subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,

     http://www.gutenberg.org

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:


keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed


Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm

works.
Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic


To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation

outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make

approach us with offers to donate.
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we

particular state visit http://pglaf.org
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating

status with the IRS.
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide

Literary Archive Foundation
Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg


     gbnewby@pglaf.org
     Chief Executive and Director
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
For additional contact information:

page at http://pglaf.org
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.

permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit

Foundation
Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive


and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the

people in all walks of life.
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of

Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm


Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the

provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied

WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth

opportunities to fix the problem.
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a

DAMAGE.
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right

your equipment.
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable

1.F.

Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm

     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.
- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free

     of receipt of the work.
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any

     Project Gutenberg-tm works.
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies

     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from

that
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing

unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,

License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,

Gutenberg-tm License.
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this

work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm

permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted

1.E.9.
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived

with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with

copied or distributed:
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

States.
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern

Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"

works.  See paragraph 1.E below.
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be

entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm

electronic works
Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm


http://gutenberg.org/license).
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK
THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

*** START: FULL LICENSE ***



redistribution.
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no

will be renamed.
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions

An Anonymous Volunteer

        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/0/2600/
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
***** This file should be named 2600.txt or 2600.zip *****

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WAR AND PEACE ***

End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of War and Peace, by Leo Tolstoy





conscious.
that does not exist, and to recognize a dependence of which we are not
in the present case it is similarly necessary to renounce a freedom
unreal immobility in space and to recognize a motion we did not feel;
In the first case it was necessary to renounce the consciousness of an

the external world, on time, and on cause, we arrive at laws."
free will we arrive at absurdity, while by admitting our dependence on
true that we are not conscious of our dependence, but by admitting our
feel) we arrive at laws," so also in history the new view says: "It is
we arrive at absurdity, while by admitting its motion (which we do not
do not feel the movement of the earth, but by admitting its immobility
personality. But as in astronomy the new view said: "It is true that we
lies in renouncing the direct feeling of the independence of one's own
the subjection of personality to the laws of space, time, and cause
the motion of the planets, so in history the difficulty of recognizing
lay in abandoning the immediate sensation of the earth's fixity and of
As with astronomy the difficulty of recognizing the motion of the earth

it is the independence of personality--free will.
phenomena. In astronomy it was the immovability of the earth, in history
nonrecognition of something absolute, serving as the measure of visible
now, the whole difference of opinion is based on the recognition or
As in the question of astronomy then, so in the question of history

the institutions of state and church are erected.
astronomy, far from destroying, even strengthens the foundation on which
the law of inevitability in history, like the law of Copernicus in
inevitability today use that law as a weapon against religion, though
So too, like Voltaire in his time, uninvited defenders of the law of

those conceptions.
and all the institutions of state and church that have been built up on
inevitability, to destroy the conception of the soul, of good and evil,
Just so it now seems as if we have only to admit the law of

religion.
religion, and he utilized the law of gravitation as a weapon against
Voltaire for example, it seemed that the laws of astronomy destroyed
son of Nun. To the defenders of the laws of Copernicus and Newton, to
God, in the creation of the firmament, and in the miracle of Joshua the
it seemed that if they admitted that truth it would destroy faith in
To the men who fought against the rising truths of physical philosophy,

is the passion for destruction.
the loss of the whole edifice constructed through the ages, on the other
passion and stifles truth. On the one hand there is fear and regret for
In the one case as in the other, on both sides the struggle provokes

revelation.
stands on guard for the old view, and accuses the new view of subverting
the old and the new conception of history, and theology in the same way
Just as prolonged and stubborn is the struggle now proceeding between

foundation.
conquered, theology established itself just as firmly on the new
old views and accused the new of violating revelation. But when truth
fought out in physical philosophy. Theology stood on guard for the
The struggle between the old views and the new was long and stubbornly

and geology, which directly contradict its assumptions.
laws of statistics, geography, political economy, comparative philology,
And yet the former history continues to be studied side by side with the

or occasioned the migrations can no longer be regarded as the cause.
individuals who appear to us to have established that mode of government
ethnographic, or economic conditions, then the free will of those
of peoples took place in consequence of such and such geographic,
certain mode of government was established or certain migrations
studying historic events as the results of man's free will. For if a
retained; but without refuting them it would seem impossible to continue
By refuting these new laws the former view of history might have been

were destroyed in their essence.
migrations of peoples, the foundations on which history had been built
conditions, and that certain relations of population to soil produce
mode of government is determined by certain geographical and economic
or of crimes is subject to mathematical laws, and that this or that
From the time the first person said and proved that the number of births

studied for a long time.
the discovery of the law of Copernicus the Ptolemaic worlds were still
impossible to continue studying the Ptolemaic worlds. But even after
the movements of the bodies, but without disproving it, it would seem
that law it might have been possible to retain the old conception of
sufficed to destroy the whole cosmography of the ancients. By disproving
recognition of the fact that it was not the sun but the earth that moves
From the time the law of Copernicus was discovered and proved, the mere


CHAPTER XII





inseparably interconnected infinitesimal elements of free will.
aside the conception of cause, should seek the laws common to all the
narration of episodes in the lives of individuals, it too, setting
the study of the movement of the nations and of humanity and not the
laws. History stands on the same path. And if history has for its object
the natural sciences: leaving aside the question of cause, they seek for
from the infinitely large to the infinitely small. The same is done by
movement of the bodies, he expressed the property common to all bodies
one another, that is, leaving aside the question of the cause of the
bodies from the largest to the smallest have the property of attracting
that the sun or the earth had a property of attraction; he said that all
have proceeded. When Newton enunciated the law of gravity he did not say
In another form but along the same path of reflection the other sciences

unknown, infinitely small, elements.
of cause, mathematics seeks law, that is, the property common to all
of unknown, infinitely small, quantities. Abandoning the conception
process of analysis and enters on the new process of the integration
infinitesimals, mathematics, the most exact of sciences, abandons the
All human sciences have traveled along that path. Arriving at

the causes of phenomena--the old method of history is moving.
with the self-destruction toward which--ever dissecting and dissecting
thought which history must adopt are being worked out simultaneously
The search for these laws has long been begun and the new methods of

its problem.
instead of seeking causes, history will take the discovery of laws as
ourselves of the absolute inaccessibility of the causes, and then
is, by regarding it as an infinitely small quantity, can we convince
Only by reducing this element of free will to the infinitesimal, that

impossible.
it as a force not subject to law, the existence of law becomes
for however man's free will may be restricted, as soon as we recognize
man's freewill, a scientific enunciation of those laws is impossible,
subject on the path it now follows, seeking the causes of events in
From the standpoint from which the science of history now regards its

is the problem of history.
evident are the laws of that movement. To discover and define those laws
The more this field of motion spreads out before our eyes, the more

dependence on cause.
consciousness of man's will in the present moves in space, time, and
of which is hidden in the unknown but at the other end of which a
For history, lines exist of the movement of human wills, one end

can exist, nor any conception of historical events.
any single action is due to free will, then not a single historical law
conception of the movement of the heavenly bodies any longer exists. If
moving freely, then the laws of Kepler and Newton are negatived and no
that is, of any science whatever. If there is even a single body
That assumption would destroy the possibility of the existence of laws,

would be for astronomy.
history as the recognition of a free force moving the heavenly bodies
historical events, that is, as not subject to laws, is the same for
The recognition of man's free will as something capable of influencing

only in so far as this free will is defined by those laws.
defines this freedom by the laws of reason, and so history is a science
with the external world in time and in dependence on cause, that is, it
History examines the manifestations of man's free will in connection


CHAPTER XI





human life.
expression for the unknown remainder of what we know about the laws of
what is unknown we call free will. Free will is for history only an
So also in history what is known to us we call laws of inevitability,

of the essence of life.
only an expression for the unknown remainder over and above what we know
inevitability, what is unknown to us we call vital force. Vital force is
In the experimental sciences what we know we call the laws of

metaphysics.
the subject of history, while free will itself is the subject of
in human beings in space, in time, and in dependence on cause forms
subject of metaphysics, even the manifestation of the force of free will
unknown essence of life while that essence itself can only be the
But just as the subject of every science is the manifestation of this
same way does the force of free will form the content of history.
astronomy, physics, chemistry, botany, zoology, and so on, just in the
of chemical affinity, or of the vital force, forms the content of
the undefinable essence of the forces of heat and electricity, or
And as the undefinable essence of the force moving the heavenly bodies,

it is only a momentary undefinable sensation of life.
gravitation, or heat, or the force that makes things grow; for reason,
apart from the laws of reason that define it, differs in no way from
definition reason gives it. Freedom, apart from necessity, that is,
is distinguished by reason from the other forces of nature only by the
differently defined by reason. Just so the force of man's free will
affinity are only distinguished from one another in that they are
any other force. The forces of gravitation, electricity, or chemical
conscious of it, but in the eyes of reason it in no way differs from
Man's free will differs from every other force in that man is directly

laws of reason.
All knowledge is merely a bringing of this essence of life under the

up to the knowledge of the most complex economic and historic laws).
inevitability to which it is subject (from the fact that every man dies,
conscious, is intelligible to us only in as far as we know the laws of
force of free will, incomprehensible in itself but of which everyone is
knowledge that all bodies have weight, up to Newton's law), so too the
know the laws of inevitability to which it is subject (from the first
felt by every man, is understood by us only to the extent to which we
But just as the force of gravitation, incomprehensible in itself but

we call that freedom.
force, and so on, but we are conscious of the force of life in man and
them; we call those forces gravitation, inertia, electricity, animal
The great natural forces lie outside us and we are not conscious of

life to the laws of reason.
relation of the forces of nature to inevitability, or of the essence of
All that we know of the external world of nature is only a certain

will to inevitability, that is, of consciousness to the laws of reason.
All that we know of the life of man is merely a certain relation of free

another as form and content, no conception of life is possible.
Apart from these two concepts which in their union mutually define one

Only by uniting them do we get a clear conception of man's life.

incomprehensible conceptions of freedom and inevitability.
as form to content, do we get the mutually exclusive and separately
Only by separating the two sources of cognition, related to one another

is the content. Inevitability is the form.
Freedom is the thing examined. Inevitability is what examines. Freedom

three forms.
consciousness. Inevitability without content is man's reason in its
Freedom not limited by anything is the essence of life, in man's

gives expression to the essence of freedom.
Reason gives expression to the laws of inevitability. Consciousness

to be the cause of every manifestation of my life.
consequently I am outside time. (3) I am beyond cause, for I feel myself
moment of the present in which alone I am conscious of myself as living,
consequently I include space. (2) I measure flowing time by the fixed
Consciousness says: (1) I alone am, and all that exists is but me,

have no end.
(3) The connection between cause and effect has no beginning and can
infinite motion without a moment of rest and is unthinkable otherwise.
visibility is infinite, and cannot be imagined otherwise. (2) Time is
Reason says: (1) space with all the forms of matter that give it

essence of life, and the laws defining that essence.
whole outlook on the universe is constructed--the incomprehensible
We should in fact have reached those two fundamentals of which man's

be nothing, or mere content without form.
cause, which by the fact of its being unconditioned and unlimited would
should have arrived at unconditioned freedom beyond space, time, and
In the second case, if freedom were possible without inevitability we

inevitability itself, that is, a mere form without content.
we should have reached a definition of inevitability by the laws of
In the first case, if inevitability were possible without freedom

and free from dependence on cause.
inevitability, we must imagine him all alone, beyond space, beyond time,
To imagine a man perfectly free and not subject to the law of

and an infinite series of causes.
infinite number of space relations, an infinitely long period of time,
inevitability without any freedom, we must assume the knowledge of an
And so to imagine the action of a man entirely subject to the law of

the conception of a man's completely free action.
inevitability without any element of freedom is just as impossible as
so the conception of the action of a man subject solely to the law of
examining, for as soon as there is no freedom there is also no man. And
so doing we should destroy the very conception of man in the case we are
dying man, an unborn babe, or an idiot--complete absence of freedom, by
equal zero, we assumed in some given case--as for instance in that of a
But besides this, even if, admitting the remaining minimum of freedom to

never reach absolute inevitability.
shall never know the whole chain since it is endless, and so again we
(3) However accessible may be the chain of causation of any action, we

inevitability.
time is infinite, and so in this respect too there can never be absolute
examining and the judgment upon it, that period will be finite, while
(2) However we may prolong the period of time between the action we are

remains.
there is no complete inevitability but a certain measure of freedom
therefore so long as not all the conditions influencing men are defined,
number of those conditions is as infinite as the infinity of space. And
in which man is situated, that knowledge can never be complete, for the
(1) However we may increase our knowledge of the conditions of space

freedom and entirely subject to the law of inevitability.
In the same way we can never imagine the action of a man quite devoid of

outside of time and independent of cause, is no longer a man.
freedom in man, for a being uninfluenced by the external world, standing
zero, we should even then not have arrived at the conception of complete
to admit so infinitely small a remainder of inevitability as equaled
only his momentary action in the present, unevoked by any cause--we were
But even if--imagining a man quite exempt from all influences, examining

cause is the cause of my action.
independently of any cause, but my wish to perform an action without a
cause no phenomenon is conceivable. I raise my arm to perform an action
of reason is the assumption of and search for a cause, for without a
expression of will in any action, our own or another's, the first demand
an absence of cause. However inaccessible to us may be the cause of the
increased, we never reach a conception of complete freedom, that is,
(3) However much the difficulty of understanding the causes may be

is, outside time, which is impossible.
it in the present, on the boundary between the past and the future--that
have been any other. To imagine it as free, it is necessary to imagine
could make only one movement at that single moment of time, it could not
not prove that I could have abstained from lifting it then. And since I
would be the only one. That I did not lift my arm a moment later does
moment I could make only one movement, and whatever movement I made
moment in which the first movement was made is irrevocable, and at that
nor is the air in which I lifted it the same that now surrounds me. The
lifted is no longer the same as the arm I now refrain from lifting,
question. Time has gone by which I could not detain, the arm I then
not now abstaining from doing so at the first moment when I asked the
convince myself of this I do not lift it the next moment. But I am
abstained from lifting my arm at the moment that has already passed? To
committed. Can I lift my arm? I lift it, but ask myself: could I have
being free, for it is irrevocably linked to the moment at which it was
an action committed a second ago I must still recognize it as not
deed, we never get a conception of freedom in time. For if I examine
(2) However much we approximate the time of judgment to the time of the

evidently impossible.
conceive of a man being free we must imagine him outside space, which is
to be free it was necessary that it should encounter no obstacles. To
directions because in it there were fewest obstacles. For my action
the construction of my own body. I chose one out of all the possible
least obstruction to that action either from things around me or from
direction, I see that I raised it in the direction in which there was
to me free; but asking myself whether I could raise my arm in every
him and by his own body. I lift my arm and let it fall. My action seems
in space. Every human action is inevitably conditioned by what surrounds
influence of the external world, we never get a conception of freedom
(1) To whatever degree we may imagine a man to be exempt from the

complete necessity.
of the action may be--can we ever conceive either complete freedom or
period of time, however intelligible or incomprehensible the causes
world, however inaccessible it may be to us, however long or short the
we may make to ourselves the connection between the man and the external
In neither case--however we may change our point of view, however plain

inevitability and a maximum of freedom.
whose action are beyond our ken, we get the conception of a minimum of
conditions, whose action was performed very recently, and the causes of
minimum of free will. If we examine a man little dependent on external
accessible, we get the conception of a maximum of inevitability and a
its examination is great, and where the causes of the action are most
external world is well known, where the time between the action and
So that if we examine the case of a man whose connection with the

contemplate a man's life.
greater or lesser dependence on the causes in relation to which we
external world, the greater or lesser remoteness of time, and the
or increases according to the greater or lesser connection with the
Thus our conception of free will and inevitability gradually diminishes


CHAPTER X





understanding of the causes that led to the action.
action and its investigation, and according to the greater or lesser
to the greater or lesser interval of time between the commission of the
which the man was placed whose action is being judged, and according
according to our greater or lesser knowledge of the circumstances in
by all legislative codes. The responsibility appears greater or less
irresponsibility for crimes and the extenuating circumstances admitted
On these three considerations alone is based the conception of

we can foretell the result.
little free will that as soon as we know the cause prompting the action
intelligence in question, we see so large an element of necessity and so
knowing the causes of the act and the simplicity of the character and
of mental development, like a child, a madman, or a simpleton--then,
If the man whose actions we are considering is on a very low stage
actions that seem to us less free the better we understand their cause.
into bad company, a drunkard's relapse into drunkenness, and so on are
son of a dishonest father, the misconduct of a woman who had fallen
their inevitability would be still greater. The dishonest conduct of the
had a vast number of such actions under observation, our conception of
connect the effects with the causes. If we examined simple actions and
appear to us more under compulsion and less free the more correctly we
correlation of cause and effect in people's actions, their actions
of examples, if our observation is constantly directed to seeking the
what the way was prepared for his activity. If we have a large range
sect or party, or an inventor, impresses us less when we know how or by
deserving of sympathy and less the result of free will. The founder of a
comprehensible than gratuitous self-sacrifice, and therefore seems less
or mother, or self-sacrifice with the possibility of a reward, is more
factors mitigates his fault in our eyes. The self-sacrifice of a father
of the apparently original action. That a criminal was reared among male
or the acknowledgment of the merit of the virtuous act, or the freedom
element of necessity and are less insistent on punishment for the crime,
the innumerable causes of the act is known to us we recognize a certain
more individuality, originality, and independence. But if even one of
rate its merit most highly. In an indifferent case we recognize in it
demand the punishment for such an act; in the case of a virtuous act we
greater amount of freedom to it. In the case of a crime we most urgently
crime, a good action, or even one that is simply nonmoral, we ascribe a
When we do not at all understand the cause of an action, whether a

actions and those of others appear.
question, the more subject to inevitability and the less free do our
observing and the less complex the character and mind of the man in
and historical causes of the action, and the simpler the action we are
and the more correctly we perceive the physiological, psychological,
historical laws deduced by observation and by which man is controlled,
The better we are acquainted with the physiological, psychological, and

what will follow.
its definite place as a result of what has gone before and as a cause of
phenomenon comprehended, and therefore man's every action, must have
endless chain of causation inevitably demanded by reason, in which each
The third consideration is the degree to which we apprehend that

the more manifest the law of inevitability.
doubtful does the free will of those concerned in the event become and
farther back in history the object of our observation lies, the more
the renovation of the European world depended on Attila's caprice. The
of the peoples it does not enter anyone's head today to suppose that
as merely due to the will of certain people. In regard to the migration
of Europe, though to the chroniclers of the Crusades that event appeared
place in history and without which we cannot imagine the modern history
will. But in the Crusades we already see an event occupying its definite
to us, though already questionably, to be the outcome of their heroes'
crafty conduct of Bismarck, and so on. The Napoleonic wars still seem
The Austro-Prussian war appears to us undoubtedly the result of the

they appear.
And the farther we go back in examining events the less arbitrary do
inevitable results which prevent our considering anything else possible.
known participants, but with a more remote event we already see its
contemporary event seems to us to be indubitably the doing of all the
the part played by free will in the general affairs of humanity. A
In history we find a very similar progress of conviction concerning

action.
judgment, the more doubtful becomes my belief in the freedom of my
in memory, or what is the same thing the farther I go forward in my
happened had that action not been performed. The farther I go back
are still plainer to me and I find it hard to imagine what would have
more remote, ten years ago or more, then the consequences of my action
essential--would not have taken place. If I reflect on an action still
not been committed much that resulted from it--good, agreeable, and even
different circumstances, I cannot help recognizing that if that act had
free. But if I examine an act performed a month ago, then being in
circumstances as those I am in now, my action appears to me undoubtedly
If I examine an act I performed a moment ago in approximately the same

of the action and our judgment of it.
respect on the greater or lesser lapse of time between the performance
The degree of our conception of freedom or inevitability depends in this

of a contemporary, the consequences of which are still unknown to me.
and are connected with me in time cannot seem to me as free as the life
the reason why the life and activity of people who lived centuries ago
appear evidently less free than a man's entry into marriage today. It is
fall of the first man, resulting in the production of the human race,
the man's action occupies in time. That is the ground which makes the
the man to the world and the clearness of our perception of the place
The second consideration is the more or less evident time relation of

weighs on him increases.
his freedom diminishes and the more our conception of the necessity that
And the more we perceive of these influences the more our conception of
has an influence on him and controls at least some side of his activity.
falls on the things about him--we see that each of these circumstances
which he is engaged, even with the air he breathes or the light that
whatever--with a man who speaks to him, a book he reads, the work on
to anything around him, if we see his connection with anything
him, each action of his seems to us free. But if we see his relation
If we consider a man alone, apart from his relation to everything around

seclusion.
and more subject to necessity than those of a man living in solitude and
bound by family, official, or business duties, seem certainly less free
closely connected with others in a thickly populated district, or of one
than one standing on dry ground, and that makes the actions of a man
evident that a drowning man is less free and more subject to necessity
in relation to everything coexisting with him. This is what makes it
of our understanding of the definite position occupied by the man
relation to the external world and the greater or lesser clearness
The first consideration is the clearness of our perception of the man's

(3) His relation to the causes leading to the action.

(2) His relation to time.

(1) The relation to the external world of the man who commits the deeds.

necessity is increased and diminished depend on three considerations:
All cases without exception in which our conception of freedom and

freedom.
and history itself understand alike this relation between necessity and
Religion, the common sense of mankind, the science of jurisprudence,

necessity the smaller the conception of freedom and vice versa.
from which the action is regarded. So that the greater the conception of
correspondingly decreased or increased, according to the point of view
is increased or diminished and the conception of compulsion is
who does not know it. In all these cases the conception of freedom
who committed the action, and seems more free and less inevitable to one
free and more inevitable to one who knows the mental condition of him
action of an insane, intoxicated, or highly excited man appears less
examined it the day after it was committed. And in the same way every
considers his action after twenty years have elapsed than to one who
and his action more due to the law of inevitability, to someone who
has since lived peaceably and harmlessly in society seems less guilty
and so on. Similarly a man who committed a murder twenty years ago and
drowning, that the mother was hungry, that the soldier was in the ranks,
placed, and more free to one who does not know that the man was himself
necessity, to one who knows the circumstances in which these people were
man--seem less guilty, that is, less free and more subject to the law of
to discipline who on duty at the word of command kills a defenseless
exhausted by feeding her baby, who steals some food; or a man trained
A sinking man who clutches at another and drowns him; or a hungry mother

their relation is always one of inverse proportion.
according to the point of view from which the action is regarded, but
The proportion of freedom to inevitability decreases and increases

the more inevitability the less freedom.
freedom we see in any action the less inevitability do we perceive, and
freedom and a certain measure of inevitability. And always the more
inevitability. In every action we examine we see a certain measure of
every human action appears to us as a certain combination of freedom and
differences in the point of view from which we regard the event, but
Our conception of the degree of freedom often varies according to

for us.
inevitability governing the actions of these people is clearly defined
walk, we are unconscious of any contradiction. The degree of freedom and
action an hour ago in choosing one direction out of several for his
of the barbarians, or of the decrees of Napoleon III, or of someone's
Whether we speak of the migration of the peoples and the incursions

will and partly of the law of inevitability.
we may consider, we always regard it as the result partly of man's free
Whatever presentation of the activity of many men or of an individual

dependent on these two elements.
quantity of phenomena of which it is cognizant and that always appear
conception of freedom and inevitability themselves from the immense
under those definitions, history should deduce a definition of the
inevitability in themselves, and then ranging the phenomena of life
sciences. Instead of first defining the conceptions of freedom and
of history can and should follow a path contrary to that taken by other
what constitutes the essence of these two conceptions, the philosophy
To solve the question of how freedom and necessity are combined and

each event presents itself as partly free and partly compulsory.
and definitely understood without any sense of contradiction, although
In actual life each historic event, each human action, is very clearly

taken place.
man's life in which the union of these two contradictions has already
for theology, ethics, and philosophy. History surveys a presentation of
incompatibility of free will and inevitability does not exist as it does
And so for history, the insoluble mystery presented by the

it.
The subject for history is not man's will itself but our presentation of

experimental science stands to abstract science.
In regard to this question, history stands to the other sciences as

under certain conditions.
to the essence of man's free will but its manifestation in the past and
question is dealt with, that for history this question does not refer
has this advantage over other branches of knowledge in which the
For the solution of the question of free will or inevitability, history


CHAPTER IX





so smooth and regular.
delighted that from their point of view as plasterers, everything is now
windows, icons, woodwork, and still unbuttressed walls, and should be
superintendent of the work, should in an access of zeal plaster over the
a church who, availing themselves of the absence of the chief
question, are like plasterers set to plaster one side of the walls of
The naturalists and their followers, thinking they can solve this

consciousness as well as the muscular and nervous activity.
observe only the muscular nervous activity, but in man we observe
physiology and zoology, for in a frog, a rabbit, or an ape, we can
necessity to which he is subject cannot be solved by comparative
man's consciousness of freedom is to be reconciled with the law of
time, in the second case it is the origin); and the question of how
certain period of time (in the first case the unknown quantity is the
as comprehensible as that they were made from a handful of earth at a
If men descended from the apes at an unknown period of time, that is

based on the consciousness of freedom.
breadth the solution of the question, which has another, opposite, side,
subject to the law of necessity; but it does not advance by a hair's
philosophic theories--that from the point of view of reason man is
the truth admitted thousands of years ago by all the religious and
at some unknown period of time, only explains from a fresh side
that man following the general law may have developed from lower animals
observation, reason and the will are merely secretions of the brain, and
of one side of it. For the fact that, from the point of view of
this matter is merely to serve as an instrument for the illumination
been denied. They do not see that the role of the natural sciences in
acknowledged by all the religions and all the thinkers, but has never
trying to prove by physiology and comparative zoology was not merely
years ago that same law of necessity which with such ardor they are now
from the apes. They say this, not at all suspecting that thousands of
free will do not exist because at an unknown period of time we sprang
movements are conditioned by the activity of the nerves; the soul and
for the life of man is expressed by muscular movements and muscular
They say and write and print that the soul and freedom do not exist,

side of the question for a solution of the whole problem.
ignoramuses--have taken the work of the naturalists who deal with one
time the majority of so-called advanced people--that is, the crowd of
been put on a level on which the question itself cannot exist. In our
diffusion of printed matter--has the question of the freedom of will
knowledge--thanks to that most powerful engine of ignorance, the
Only in our self-confident day of the popularization of

the constrained, activity of man? That is a question for history.
of humanity be regarded--as the result of the free, or as the result of
connection appears to be free. How should the past life of nations and
to laws which determine that life. But the same man apart from that
Man in connection with the general life of humanity appears subject

question for ethics.
in actions that follows from the consciousness of freedom? That is a
upon him. What is conscience and the perception of right and wrong
Man's actions proceed from his innate character and the motives acting

jurisprudence.
which results from the conception of freedom? That is a question for
statistics. What is man's responsibility to society, the conception of
The actions of men are subject to general immutable laws expressed in

man's freedom? That is a question for theology.
What is sin, the conception of which arises from the consciousness of
Man is the creation of an all-powerful, all-good, and all-seeing God.

is possible constitutes the other side of the question.
without exception, this consciousness without which no conception of man
experiment or argument, recognized by all thinkers and felt by everyone
This unshakable, irrefutable consciousness of freedom, uncontrolled by

proves that consciousness is not subject to reason.
the same instant of time, or of an effect without a cause, that only
contradiction like the possibility of performing two actions at one and
If the conception of freedom appears to reason to be a senseless

life.
A man having no freedom cannot be conceived of except as deprived of

virtue and vice, are only greater or lesser degrees of freedom.
disease, culture and ignorance, work and leisure, repletion and hunger,
obscurity, power and subordination, strength and weakness, health and
are only efforts to increase freedom. Wealth and poverty, fame and
He could not live, because all man's efforts, all his impulses to life,

be unable to live for a single moment.
of freedom not only would he be unable to understand life, but he would
that however impossible it may be, it is so, for without this conception
constitutes the essence of freedom) he cannot imagine life. He feels
same conditions, feels that without this irrational conception (which
impossible to imagine two different courses of action in precisely the
incontestably reason and experiment may prove to him that it is
that he can act as he pleases. Every man, savage or sage, however
same way, he feels as certainly convinced as before the experiment
he approaches for the thousandth time the action that always ends in the
before, yet when under the same conditions and with the same character
same conditions and with the same character he will do the same thing as
However often experiment and reasoning may show a man that under the

not and cannot believe this.
But learning just as certainly that his will is subject to laws, he does

that he has learned to be fulfilled.
downwards, a man indubitably believes this and always expects the law
Having learned from experiment and argument that a stone falls
man never submits to the deductions of these experiments and arguments.
on his organization, his character, and the motives acting upon him; yet
conscious in himself is impossible, and that his every action depends
and arguments proves to him that the complete freedom of which he is
has become acquainted with them. But the same series of experiments
them and never resists the laws of gravity or impermeability once he
an object of observation, is subject to certain laws, and man submits to
A series of experiments and arguments proves to every man that he, as

inconceivable.
to experience, but in fact such subjection does not exist and is
source of self-consciousness it would be subject to reasoning and
If the consciousness of freedom were not a separate and independent

reason.
That reply is the expression of a consciousness that is not subject to

demonstration of freedom.
Everyone understands that this illogical reply is an irrefutable
You say: I am not free. But I have lifted my hand and let it fall.

to be limited just because he is not conscious of it except as free.
it. Were it not free it could not be limited. A man's will seems to him
never-varying direction of his will otherwise than as a limitation of
food, using his brain, or anything else) he cannot recognize this
one and the same law (whether he observes the necessity of taking
If, observing himself, man sees that his will is always directed by

recognizes (and can but recognize) as free.
his volition. But his will--which forms the essence of his life--man
a living being by the fact that he wills, that is, is conscious of
conscious of himself as living. A man is only conscious of himself as
To understand, observe, and draw conclusions, man must first of all be

is conceivable.
Apart from consciousness of self no observation or application of reason

through consciousness does he know himself.
independent of reason. Through his reason man observes himself, but only
This consciousness is a source of self-cognition quite apart from and

we are conscious of, we feel ourselves to be free.
that exists) is subject. But regarding him from within ourselves as what
philosophic--we find a general law of necessity to which he (like all
from whatever point of view--theological, historical, ethical, or
The problem is that regarding man as a subject of observation

times has been presented in its whole tremendous significance.
ancient times has occupied the best human minds and from most ancient
In this contradiction lies the problem of free will, which from most

exist, for then man's will is subject to that law.
If there be a single law governing the actions of men, free will cannot

possibility of the existence of any laws for the whole of humanity.
in violation of the laws governing human action would destroy the
is, as he chose, it is evident that one single free act of that man's
If in a thousand years even one man in a million could act freely, that

pleased, all history would be a series of disconnected incidents.
If the will of every man were free, that is, if each man could act as he

a solution of that question.
false path historical science has followed are due solely to the lack of
question. All the contradictions and obscurities of history and the
All seriously thinking historians have involuntarily encountered this

felt at every step of history.
The presence of the problem of man's free will, though unexpressed, is

says plainly: I am free and am therefore not subject to the law.
and that that law is untrue, but man, who is the subject of history,
cannot tell us that it does not feel the law of attraction or repulsion
argument. But the law of history relates to man. A particle of matter
simple and obvious law would suffice and we should have finished our
If history dealt only with external phenomena, the establishment of this


CHAPTER VIII





words that it is a law.
we say that this is so because it is unthinkable otherwise, or in other
people combine in a certain formation in which they all take part, and
not know. We only know that to produce the one or the other action,
same applies to historical events. Why war and revolution occur we do
inconceivable otherwise, because it must be so and that it is a law. The
cannot say why this occurs, and we say that it is so because it is
Speaking of the interaction of heat and electricity and of atoms, we

electricity. Atoms attract each other and atoms repel one another.
playing with the subject. Electricity produces heat, heat produces
to which in every domain of thought man's reason arrives if it is not
In the last analysis we reach the circle of infinity--that final limit

phenomena we are examining.
Or in other words, the conception of a cause is inapplicable to the

the one nor in the other but in the union of the two.
inconceivable without the physical, the cause of the event is neither in
it is those who submit to the power. But as the moral activity is
Morally the wielder of power appears to cause the event; physically

responsibility and vice versa.
the largest direct share in the event take on themselves the least
the events, and who always combine in such a way that those taking
supposed, but by the activity of all the people who participate in
activity, nor even by a combination of the two as historians have
(2) The movement of nations is caused not by power, nor by intellectual

his participation in that action.
justifications of the collective action that is performed, the less is
in which the more this person expresses opinions, predictions, and
(1) Power is the relation of a given person to other individuals,

(2) What force produces the movement of the nations?

(1) What is power?

these two essential questions of history:
Arriving at this conclusion we can reply directly and positively to

of utterance are related as commands to the events.
people some will always be found which by their meaning and their time
may--then out of all the continually expressed wishes of different
other causes for it, but as soon as an event occurs--be it what it
commands were issued, the event does not take place unless there are
events. The incontestable proof of this deduction is that, however many
the people, we have found that they and their orders were dependent on
themselves and the connection in which the historical persons stood to
that the events depended on those commands. But examining the events
which, as commands, were related to events, historians have assumed
Examining only those expressions of the will of historical persons


movement also.
seems to us not merely to move of itself but to govern the ship's
directs nor increases its movement foams ahead of it, and at a distance
and decreed. Wherever the ship may go, the rush of water which neither
Whatever happens it always appears that just that event was foreseen

anticipating its movement.
frequently. But wherever it may turn there always will be the wave
ahead of it, when it turns frequently the wave ahead of it also turns
When the ship moves in one direction there is one and the same wave

essential connection of historical persons with the masses.
occurs--the continuity of movement in time) and do not lose sight of the
characters (that is, re-establish the inevitable condition of all that
We see the same if we watch moment by moment the movement of historical

imperceptibly moving.
and that we were led into error by the fact that we ourselves were
every bit of it is occasioned by the forward movement of the ship,
comparing it with the movement of the ship do we convince ourselves that
Only by watching closely moment by moment the movement of that flow and

movement of those waves will be the only perceptible motion.
will always be noticeable ahead of it. To those on board the ship the
In whatever direction a ship moves, the flow of the waves it cuts

the will of one man or of several men.
wish and, receiving a justification, presents itself as the result of
that every event that occurs inevitably coincides with some expressed
unity, in patriotism, in the balance of power, or in civilization? So
collective action which cannot find its justification in political
ministers, parliaments, or newspapers be imagined? Is there any
can any event that is not prescribed, decreed, or ordered by monarchs,
With the present complex forms of political and social life in Europe

murder, and so on?
is it that millions of men commit collective crimes--make war, commit
question that presents itself when examining each historical event. How
Without such justification there would be no reply to the simplest

men's moral responsibilities from their path.
of a locomotive to clear the snow from the rails in front: they clear
responsibility. These temporary aims are like the broom fixed in front
These justifications release those who produce the events from moral

justifications have a very necessary significance in their own day.
of millions in Russia for the humiliation of England. But these
killing a man as the result of recognizing his rights, and the killing
events have no common sense and are all contradictory, as in the case of
England, and so on. History shows us that these justifications of the
was accompanied by phrases about the glory of France, the baseness of
from the west to the east killing their fellow men, and the event
centralization of power, resistance to Europe, and so on. Men went
this event was accompanied by its justification in the necessity for a
liberty, and for equality. People ceased to kill one another, and
people's belief that this was necessary for the welfare of France, for
one another. And corresponding to the event its justification appears in
For reasons known or unknown to us the French began to drown and kill

surmises concerning their collective activity.
part in the activity to devise considerations, justifications, and
done by a concourse of people, allowing those who do not take a direct
activity, and guide him in planning his future actions. Just the same is
as it seems to him directed his past activity, justify his present
When a man works alone he always has a certain set of reflections which

given to directing and commanding, take less part in the direct work.
there is a yet sharper division of those who, because their activity is
When some larger concourse of men direct their activity to a common aim

verbal activity.
more would evidently work less with his hands on account of his greater
would result from the common activity; while the man who commanded
think so much about what he was doing, or reflect on or command what
in their primary form. The man who worked most with his hands could not
done as one of them said. He ordered it. There we have command and power
where to haul it. They haul the log away, and it happens that this is
Men are hauling a log. Each of them expresses his opinion as to how and

preceding it.
is fulfilled, that opinion gets connected with the event as a command
fulfilled if but approximately. When one of the opinions expressed
many people, some one of the opinions or wishes expressed is sure to be
about it, and as the event results from the collective activity of
When an event is taking place people express their opinions and wishes


CHAPTER VII





commanding.
in the action itself and that their activity is exclusively directed to
by the very nature of the case those who command take the smallest part
relation between those who command and those who execute, we find that
corresponding series of events. Restoring the essential condition of
we find that a command is executed only when it is related to a
Having restored the condition of time under which all events occur,

constitutes the essence of the conception called power.
This relation of the men who command to those they command is what

in the action and directs his activity chiefly to commanding.
the lowest ranks to the man at the top, who takes the least direct share
they command and the fewer of them there are; rising in this way from
while the less their direct participation in the action itself, the more
the action the less they can command and the more numerous they are,
in such relations that the more directly they participate in performing
highest, we see a law by which men, to take associated action, combine
any administrative or public business whatever from the lowest to the
a cone and of the ranks of an army, or the ranks and positions in
And so without particularly analyzing all the contiguous sections of

for common activity--in agriculture, trade, and every administration.
relation of people to one another is seen in every combination of men
orders concerning the movement of the mass of the troops. A similar
never takes direct part in the action itself, but only gives general
objective, and hardly ever uses a weapon himself. The commander in chief
frequently. A general does nothing but command the troops, indicates the
officer still less often acts directly himself, but commands still more
frequently than the soldiers, but they already give commands. An
officers (of whom there are fewer) perform the action itself less
from men above him; he himself never gives an order. The noncommissioned
burning, and pillaging, and always receives orders for these actions
the cone and its base. The soldier himself does the stabbing, hacking,
The soldiers, of whom there are the most, form the lower section of

will represent the commander in chief.
higher grades of the army, and so on to the apex, the point of which
the next higher and smaller section of the cone consists of the next
which the base with the largest diameter consists of the rank and file;
A military organization may be quite correctly compared to a cone, of

person.
and so on to the highest military command which is concentrated in one
fewer, and of still-higher officers of whom there are still fewer,
military rank--corporals and noncommissioned officers of whom there are
file--of whom there are always the greatest number; of the next higher
Every army is composed of lower grades of the service--the rank and

the most striking and definite examples is an army.
Of all the combinations in which men unite for collective action one of

they have combined.
smaller number a less direct share, in the collective action for which
one another that the larger number take a more direct share, and the
Men uniting in these combinations always assume such relations toward

relation between those taking part in it is always the same.
regardless of the difference of the aims set for the common action, the
For common action people always unite in certain combinations, in which

called power. This relation consists in the following:
This relation of the commander to those he commands is just what is

himself takes part in the event.
the Deity but from a man, which is, that the man who gives the command
reinstate another omitted condition of every command proceeding not from
To understand in what this dependence consists it is necessary to

certain definite dependence exists between the two.
we find that a command can never be the cause of the event, but that a
So that examining the relation in time of the commands to the events,

the figure cut in the stencil.
this side or in that way, but because it was laid on from all sides over
this or that figure comes out not because the color was laid on from
events that led the French army into Russia; just as in stencil work
other, unexecuted orders but because they coincided with the course of
was carried out--not because those orders differed in any way from the
of unexecuted orders of Napoleon's one series, for the campaign of 1812,
his will, very variously and indefinitely directed. Amid a long series
expression of that wish, but find a series of orders, or expressions of
reality in all Napoleon's activity we never find anything resembling an
We say that Napoleon wished to invade Russia and invaded it. In

series of commands is also generalized into a single expression of will.
series of events, and corresponding with this generalization the whole
generalized into one event in accord with the result produced by that
for instance as all those which led the French armies to Russia, is
accounts a whole series of innumerable, diverse, and petty events, such
of our error in this matter is due to the fact that in the historical
executed because they could not be. Apart from that, the chief source
event have been executed, we forget about the others that were not
thousands of others those few commands which were consistent with that
it is due to the fact that when the event has taken place and out of
Our false conception that an event is caused by a command which precedes

are executed.
consecutive series of commands corresponding to a series of events, and
events remain unexecuted. Only the possible ones get linked up with a
unexecuted. All the impossible orders inconsistent with the course of
execution. Every order executed is always one of an immense number
for in either case millions of obstacles may arise to prevent its
Russia in which millions participated, but even in the simplest event,
executed is impossible, not only in the case of Napoleon's invasion of
order what can be executed. But to know what can and what cannot be
For an order to be certainly executed, it is necessary that a man should

latter.
the course of events in the first case, but did so correspond in the
expressed)--this came about because his commands did not correspond to
considered it desirable to be in alliance (a conviction he repeatedly
design but undertook an expedition into Russia, with which country he
and yet during his whole reign never once attempted to execute that
of England and expended on no other undertaking so much time and effort,
If throughout his reign Napoleon gave commands concerning an invasion

French armies into Russia.
a whole series corresponding to a series of events which brought the
commissariat, and so on and so on--millions of commands, which formed
tomorrow such and such decrees and orders to the army, the fleet, the
papers to be written to Vienna, to Berlin, and to Petersburg;
an invasion of Russia and never did so. Today he ordered such and such
commands dependent one on another. Napoleon could not have commanded
we combine in one simultaneous expression a whole series of consecutive
When, for instance, we say that Napoleon ordered armies to go to war,

to a whole series of events but always to one moment only of an event.
of occurrences; but each command follows from another, and never refers
No command ever appears spontaneously, or itself covers a whole series

rendering the execution of the last command possible.
command can be executed without some preceding order having been given
Reinstating the first condition omitted, that of time, we see that no

in time and himself takes part in what occurs.
sole will determine the direction of humanity's movement; but man acts
centuries, and only the Deity, independent of everything, can by His
relate to a whole series of events occurring over a period of years or
Only the expression of the will of the Deity, not dependent on time, can


CHAPTER VI





between the person commanding and those who execute his command.
of the person who commands, and (2) the inevitability of the connection
takes place: the continuity of movement in time both of the events and
commands with events we must restore: (1) the condition of all that
in time and in relation to one another, to explain the connection of
speaking of commands that are the expression of the will of men acting
caused by anything, for the Divinity is not controlled by an event. But
tells us, the expression of that will is independent of time and is not
If the Deity issues a command, expresses His will, as ancient history

Deity.
conception of the expression of will, referring it to man and not to the
To explain the conditions of that relationship we must first establish a

that will by others.
exists between the expression of someone's will and the execution of
Power, from the standpoint of experience, is merely the relation that

cannot regard "power" as the cause of events.
Without admitting divine intervention in the affairs of humanity we

opposite of what they order occurs.
is to say, their commands are often not executed, and sometimes the very
historical personages does not in most cases produce any effect, that
cause of events, history shows that the expression of the will of
men. On the other hand, even if we admitted that words could be the
that words can be the immediate cause of the movements of millions of
an incomprehensible, supernatural force--a miracle--one cannot admit
event, as for instance in a war or a revolution, and so without assuming
will--his words--are only part of the general activity expressed in an
On the one side reflection shows that the expression of a man's

supposition is not confirmed either by reason or by experience.
the expression of the will of someone endowed with power, but that
intervention in human affairs, want to see the cause of events in
The historians, in accord with the old habit of acknowledging divine

related to the will of one or of several men who have decreed it.
Bourbons. Experience shows us that whatever event occurs it is always
Russia. Alexander I gives a command and the French submit to the
an army enters Bohemia. Napoleon I issues a decree and an army enters
French go to Mexico. The King of Prussia and Bismarck issue decrees and
event seems to have taken place. Napoleon III issues a decree and the
Whenever an event occurs a man appears or men appear, by whose will the

proved both by history and by observing contemporary events.
of men can do without the conception of power, the existence of power is
Not to speak of the fact that no description of the collective activity

an actually existing phenomenon.
reflections. And experience tells us that power is not merely a word but
has, besides abstract reasoning, experience by which he verifies his
a word and has no real existence. But to understand phenomena man
juridical science gives us, humanity would conclude that power is merely
then having subjected to criticism the explanation of "power" that
If the realm of human knowledge were confined to abstract reasoning,


we do not understand.
is, power is power: in other words, power is a word the meaning of which
condition that that person expresses the will of the whole people. That
condition is the will of the people delegated to one person? On
collective will of the people transferred to one person. Under what
What causes historical events? Power. What is power? Power is the

words.
persons is merely a paraphrase--a restatement of the question in other
The theory of the transference of the will of the people to historic

their age.
historical persons, from monarchs to journalists, as the expression of
sides of the herd." So say the third class of historians who regard all
we must watch the movements of all the prominent animals moving on all
have attracted our attention, and to study the movements of the herd
a given direction the animals transfer their will to the animals that
the whole herd is constantly altered, this is because in order to follow
"If the animals in front are continually changing and the direction of

or even in the rear.)
people's change of direction, are no longer in front, but on one side,
direction he himself prefers, regards those as leaders who, owing to the
of observation it often happens that the observer, influenced by the
rulers under conditions which they regard as known. (With this method
who assume that the collective will of the people is delegated to
the direction selected by the whole herd." Such is the reply historians
another, according to whether the animal is or is not leading them in
collective will of all the animals is transferred from one leader to
"If the animals leading the herd change, this happens because the

assume the unconditional transference of the people's will.
leader." This is what historians of the first class say--those who
it and the collective will of all the other animals is vested in that
"The herd goes in that direction because the animal in front leads

the direction the herd takes to what animal happens to be at its head.
parts of the field, or to the driving of the herdsman, should attribute
paying no attention to the varying quality of the pasturage in different
replies of a man who, watching the movements of a herd of cattle and
The replies this theory gives to historical questions are like the

the collective will was transferred to him.
theory can always say that such and such a person took the lead because
Whatever happens and whoever may stand at the head of affairs, the

people's will cannot be verified, for it never occurred.
The theory seems irrefutable just because the act of transference of the

history begins--that theory explains nothing.
soon as revolutions, conquests, or civil wars occur--that is, as soon as
and be essential for its purposes, but in its application to history, as
historic persons may perhaps explain much in the domain of jurisprudence
The theory of the transference of the collective will of the people to

hypothesis unconfirmed by the experience of history.
collective will of a people to certain historical personages is an
The theory that this connection is based on the transference of the
the connection between those men and the nations has not been found.
The life of the nations is not contained in the lives of a few men, for


CHAPTER V





the history of the life of the peoples.
historians, we shall have the history of monarchs and writers, but not
If we unite both these kinds of history, as is done by the newest

French Revolution they guillotined one another.
the Reformation the peoples massacred one another, nor why during the
suspicious and wrote such and such books; but we do not learn why after
a hot temper and said such and such things; we learn that Rousseau was
life and thought of a writer or a reformer. We learn that Luther had
The history of culture explains to us the impulses and conditions of

life of the peoples.
Still less does the history of authors and reformers explain to us the

and their impulses has remained unknown.
of Godfreys and Minnesingers, but the history of the life of the peoples
history of the Godfreys and the Minnesingers has remained the history
Minnesingers can evidently not cover the life of the peoples. And the
them to go no longer existed. The history of the Godfreys and the
people did not go, for the unknown cause which had previously impelled
kings, and knights incited the peoples to free the Holy Land; but the
of Jerusalem--had been clearly defined by historic leaders. Popes,
movement when a rational and sacred aim for the Crusade--the deliverance
incomprehensible. And yet more incomprehensible is the cessation of that
leaders, with a crowd of vagrants, and with Peter the Hermit, remains
For us that movement of the peoples from west to east, without
the life and activity of the Godfreys and the Louis-es and their ladies?
Is the movement of the peoples at the time of the Crusades explained by

his correspondence with Kurbski?
expressed by details of the morbid character of Ivan the Terrible and by
Is the movement of the Russian people eastward to Kazan and Siberia

Beaumarchais, and others?
and ministers, and by the lives of Napoleon, Rousseau, Diderot,
explained by the activity of Louis XIV, XV, and XVI, their mistresses
the west at the end of the eighteenth century and their drive eastward
History proves this at every turn. Is the ferment of the peoples of

agriculture, or slay their fellow creatures.
activity of some dozen people who did not burn houses, practice
and destroy one another never is expressed in the account of the
activity of the millions who migrate, burn houses, abandon agriculture,
always transferred to the men whom we have noticed, it happens that the
on the arbitrary assumption that the collective will of the people is
of the people with the rulers and enlighteners of humanity is only based
freedom, equality, enlightenment, or civilization, and as the connection
But as it is in no way proved that the aim of humanity does consist in
their opinion these persons have promoted or hindered that abstraction.
authors, reformers, popes, and journalists, to the extent to which in
greatest number of monuments have remained: kings, ministers, generals,
of the movement of humanity, the historians study the men of whom the
civilization, and culture. Postulating some generalization as the goal
all the historians are: freedom, equality, enlightenment, progress,
humanity's movement. The most usual generalizations adopted by almost
conceivable occurrences, and declare this abstraction to be the aim of
obscure, impalpable, and general abstraction which can cover all
Met by this difficulty historians of that class devise some most

first of all to know in what the nation's life consists.
side of the activity of a leader expresses the nation's life, we have
so-called "philosophical" historians believe, then to determine which
historical leader which serves to express the people's life, as other
nonsense; but if it is only some particular side of the activity of an
a Catherine serve to express the life of the nation, which is evident
of the court scandals contained in the biographies of a Napoleon or
the people's will, as some historians suppose, then all the details
of it. If the whole activity of the leaders serves as the expression of
leaders serves as an expression of the people's will or only some part
But in that case the question arises whether all the activity of the

the activity of the leaders represents the activity of the people.
The leaders, these historians tell us, express the will of the people:

those leaders?
historic leaders but in the nations themselves, what significance have
But in that case, if the force that moves nations lies not in the

delegated to them.
power only because they fulfill the will of the people which has been
conditions are unknown to us. They say that historical personages have
is transferred to historic personages conditionally, but that the
Historians of the third class assume that the will of the people

resemble two leaves, are deviations from the theory.
mushroom, and even the oak, which blossom into full growth and no longer
that grows does so by sprouting into two leaves, and that the palm, the
plants grow from seeds producing two cotyledons, should insist that all
These historians resemble a botanist who, having noticed that some

and admit historical events which are exceptions to the theory.
once again, as usurpations of power. And so these historians also see
results of the ill-directed will of one or more individuals, that is,
not as the results of free transferences of the people's will, but as
wars, revolutions, and conquests--are presented by these historians
party leader. So that the greater part of the events of history--civil
mistakes, on craft, or on the weakness of a diplomatist, a ruler, or a
of the people's will but are accidents dependent on cunning, on
obliged to admit that some of these transfers are not normal delegations
of international relations, conquests, and alliances, the historians are
of the people's will from one individual to another, especially in view
government, and to Napoleon III. When explaining these rapid transfers
to Napoleon again, to Charles X, to Louis Philippe, to a Republican
Convention, to the Directory, to Napoleon, to Alexander, to Louis XVIII,
then suddenly during a period of fifty years is transferred to the
will is not withdrawn from certain rulers and their heirs, and
little does this view explain why for several centuries the collective
reactions? To these questions there are and can be no answers. Equally
should it react just on Louis XVI? And what is the time limit for such
Louis XVI. But why did it not react on Louis XIV or on Louis XV--why
reply that Louis XIV's activity, contrary to the program, reacted on
and Charles I are executed by their people? To this question historians
XIV and Ivan the Terrible end their reigns tranquilly, while Louis XVI
wealth, freedom, and enlightenment of the people, how is it that Louis
theory. If the conditions under which power is entrusted consist in the
conditions exists--the facts of history almost always contradict that
program--or even admitting that some one general program of these
to mention the historians' contradictions as to the nature of this
or enlightenment of citizens of France or some other country. But not
progress, looks for these conditions in the greatness, wealth, freedom,
Each historian, according to his view of what constitutes a nation's

contradict one another.
consists in these historians do not say, or if they do they continually
people has by tacit agreement prescribed to them. But what this program
only conditionally on carrying out the program that the will of the
of the people to their rulers, and that historical leaders have power
historians say that power rests on a conditional delegation of the will
Recognizing the falsity of this view of history, another set of

contradictory can only satisfy young children.
Evidently the explanations furnished by these historians being mutually
real power, and that all the others were violations of power.
prove: the one that the Convention and the other that the Empire was the
infringers of the true power, while a Republican and a Bonapartist will
that the National Convention, the Directory, and Bonaparte were mere
struggle with one another--that a Legitimist historian will prove
the life of nations during which various powers arise simultaneously and
has the inconvenience--in application to complex and stormy periods in
Their theory, suitable for primitive and peaceful periods of history,

opposing this is not a power but a violation of power--mere violence.
power to be the one absolute and real power, and that any other force
therefore when describing some single state they assume that particular
the people is unconditionally transferred to historical persons, and
the meaning of power, seem to consider that the collective will of
referred to--in their simplicity failing to understand the question of
Some historians--those biographical and specialist historians already

relation of the people to their rulers.
And these are the three ways in which the historians do explain the

people to others.
conditions on which the will of the people is transferred from some
from the greater or lesser fulfillment by the rulers of these unknown
of several authorities, their struggles and their falls, result solely
that the conditions are unknown and indefinite, and that the appearance
the will of the people is delegated to the rulers conditionally, but
conditions under which their power was entrusted to them; or (3) that
destructions of power result from a nonobservance by the rulers of the
conditions, and to show that all limitations, conflicts, and even
is transferred to the rulers conditionally, under definite and known
infringement of the real power; or (2) that the will of the people
against the power once appointed, should be absolutely regarded as an
that therefore every emergence of a new power, every struggle
unconditionally transferred to the ruler or rulers they have chosen, and
Either to assume (1) that the will of the people is always

To these questions three answers are possible:

fight the Austrians?
to Napoleon in 1809, when our army in alliance with the French went to
to Napoleon in 1806? Was the will of the Russian people transferred
conqueror? Was the will of the Confederation of the Rhine transferred
relations, is the will of the people also transferred to their
part--transfer the will of the people to a new ruler? In international
Do palace revolutions--in which sometimes only two or three people take

he arrested?
taken prisoner at Boulogne, and why, later on, were those criminals whom
then why was Napoleon I? Why was Napoleon III a criminal when he was
ruler, was Pugachev a representative of the will of the people? If not,
If power be the collective will of the people transferred to their

nothing.
about the meaning of the mutations of power in time it can answer
power--existing immutably outside time--is, but to history's questions
minutely how in its opinion power should be constituted and what
that held by jurisprudence, it follows that jurisprudence can tell
From this fundamental difference between the view held by history and

physics fire is not an element but a phenomenon.
history, the state and power are merely phenomena, just as for modern
regarded fire--namely, as something existing absolutely. But for
The science of jurisprudence regards the state and power as the ancients

definition of power needs explanation.
be arranged, it is all very clear; but when applied to history that
state and power might be arranged were it possible for all that to
In the domain of jurisprudence, which consists of discussions of how a

tacit consent, to their chosen rulers.
Power is the collective will of the people transferred, by expressed or

understanding of power for true gold.
that exchange bank of history which offers to exchange history's
And that is how power is understood by the science of jurisprudence,

power.
elsewhere--in the relation to the people of the man who wields the
qualities of him who possesses it, it must evidently be looked for
If the source of power lies neither in the physical nor in the moral

ruled over.
contrary were generally morally weaker than any of the millions they
over millions of people, had any particular moral qualities, but on the
history shows us that neither a Louis XI nor a Metternich, who ruled
such as Napoleon about whose moral qualities opinions differ widely,
based on the predominance of moral strength, for, not to mention heroes
special strength of soul and mind called genius. This power cannot be
leading figures in history are heroes, that is, men gifted with a
force, as in their simplicity some historians think who say that the
like the power of Hercules; nor can it be based on the effect of moral
one--a domination based on the application or threat of physical force,
It cannot be the direct physical power of a strong man over a weak

determine what is this power of one man over others.
him by God. But as soon as we do not admit that, it becomes essential to
This reply is quite satisfactory if we believe that the power was given

ordered was done.
certain words, seems to us senseless. He had the power and so what he
why did six hundred thousand men go to fight when Napoleon uttered
accustomed to that idea and have become so used to it that the question:
Napoleon ordered an army to be raised and go to war. We are so

so it is essential to explain what is meant by power.
A return to the first is impossible, the belief has been destroyed; and

historical events and termed "power."
affairs or a definite explanation of the meaning of the force producing
to the former belief in the direct intervention of the Deity in human
take a single step till it has chosen one of two things: either a return
of that man's will to the Deity, history cannot without contradictions
subjection of the will of a nation to some chosen man and the subjection
Having abandoned the conception of the ancients as to the divine


CHAPTER IV





taste for what they call "serious reading."
their own, only in universities and among the mass of readers who have a
humanity's essential question, serve as currency for some purposes of
gold, so universal historians and historians of culture, not answering
accept them as gold, or among those who do not know the nature of
of imitation gold can be used only among a group of people who agree to
culture evade it and answer something quite different. And as counters
give contradictory replies to that question, while the historians of
history's essential question: what is power? The universal historians
so universal historians will be valuable only when they can reply to
gold only if it is serviceable not merely for exchange but also for use,
tokens of base metal that have no value but merely jingle. As gold is
that. Paper money may deceive the ignorant, but nobody is deceived by
of gold. It may indeed make jingling coin, but will do no more than
substitute for it money made of metal that has not the specific gravity
like people who, recognizing the defects of paper money, decide to
The writers of universal histories and of the history of culture are

comprehension.
to exchange the current paper money for the real gold of actual
someone inquires: by what force did Napoleon do this?--that is, wants
too many of them are written or because in his simplicity of heart
doubts concerning the real value of such histories arise either because
of it gets made or because people try to exchange it for gold, so also
value of paper money arise either because, being easy to make, too much
perhaps even possess a tinge of poetry. But just as doubts of the real
such histories as Thiers' will be interesting and instructive and may
You need only forget to ask how the will of heroes produces events, and
advantageously, as long as no one asks what is the security behind them.
can circulate and fulfill their purpose without harm to anyone and even
special national histories are like paper money. They can be used and
is like money in circulation--paper money and coin. The biographies and
In dealing with humanity's inquiry, the science of history up to now

every step.
professedly reject that conception but inevitably have recourse to it at
the universal historians and historians of culture themselves, for they
power as an explanation of historical events is best demonstrated by
possible way of dealing with it. The necessity of the conception of
of treating historical material, merely deprives himself of the one
breaks that handle off, as Buckle did, without finding some other method
history, as at present expounded, can be dealt with, and anyone who
This conception is the one handle by means of which the material of

And the only such conception known to historians is that of power.
of a force compelling men to direct their activity toward a certain end.
impossible to describe the movement of humanity without the conception
of all, absolutely all those who take part in an event, it is quite
Caesars, Alexanders, Luthers, or Voltaires, and not the histories
So long as histories are written of separate individuals, whether

as an intellectual influence, like the smoke that is blown away.
from several other forces, like the movement of the wheels; others again
peasant sees the devil in the locomotive; others as a force resulting
observed. Some see it as a force directly inherent in heroes, as the
different kinds, all of which are incommensurate with the movement
Yet to supply this conception various historians take forces of

of some force commensurate with the whole movement of the peoples.
The only conception that can explain the movement of the peoples is that

that of a force commensurate with the movement observed.
The only conception that can explain the movement of the locomotive is

explanation.
first sign that occurs to him and in his turn has offered that as an
noticed that the wheels do not supply an explanation and has taken the
the movement of the locomotive by the smoke that is carried back has
has no right to stop in his search for the cause. The man who explains
movement of the locomotive in the pressure of steam in the boiler, he
the wheels go round; and till he has reached the ultimate cause of the
having once begun to analyze he ought to go on and explain further why
says that the movement of the wheels is the cause refutes himself, for
contradiction, will they see that they are both wrong. But the man who
but a German, who moves the locomotive. Only then, as a result of the
or another peasant would have to explain to him that it is not the devil
refute him someone would have to prove to him that there is no devil,
The peasant is irrefutable. He has devised a complete explanation. To

the smoke which the wind carries away.
wheels go round. A third asserts that the cause of its movement lies in
the devil moves it. Another man says the locomotive moves because its
A locomotive is moving. Someone asks: "What moves it?" A peasant says


CHAPTER III





power which they apparently do not recognize.
in history, and that history can only be explained by introducing a
that the new force they have devised does not account for what happens
the historians of culture involuntarily contradict themselves, and show
say plainly that that was the result of Napoleon's will. Speaking so,
involuntarily describe it as resulting from an exercise of power--and
actual historic event such as the campaign of 1812 for instance, they
doctrines as causes of events, as soon as they have to describe an
and minutely examining various religious, philosophic, and political
to approximate, are significant from the fact that after seriously
histories of culture, to which all general histories tend more and more
(which may possibly even be of use to someone for something) the
But not to speak of the intrinsic quality of histories of this kind

theory.
definite meaning, and which can therefore be readily introduced into any
under whose banner it is very easy to use words having a still less
civilization, culture, ideas, are all indistinct, indefinite conceptions
do not write history), and (2) that spiritual activity, enlightenment,
(if they do not express it, that is merely because traders and soldiers
belief is natural and agreeable to traders, agriculturists, and soldiers
supplies the basis of the movement of all humanity, just as a similar
natural and agreeable for them to think that the activity of their class
a conclusion: (1) that history is written by learned men, and so it is
Only the following considerations can have led the historians to such
expression of the whole historical movement is hard to understand.
activity is considered by the historians of culture to be the cause or
handicraft, gardening, or anything else you please. But why intellectual
connection may be found between the movements of humanity and commerce,
activity of men and their historical movements, just as such a
and so it is possible to find some connection between the intellectual
Undoubtedly some relation exists between all who live contemporaneously,

explanation of the causal nexus of this new force with the event.
Frenchmen begin to drown one another cannot be understood without an
of an event; but how a book, Le Contrat social, had the effect of making
even conceive that Napoleon together with other influences was the cause
that Napoleon had power and so events occurred; with some effort one may
which with the masses needs explanation. It is possible to understand
historians, another, newer force--the idea--is added, the connection of
influence of advisers and other people introduced by the universal
remains unanswered, and to the former power of monarchs and to the
some undefined force called an idea--history's essential question still
which these histories are filled--admitting that nations are governed by
But even admitting as correct all the cunningly devised arguments with

executions resulting from the preaching of love.
from the doctrine of the equality of man, or the very cruel wars and
such facts as the very cruel murders of the French Revolution resulting
activity controls people's actions, for that view is not confirmed by
movement of peoples, and in no case can one admit that intellectual
that there is any connection between intellectual activity and the
lies in intellectual activity, only by a great stretch can one admit
the cause. But despite their endeavors to prove that the cause of events
the indication of intellectual activity and say that this indication is
indications accompanying every vital phenomenon, these historians select
such and such people wrote such and such books? Of the immense number of
another in such and such ways, why not explain them by the fact that
events may be explained by the fact that certain persons treated one
progenitors, the writers of universal histories, for if historical
The historians of culture are quite consistent in regard to their

called culture--in mental activity.
take that force to be something quite different. They see it in what is
sometimes accept writers and ladies as forces producing events--again
culture--following the path laid down by the universal historians who
A third class of historians--the so-called historians of

when they want to prove something else, say that power produces events.
their theory, say that power is the result of events, and sometimes,
universal historians sometimes, when it pleases them and fits in with
away," or, "The wind has brought up the clouds." And in the same way the
whether they want rain or fine weather: "The wind has blown the clouds
Peasants having no clear idea of the cause of rain, say, according to

contradict the specialist historians but contradict themselves.
just what the universal historians do, and consequently they not only
has to admit an unexplained force acting on the resultant. And that is
denied--and to recognize it as the resultant of the forces, that is, he
historian is again obliged to fall back on power--the force he had
forces equal to one A gave a resultant equal to a thousand times A--the
the submission of millions of people resulted--that is, how component
of millions. And therefore to explain how from these relations of theirs
affected their mutual relations but does not account for the submission
Madame de Stael, and others spoke certain words to one another only
of millions of Frenchmen submitting to the Bourbons. That Chateaubriand,
others, evidently does not equal the resultant, namely the phenomenon
the interactions of Chateaubriand, Talleyrand, Madame de Stael, and the
Chateaubriand, and the rest--but the sum of the components, that is,
evidently decomposes Alexander's power into the components: Talleyrand,
de Stael, Talleyrand, Fichte Chateaubriand, and others. The historian
Alexander's will--such as the activity of Stein, Metternich, Madame
1813 and the restoration of the Bourbons were due to other things beside
opinion of the specialist historian, tries to prove that the campaign of
will of Alexander. But the universal historian Gervinus, refuting this
of the Bourbons plainly assert that these events were produced by the
Specialist historians describing the campaign of 1813 or the restoration

components, another unexplained force affecting the resultant action.
forces they are obliged to admit, in addition to the insufficient
observed by the universal historians, and so to explain the resultant
sum of the components must equal the resultant. This condition is never
To find component forces equal to the composite or resultant force, the

entering the field of analysis the universal historians stop halfway.
a chain of such contradictions. This contradiction occurs because after
every step, but the universal historians' accounts are all made up of
This curious contradiction is not accidental. Not only does it occur at

the age.
power suppressed the ideas of the Revolution and the general temper of
general temper of the age produced Napoleon's power. But Napoleon's
development by Napoleon's caprice. The ideas of the Revolution and the
misdirected will, and that the very ideas of 1789 were arrested in their
and other things they do not like were simply the product of Napoleon's
1789 and so forth, and at another plainly say that the campaign of 1812
time prove Napoleon to be a product of the Revolution, of the ideas of
producing events. Gervinus, Schlosser, and others, for instance, at one
the resultant of various forces, and then his power is itself a force
historic character is first the product of his time, and his power only
produces events, and treat it as their cause. In their exposition, an
historians still employ the conception of power as a force that itself
as a force that itself produces events. Yet in most cases universal
as the product of many forces, can no longer, it would seem, be regarded
According to this view the power of historical personages, represented

event.
of one man, but in the interaction of many persons connected with the
general historian looks for the cause of the event not in the power
directed forces. In describing a war or the subjugation of a people, a
heroes and rulers, but as the resultant of a multiplicity of variously
which produces events. They do not recognize it as a power inherent in
recognize how erroneous is the specialist historians' view of the force
Writers of universal history who deal with all the nations seem to

reply to history's essential question.
the understanding of the force which produces events, and furnish no
of this class, by mutually destroying one another's positions, destroy
was based on his trickery and deception of the people. So the historians
power was based on his virtue and genius. Lanfrey, a Republican, says it
particular person was based. Thiers, a Bonapartist, says that Napoleon's
in their statement as to the force on which the authority of some
Besides this, historians of that kind contradict each other even
Alexander's, a third that it was due to the power of some other person.
event was produced by Napoleon's power, another that it was produced by
but often in quite contradictory ways. One historian says that an
meaning, for this force is understood by them all not only differently
to describe the same event, the replies they give immediately lose all
As soon as historians of different nationalities and tendencies begin
satisfactory only as long as there is but one historian to each event.
of historian to the question of what force causes events to happen are
general of the persons they describe. The answers given by this kind
events occur solely by the will of a Napoleon, and Alexander, or in
this force as a power inherent in heroes and rulers. In their narration
Biographical historians and historians of separate nations understand

What force moves the nations?


CHAPTER II





quite well known to everybody.
force, so variously understood by the historians themselves, is really
reading many historical works cannot help doubting whether this new
everyone. But in spite of every desire to regard it as known, anyone
History seems to assume that this force is self-evident and known to

history lies precisely in that force.
be explained in what this new force consists, for the whole interest of
If instead of a divine power some other force has appeared, it should

and the movement of the nations.
authors, we ought to be shown the connection existing between these men
a power, and therefore before speaking about Napoleons, Louis-es, and
through Napoleons, Louis-es, and writers; but we do not acknowledge such
power based on itself and always consistently directing its nations
what was asked. All that would be interesting if we recognized a divine
All that may be so and mankind is ready to agree with it, but it is not

proud, or that certain writers wrote certain books.
either that Napoleon was a great genius, or that Louis XIV was very
power that moves peoples? To this, modern history laboriously replies
reply to which all the rest will be incomprehensible--is: what is the
humanity and of the peoples, the first question--in the absence of a
If the purpose of history be to give a description of the movement of

modern history, like a deaf man, answers questions no one has asked.
The strangeness and absurdity of these replies arise from the fact that

histories of the culture of that period.
of separate states to the writers of general histories and the new
historians give, from the compilers of memoirs and the histories
the contradictory replies, not meeting the questions, which all the
historical accounts. On the contrary it is a very mild expression of
It would be a mistake to think that this is ironic--a caricature of the

subjects."
occurred and the sovereigns once again all began to oppress their
bequeathed his great deeds to posterity. But in Europe a reaction
France so dear to his heart, died a lingering death on that rock and
to the island of St. Helena. And the exile, separated from the beloved
the genius Napoleon and, suddenly recognizing him as a brigand, sent him
angry at this and went to fight the French once more. And they defeated
him, immediately all submitted to him. But the Allied monarchs were
arrived in France with a battalion, and the French, who had been hating
again ordering their armies to kill one another, but just then Napoleon
diplomatists and monarchs nearly quarreled and were on the point of
these conversations made the nations happy or unhappy. Suddenly the
thereby extended the frontiers of France) talked in Vienna and by
managed to sit down in a particular chair before anyone else and
the skillful statesmen and diplomatists (especially Talleyrand, who
before his Old Guards, renounced the throne and went into exile. Then
French and the Allies, began to reign. And Napoleon, shedding tears
Then Louis XVIII, who till then had been the laughingstock both of the
and one year later they all regarded him as an outlaw and a brigand.
title of Emperor and showing him every respect, though five years before
abdicate, and sent him to the island of Elba, not depriving him of the
raised. The Allies defeated Napoleon, entered Paris, forced Napoleon to
became his enemies and their forces advanced against the fresh forces he
arm against the disturber of its peace. All Napoleon's allies suddenly
Alexander, helped by the advice of Stein and others, united Europe to
Moscow; then he suddenly ran away from Moscow, and the Emperor
people. Napoleon led six hundred thousand men into Russia and captured
with him, but in 1811 they again quarreled and again began killing many
therefore fought against Napoleon. In 1807 he suddenly made friends
was an Emperor, Alexander, who decided to restore order in Europe and
and Prussia. And there too he killed a great many. In Russia there
become an Emperor he again went out to kill people in Italy, Austria,
France he ordered everybody to obey him, and they all obeyed him. Having
killed them so well and was so cunning and wise that when he returned to
he was a great genius. And for some reason he went to kill Africans, and
conquered everybody everywhere--that is, he killed many people because
people. At that time there was in France a man of genius--Napoleon. He
to slash at and drown one another. They killed the king and many other
men being free and equal. This caused people all over France to begin
there were a couple of dozen men in Paris who began to talk about all
men wrote some books at that time. At the end of the eighteenth century
such and such favorites and such and such mistresses. Moreover, certain
descendants were weak men and they too ruled France badly. And they had
mistresses and such and such ministers and he ruled France badly. His
"Louis XIV was a very proud and self-confident man; he had such and such

events? Then listen:
this movement means, what caused it, and what force produced these
Modern history replying to these questions says: you want to know what

in human affairs, and therefore history ought to give other answers.
conception of the ancients as to the direct participation of the Deity
But modern history cannot give that reply. Science does not admit the

period, nor would there have been any contradictions.
it there would have been nothing unintelligible in the history of that
in the divine significance of Napoleon, but for anyone believing in
would have been clear and complete. One might believe or disbelieve
directed his will to the fulfillment of the divine ends, and that reply,
said that God, to reward or punish his people, gave Napoleon power and
If history had retained the conception of the ancients it would have

themselves.
science of history, whose aim is to enable nations and humanity to know
For a reply to these questions the common sense of mankind turns to the

monuments and tradition of that period.
most legitimate questions humanity asks itself when it encounters the
What force made men act so? These are the instinctive, plain, and
houses and slay their fellow men? What were the causes of these events?
What does all this mean? Why did it happen? What made those people burn

another.
of Christian men professing the law of love of their fellows slew one
of men migrated, were impoverished, or were enriched, and millions
untilled, houses were burned, trade changed its direction, millions
During that twenty-year period an immense number of fields were left

west--Paris--and subsides.
counter movement reaches the starting point of the first movement in the
it, as the first movement had done, the nations of middle Europe. The
symmetry, a countermovement occurs from east to west, attracting to
In 1812 it reaches its extreme limit, Moscow, and then, with remarkable
eastward and collides with a countermovement from the east westward.
by a movement of peoples from west to east. Several times it moves
In 1789 a ferment arises in Paris; it grows, spreads, and is expressed

Europe.
and a certain kind of civilization of a small corner of the world called
the Roman, Spanish, or French realm; to another it is liberty, equality,
is known to the historians: to one of them this goal is the greatness of
Secondly, it is assumed that the goal toward which humanity is being led
includes also orators, learned men, reformers, philosophers, and poets).
only monarchs, generals, and ministers as being such men, while another
who in his opinion have directed humanity (one historian considers
In the first place the historian describes the activity of individuals

their outlooks, lie those two old, unavoidable assumptions.
Buckle, despite their seeming disagreements and the apparent novelty of
At the basis of the works of all the modern historians from Gibbon to

nations and humanity at large are tending.
by individual men, and (2) the existence of a known aim to which these
conclusion by another road, that is, to recognize (1) nations guided
authority of the kings and the "fate" of the ancients, to reach the same
obliged the historians, after they had apparently rejected the divine
replacing them by a new conception, and the logic of the situation has
Modern history has rejected the beliefs of the ancients without

large continent.
meant that of the peoples occupying a small northwesterly portion of a
welfare and civilization of humanity in general, by which is usually
French, German, or English people, or, in its highest abstraction, the
humanity, modern history has postulated its own aims--the welfare of the
which ancient historians regarded as representing the progress of
former divinely appointed aims of the Jewish, Greek, or Roman nations,
kinds, from monarchs to journalists, who lead the masses. Instead of the
extraordinary, superhuman capacities, or simply men of very various
the will of God, modern history has given us either heroes endowed with
Instead of men endowed with divine authority and directly guided by

in practice.
in theory rejected the view held by the ancients, it still follows them
the causes that produce it. But modern history has not done this. Having
are led, modern history should study not the manifestations of power but
subjection to the Deity and in a predetermined aim toward which nations
It would seem that having rejected the belief of the ancients in man's

Modern history, in theory, rejects both these principles.

participation of the Deity in human affairs.
For the ancients these questions were solved by a belief in the direct

ends that were predestined.
a chosen man, and guided the will of that chosen man so as to accomplish
met by recognizing a divinity which subjected the nations to the will of
what was the will of these individuals themselves guided? the ancients
The question: how did individuals make nations act as they wished and by

activity of those men as representing the activity of the whole nation.
the activity of individuals who ruled the people, and regarded the
and seize the apparently elusive--the life of a people. They described
The ancient historians all employed one and the same method to describe

nation, appears impossible.
words, to describe directly the life of humanity or even of a single
History is the life of nations and of humanity. To seize and put into


CHAPTER I





SECOND EPILOGUE





satisfied...."
Father, Father! Yes, I will do something with which even he would be
"But Uncle Pierre! Oh, what a wonderful man he is! And my father? Oh,
"He is good and kind and I am fond of him!" he thought of Dessalles.

"No," answered Nicholas, and lay back on his pillow.

"Are you ill?" he heard Dessalles' voice asking.

he began to cry.
and be delighted with me!" And suddenly his bosom heaved with sobs and
will act as they did. I will do better. Everyone shall know me, love me,
something may happen to me such as happened to Plutarch's men, and I
finished learning, and then I will do something. I only pray God that
they want me to learn. And I will learn. But someday I shall have
his hand. Why should not the same sort of thing happen to me? I know
Pierre. Whatever he may tell me, I will do it. Mucius Scaevola burned
father has been with me and caressed me. He approved of me and of Uncle
Andrew in the house, Nicholas never imagined him in human form.) "My
"My father!" he thought. (Though there were two good portraits of Prince

seized young Nicholas and he awoke.
pitied him. But Uncle Nicholas came nearer and nearer to them. Terror
he felt himself powerless, limp, and formless. His father caressed and
existed, and when little Nicholas perceived him he grew faint with love:
father--Prince Andrew--and his father had neither shape nor form, but he
at Pierre but Pierre was no longer there. In his place was his
the first of you who moves forward." Little Nicholas turned to look
pens. "I loved you, but I have orders from Arakcheev and will kill
"Have you done this?" he said, pointing to some broken sealing wax and

them in a stern and threatening attitude.
entangled and it grew difficult to move. And Uncle Nicholas stood before
goal. Suddenly the threads that moved them began to slacken and become
Pierre were borne along lightly and joyously, nearer and nearer to their
Glory, which was similar to those threads but rather thicker. He and
autumn and which Dessalles called les fils de la Vierge. In front was
slanting lines that filled the air like the cobwebs that float about in
his Plutarch, were leading a huge army. The army was made up of white
that he and Uncle Pierre, wearing helmets such as were depicted in
with wide-open eyes. He had awaked from a terrible dream. He had dreamed
just waked up in a cold perspiration, sat up in bed and gazed before him
Roman nose emitted sounds of rhythmic snoring. Little Nicholas, who had
not cure him of it.) Dessalles slept propped up on four pillows and his
was burning as usual. (The boy was afraid of the dark and they could
Meanwhile downstairs in young Nicholas Bolkonski's bedroom a little lamp


Well, good-by!" and she left the room.
sure he thought he was hiding. Awfully sweet! There, now he's crying.
to take him from me, and he laughed, shut his eyes, and clung to me. I'm
brightly. "I only wanted to tell you about Petya: today nurse was coming
"Oh nothing, only a trifle," said Natasha, smilingly still more

"But all the same?"

"I? Only nonsense."

"And what were you going to say?"

"Yes."

enough."
constitute a power, then honest folk must do the same. Now that's simple
simple ones. My whole idea is that if vicious people are united and
"I only wished to say that ideas that have great results are always

society and to the whole world.
him that he was chosen to give a new direction to the whole of Russian
reflections on his success in Petersburg. At that moment it seemed to
Pierre finished what he had begun. It was the sequel to his complacent

"No, you go on, I was talking nonsense," said Natasha.

"No. What did you say? Go on, go on."

continue.
Having interrupted one another they both stopped to let the other
self-satisfaction and enthusiasm, Natasha with a quiet, happy smile.
another at the same time they both began to speak. Pierre began with
They were silent for a few seconds. Then suddenly turning to one

come.... But I'm sorry to leave you."
meant her little son.) "Oh, it's time to go to him.... The milk's
come over them. "You are as like him as two peas--like the boy." (She
you," Natasha began, evidently anxious to disperse the cloud that had
"Oh, do you know? While you were talking in the study I was looking at

They were silent for a while.

"No, and if I had I shouldn't have recognized her."

coldly and vindictively. "Did you see her?" she added, after a pause.
"Don't say it! I can't bear it!" Natasha cried, and her eyes glittered

"Always about the same thing," said Pierre with a smile. "Jealo..."

quarreled about--I don't even remember!"
we quarreled? And it was always my fault. Always mine. And what we
the best of all. If only you did not go away! Do you remember how
and that the greatest happiness is at first! On the contrary, now is
"What nonsense it is," Natasha suddenly exclaimed, "about honeymoons,

finish because their eyes meeting said the rest.
more, but this is something special.... Yes, of course-" he did not
"No, it's not that. I never leave off loving you. And one couldn't love

"Yes, I should think..." Natasha began.

separation...."
but you wouldn't believe what a special feeling I have for you after a
have been proud to let him see us. There now--you talk of my absence,
to find seemliness, happiness, and peace in everything, and I should
he would have approved of is our family life. He was always so anxious
"No, he would not have approved," said Pierre, after reflection. "What

"I love you awfully!" Natasha suddenly said. "Awfully, awfully!"

understood... yet perhaps he would."
trying to imagine Karataev's opinion on the subject. "He would not have
"Platon Karataev?" he repeated, and pondered, evidently sincerely

wife's line of thought.
Pierre was not at all surprised at this question. He understood his

Karataev. Would he have approved of you now, do you think?"
"Do you know what I am thinking about?" she asked. "About Platon

he had respected so highly as Platon Karataev.
whom Pierre most respected. Judging by what he had said there was no one
than all the others?" she asked herself, and passed in review all those
this doubt to him. "Now who could decide whether he is really cleverer
society be also my husband? How did this happen?" She wished to express
but one thing disconcerted her. "Can a man so important and necessary to
Natasha would have had no doubt as to the greatness of Pierre's idea,

clever."
one banner--that of active virtue.' Prince Sergey is a fine fellow and
What I say is: 'Join hands, you who love the right, and let there be but
I don't say that we ought to oppose this and that. We may be mistaken.
in uniting them all; and then my idea is so clear and simple. You see,
to pieces without me--everyone was pulling his own way. But I succeeded
Petersburg I felt (I can say this to you) that the whole affair would go
says we ought not to think. But I can't help it. Besides, when I was in
"Yes," Pierre replied, and went on with what was in his mind. "Nicholas

Natasha. "Which was most delighted? Lisa, I'm sure."
"Ah, I'm so sorry I wasn't there when you met the children," said

mere amusement."
saw everyone as in a dream. When I am taken up by a thought, all else is
"Yes, and for me nothing else is serious. All the time in Petersburg I

"So you say ideas are an amusement to him...."

that this was unnecessary.
to soften down what he had said; but Natasha interrupted him to show
Montesquieu," he added with a smile. "You know how much I..." he began
till he has read what he had already bought--Sismondi and Rousseau and
collecting a library and has made it a rule not to buy a new book
an amusement--almost a pastime," said Pierre. "For instance, he is
"No, the chief point is that to Nicholas ideas and discussions are

said she, repeating words Pierre had once uttered.
accepted. But I understand that you value what opens up a fresh line,"
"Nicholas has the weakness of never agreeing with anything not generally

he wanted to know what Natasha thought of it.
recollection of his dispute with his brother-in-law was unpleasant and
Natasha knew why he mentioned Mitya's likeness to Nicholas: the

"How like his father he is," Pierre interjected.

naughty..."
if she saw straight into their souls. Yesterday, for instance, Mitya was
"Mary is so splendid," she said. "How she understands children! It is as

Natasha looked intently at him and went on:

simply dull. Besides, I was very busy."
"I have quite lost the knack of talking to ladies," he said. "It was

for him to meet ladies at dinners and balls in Petersburg.
Pierre, answering Natasha's words, told her how intolerable it had been

Petersburg, he should tell her so afresh.
other women, and that now, especially after having seen many women in
Pierre that he should, all the same, prefer her to Mary and to all
superiority, but at the same time by saying it she made a demand on
herself. In saying this Natasha was sincere in acknowledging Mary's
was fonder than ever of Mary, and how Mary was in every way better than
had suffered and lacked life during his own absence, and of how she
Natasha spoke to Pierre about her brother's life and doings, of how she

not consecutive and clear but only the feeling that prompted them.
intercourse contrary to all laws of reason, the words themselves were
contradictory, except the feeling that guides the dream, so in this
Just as in a dream when all is uncertain, unreasoning, and

sign that they fully understood one another.
did not prevent a clear understanding but on the contrary was the surest
at one and the same time. This simultaneous discussion of many topics
and contrary to them because quite different subjects were talked about
that moment this conversation began, contrary to all the laws of logic
bosom, saying: "Now you are all mine, mine! You won't escape!"--from
wide-open happy eyes, and quickly seizing his head pressed it to her
From the moment they were alone and Natasha came up to him with

the verge of a quarrel.
led on by his example, began to do the same, she knew that they were on
began proving anything, or talking argumentatively and calmly and she,
between them if Pierre followed a line of logical reasoning. When he
husband that for her it was the surest sign of something being wrong
a quite peculiar way. Natasha was so used to this kind of talk with her
all rules of logic, without premises, deductions, or conclusions, and in
understanding and expressing each other's thoughts in ways contrary to
and wife can talk, that is, with extraordinary clearness and rapidity,
Natasha and Pierre, left alone, also began to talk as only a husband


CHAPTER XVI





the icon he began to say his evening prayers.
fear when her face is like that?" thought he, and placing himself before
gazed at her. "O God! What will become of us if she dies, as I always
suffering of a soul burdened by the body appeared on her face. Nicholas
therefore never be at peace. A stern expression of the lofty, secret
strove toward the infinite, the eternal, and the absolute, and could
her neighbors, as Christ loved mankind. Countess Mary's soul always
this life to love her husband, her children, little Nicholas, and all
promised in her heart to do better and to accomplish the impossible--in
difference in their ages, but she felt herself to blame toward him and
Sometimes it seemed to her that this difference arose from the

Nicholas.
with regret that there was something lacking in her feeling for young
compared her feeling for them with her feeling for him, and felt
thought also of her own children. She did not compare them with him, but
character recurred to her mind; and while thinking of her nephew she
struck her forcibly, and various traits of his gentle, sensitive
Her husband's account of the boy's agitation while Pierre was speaking
what he was saying flitted through her mind. She thought of her nephew.
the details of her husband's plans, thoughts that had no connection with
feeling which absorbed her altogether and hindered her from following
stronger and added a touch of passionate tenderness. Besides this
that she understood, and this seemed to make her love for him still
a submissive tender love for this man who would never understand all
at him and did not think, but felt, about something different. She felt
attend, for what he was saying did not interest her at all. She looked
had been thinking about something else. But she had to force herself to
ask her what he had been saying, and be vexed if he noticed that she
her. She knew that when he thought aloud in this way he would sometimes
Countess Mary listened to her husband and understood all that he told

and I shall leave the children... in an excellent position."
repurchasing Otradnoe before long, and added: "Another ten years of life
And with an eager face Nicholas began to speak of the possibility of

thousand rubles for the forest."
back from the Tambov estate and told me they are already offering eighty
"You know, Mary, today Elias Mitrofanych" (this was his overseer) "came

continued to think aloud.
a confirmation of his thoughts, and after a few minutes' reflection
took his hand and kissed it. He took this as a sign of approval and
she must not say this and that it would be useless to do so. She only
and that he attached too much importance to these matters. But she knew
Countess Mary wanted to tell him that man does not live by bread alone

to leave the children such beggars as I was."
No, but I know I must work to comfort my mother, to repay you, and not
pleasure that I am at the farm or in the office from morning to night?
then there are you and the children and our affairs. Is it for my own
prison, and had a mother who could not see or understand it? And
mine when I married and was so deep in debt that I was threatened with
there--whether Arakcheev is bad, and all that? What business was it of
disturbed him. "Well, what business is it of mine what goes on
he continued, returning to the talk in the study which had evidently
said Nicholas. "Yes, Pierre always was a dreamer and always will be,"
"Well it won't be for long. Next summer I'll take him to Petersburg,"

dreadfully afraid for him. It would be good for him to have companions."
feel I am not the same and it troubles me. A wonderful boy, but I am
"Still, I am not the same as his own mother," said Countess Mary. "I

he was a fine lad.
not fond of Nicholas Bolkonski but was always anxious to recognize that
untruth. A fine lad, a fine lad!" repeated Nicholas, who at heart was
bits, and he told me of it himself at once! I never knew him to tell an
going in to supper I looked and he had broken everything on my table to
evening he listened to Pierre in a sort of trance, and fancy--as we were
him, and of course I am glad of it. He is a fine lad, a fine lad! This
the fondest mother could do for her son you have done and are doing for
"Well, I don't think you need reproach yourself on his account. All that

he has no one. He is constantly alone with his thoughts."
neglect him in favor of my own: we all have children and relations while
said Countess Mary. "He is such an exceptional boy. I am afraid I
"Ah, Nicholas, do you know I am often troubled about little Nicholas,"

young Nicholas, who had gone into my study and broke all my things."
love of one's neighbor and Christianity--and all this in the presence of
fancied he really had said it. "But they insisted on their own view:
"Yes, that's it! That's just what I said to him," put in Nicholas, who

ourselves to risks we must not risk our children."
duties indicated to us by God Himself, and that though we might expose
Countess Mary, "but he forgets that we have other duties nearer to us,
is our duty to help our neighbor. Of course he is right there," said
everybody is suffering, tortured, and being corrupted, and that it
"As I see it you were quite right, and I told Natasha so. Pierre says

would you have said?"
started proving goodness knows what! A pity you were not there--what
"When I told him that duty and the oath were above everything, he

"Yes, I have noticed that," said Countess Mary.

have been applied word for word to himself in relation to his wife.
dearest to us. He forgot that what he was saying about Natasha could
irresistible inclination which tempts us to judge those nearest and
own but only repeats his sayings..." added Nicholas, yielding to that
And yet there need only be a discussion and she has no words of her
on me--Denisov and Natasha... Natasha is absurd. How she rules over him!
of allegiance and duty... I am sorry you weren't there. They all fell
every honest man's duty to go against the government, and that the oath
recollection of their discussion, "he wanted to convince me that it is
"Well, then, you know," Nicholas went on, growing hot at the mere

"Yes, I know," said Countess Mary. "Natasha told me."

why he went to Petersburg? They have formed..."
become of him if Natasha didn't keep him in hand.... Have you any idea
temper. But he is impossible: such a child! I don't know what would
weren't in the study. We began disputing--Pierre and I--and I lost my
and after a short pause he added: "And I behaved badly today. You
"I quite, quite approve, my dearest!" said he with a significant look,

himself.
more that she with such a soul not only belonged to him but was part of
insignificance beside her in the spiritual world, and rejoiced all the
He was proud of her intelligence and goodness, recognized his own

in which she had her being.
her spirituality and at the lofty moral world, almost beyond his reach,
tender, and proud love of his wife rested on his feeling of wonder at
been able to analyze his feelings he would have found that his steady,
sole aim was the children's moral welfare delighted him. Had Nicholas
done at all, but this untiring, continual spiritual effort of which the
Perhaps it need not be done so pedantically, thought Nicholas, or even

admiration for his wife.
diary? There could be no doubt not only of his approval but also of his
gazed at him questioningly: would he approve or disapprove of her
Nicholas put down the book and looked at his wife. The radiant eyes


develops their greediness. Must tell Nicholas this.
eating! I think that punishment by depriving children of sweets only
none, but looked so unhappily and greedily at the others while they were
Mitya was naughty at table. Papa said he was to have no pudding. He had


Under the date "5" was entered:

that he read this diary about his children for the first time.
trifles, but did not seem so to the mother or to the father either, now
on educational methods. They were for the most part quite insignificant
mother as showing their characters or suggesting general reflections
everything in the children's lives that seemed noteworthy to their
continued to turn over the pages and read. In the diary was set down
Nicholas looked into the radiant eyes that were gazing at him, and

they have behaved."
"I have begun giving the elder ones marks every evening, showing how

"What is a 'ticket'?" Nicholas inquired.


tenderness.
crying piteously and kissing me. One can do anything with him by
Afterwards in the evening when I gave him his ticket, he again began
It was plain that what troubled him most was that he had grieved me.
his shirt, and sobbed so that I could not calm him for a long time.
he was silent, as if astonished, then he jumped out of bed, ran to me in
other children up, telling him that I did not love him. For a long time
matter in hand: I left him alone and began with nurse's help to get the
obstinate. I tried threats, but he only grew angrier. Then I took the
wish to dress and Mademoiselle Louise sent for me. He was naughty and
December 4. Today when Andrusha (her eldest boy) woke up he did not


It was in French.

book.
"A diary?" Nicholas repeated with a shade of irony, and he took up the

filled with her firm, bold writing.
"A diary, Nicholas," she replied, handing him a blue exercise book

tell him.
time was glad he had surprised her at it and that she would now have to
She had wanted to conceal what she was writing from him, but at the same

not be understood or approved by her husband.
Countess Mary blushed. She was afraid that what she was writing would

"What are you writing, Mary?" Nicholas asked.

table, writing.
bedroom in his dressing gown, where he found his wife still at her
instructions to the steward who had been waiting for him, went to the
After supper Nicholas, having undressed in his study and given

about them. The family separated on the most friendly terms.
Denisov started these and Pierre was particularly agreeable and amusing
turned on the subject Nicholas liked best--recollections of 1812.
The conversation at supper was not about politics or societies, but


CHAPTER XV





"You ought not to have been here at all," he said.

from the boy.
And evidently suppressing his vexation with difficulty, he turned away

"All right, all right," he said, throwing the bits under the table.

Nicholas started angrily.

the broken sealing wax and pens.
"Uncle, forgive me, I did that... unintentionally," he said, pointing to

had done to the things on the table. He flushed and went up to Nicholas.
The lad looked down and seemed now for the first time to notice what he

"Yes, I think so," he said reluctantly, and left the study.

him an answer.
regretted that the lad should have heard him. He had, however, to give
this boy during that conversation, and remembering all he had said he
powerful process of thought and feeling must have been going on in
And Pierre suddenly realized what a special, independent, complex, and

you?" he asked.
"Uncle Pierre, you... no... If Papa were alive... would he agree with

up to Pierre, pale and with shining, radiant eyes.
When they all got up to go in to supper, little Nicholas Bolkonski went

no longer in the unpleasantly hostile tone of Nicholas' last remark.
and inapt but she attained her object. The conversation was resumed, and
defending her husband and attacking her brother. Her defense was weak
An awkward silence followed these words. Natasha was the first to speak,

And you may argue about that as you like!"
and cut you down, I should not hesitate an instant, but should do it.'
government. And if Arakcheev ordered me to lead a squadron against you
government--be it what it may--I know it is my duty to obey the
but if you formed a secret society and began working against the
matter, and to that I reply: 'You are my best friend, as you know,
see it. But you also say that our oath of allegiance is a conditional
everything here is rotten and that an overthrow is coming: I don't
abandoning the attempt. "I can't prove it to you. You say that
twitching fingers to prop up his pipe in a corner, but finally
"I will tell you this," he said, rising and trying with nervously

opinion.
but by something within him stronger than reason, of the justice of his
made him still angrier, for he was fully convinced, not by reasoning
were greater and more resourceful, Nicholas felt himself cornered. This
imagination. Pierre maintained the contrary, and as his mental faculties
any great change and that all the danger he spoke of existed only in his
still more and began proving to Pierre that there was no prospect of
Pierre smiled, Natasha began to laugh, but Nicholas knitted his brows


    * "I'm your man."


vot'e homme!" *
not satisfied, let us have a bunt of our own. That's all wight. Je suis
wotten and howwible, but the Tugendbund I don't understand. If we're
Denisov in a loud and resolute voice. "I agwee that evewything here is
but I don't understand it and can't even pwonounce it," interposed
"No, my fwiend! The Tugendbund is all vewy well for the sausage eaters,

Tugendbund was, and what I am proposing."
"It is not at all what you suppose; but that is what the German

sealing wax and quill pens his hands came upon on his uncle's table.
and with a nervous movement of his fingers he unconsciously broke the
and more rapturous joy. Every word of Pierre's burned into his heart,
collar--whom everyone had forgotten--gazed at Pierre with even greater
The boy with the thin neck stretching out from the turn-down

and enthusiastic appearance that made her glad.
knew that it sprang from Pierre's whole soul), but it was his animated
and that she had known it a long time (it seemed so to her because she
even interest her, for it seemed to her that was all extremely simple
husband. It was not what he was saying that pleased her--that did not
Natasha, who had come in during the conversation, looked joyfully at her

preached on the Cross."
is an alliance of virtue: it is love, mutual help... it is what Christ
to suggest that Russia had saved Europe) "do any harm? The Tugendbund
"Why? Did the Tugendbund which saved Europe" (they did not then venture

which can only cause harm."
"Yes, but it's a secret society and therefore a hostile and harmful one

general safety."
Military Settlement. We join hands only for the public welfare and the
killing my children and yours, and Arakcheev from sending me off to some
meaning of that word. It is only to prevent some Pugachev or other from
is a society of true conservatives--a society of gentlemen in the full
government allows it. Not merely is it not hostile to government, but it
"Why, the position of assistants. The society need not be secret if the

toward the government?"
"But action with what aim?" he cried. "And what position will you adopt

more and more.
down in it, and listened to Pierre, coughing discontentedly and frowning
Nicholas, who had left his nephew, irritably pushed up an armchair, sat

mot d'ordre be not virtue alone but independence and action as well!"
or I, are left. What I say is widen the scope of our society, let the
or money, and they go over to that camp. No independent men, such as you
depraved. One is lured by women, another by honors, a third by ambition
calamity. Everything that is young and strong is being enticed away and
possible must join hands as closely as they can to withstand the general
when everyone is expecting the inevitable catastrophe, as many as
When you stand expecting the overstrained string to snap at any moment,
continuing. "That is not enough, I told them. Something else is needed.
"Why? Let him be," said Pierre, taking Nicholas by the arm and

"Why are you here?"

darkened and he went up to the boy.
At that moment Nicholas noticed the presence of his nephew. His face

present circumstances something else is needed."
philanthropy is all very well of course. The aim is excellent but in the
his brows. "Prince Theodore and all those. To encourage culture and
"Well, you know whom," said Pierre, with a meaning glance from under

"Told whom?"

governments began). "I told them just one thing in Petersburg."
those who examine the actions of any government have always said since
strained to such a degree that it will certainly break," said Pierre (as
honest is crushed! Everyone sees that this cannot go on. Everything is
people are tortured, enlightenment is suppressed. All that is young and
army nothing but flogging, drilling, and Military Settlements; the
"Well, everything is going to ruin! Robbery in the law courts, in the

"Well, what does that lead up to?" said Nicholas.


    * Without faith or law.


more readily your object might be attained," he said to Nicholas.
yourself but only wanted a quiet life, the harsher your steward was the
quanti.... You will agree that if you did not look after your estates
hack at and strangle everything--Magnitski, Arakcheev, and tutti
these people sans foi ni loi * can give it him--people who recklessly
tolerate mysticism in anyone now). "He seeks only for peace, and only
has abandoned himself altogether to this mysticism" (Pierre could not
in Petersburg is this: the Emperor does not look into anything. He
sometimes stopping short, gesticulating, and lisping: "the position
"Why this," began Pierre, not sitting down but pacing the room,

"Always some fantastic schemes," said Nicholas.

"Well, what would you do?" asked Denisov.

in a shady corner by the window.
followed them unnoticed by his uncle and sat down at the writing table
followed her. The men went into the study and little Nicholas Bolkonski
heard the nurse calling her and went to the nursery. Countess Mary
Natasha, who had long expected to be fetched to nurse her baby, now

"Come into my study," said Nicholas.

"Why, this..."

can be done?"
"What can decent men do?" Nicholas inquired, frowning slightly. "What

counteract it as far as they can."
allowed to go on so and that it is the duty of all decent men to
"Everybody sees that things are going so badly that they cannot be
"Always the same thing," said Pierre, looking round at his listeners.

"What was it about?" asked Nicholas.

Theodore had gone.
Theodore, and she helped him by asking how his affairs with Prince
which he had gone to Petersburg to consult with his new friend Prince
another channel and express his own deeply felt idea for the sake of
long been wishing but had been unable to divert the conversation to
But Natasha, knowing all her husband's ways and ideas, saw that he had

higher government circles.
conversation from changing its ordinary character of gossip about the
things and to question Pierre. The questions put by these two kept the
important. And so he thought it necessary to take an interest in these
had said so-and-so and this minister so-and-so, seemed to him very
Minister of This and B Governor General of That, and that the Emperor
serious and weighty matter, and the fact that A had been appointed
everything, also thought that discussion of the government was a very
Nicholas, though free from Denisov's readiness to find fault with

fellow like that Schwa'tz!" he cried.
out of them! Fancy giving the command of the Semenov wegiment to a
should let that fine fellow Bonaparte lose--he'd knock all this nonsense
and Madame Kwudener, and wead Ecka'tshausen and the bwethwen. Oh, they
"One used to have to be a German--now one must dance with Tatawinova

Pierre told them.
which seemed to him stupid, and made forcible and sharp comments on what
in the service, heard with pleasure of the things done in Petersburg
dissatisfied with the government on account of his own disappointments
in which most people see the chief interest of home politics. Denisov,
The conversation turned on the contemporary gossip about those in power,

place where Pierre sat.
head, with his thin neck exposed by his turn-down collar, toward the
evidently experiencing a new and powerful emotion as he turned his curly
starting every now and then and muttering something to himself, and
curly-headed, delicate boy sat with shining eyes unnoticed in a corner,
sat weary but resolute at the samovar--and questioned Pierre. The
for their pipes, smoked, went to fetch more tea from Sonya--who
did not take her eyes off her husband. Nicholas and Denisov rose, asked
children had interrupted. Countess Mary sat down doing woolwork; Natasha
Pierre nodded, and went on with what he had been saying when the

Pierre with bright, ecstatic eyes.
"Like my father?" asked the boy, flushing crimson and looking up at

Mary.
yet... How like he is growing, Mary!" he added, addressing Countess
Nicholas with a smile. "You and I haven't seen anything of one another
said Pierre, giving his hand to the Swiss tutor, and he turned to young
"I will bring him to you directly, Monsieur Dessalles. Good night!"

"When you are here he can't tear himself away," she said.

glanced at him and turned to Pierre.
His face expressed entreaty, agitation, and ecstasy. Countess Mary

"Ma tante, please let me stay," said he, going up to his aunt.

Nicholas Bolkonski also in a whisper.
"No, Monsieur Dessalles, I will ask my aunt to let me stay," replied

boy to come downstairs.
Only young Nicholas and his tutor remained. Dessalles whispered to the
everyone, the tutors and governesses made their bows, and they went out.
Soon after this the children came in to say good night. They kissed


CHAPTER XIV





one out of the other, in the children's presence.
needles, and which, when they were ready, she always triumphantly drew,
herself Anna Makarovna used to knit at the same time on the same
This meant two stockings, which by a secret process known only to

shouted.
breathless cry of children's voices filled the room. "Two, two!" they
two!..." said Pierre, and a silence followed: "three!" and a rapturously
I say 'three'... You stand here, and you in my arms--well now! One,
the middle of the room and at the word of command, 'One, two,' and when
"Come, Anna Makarovna," Pierre's voice was heard saying, "come here into

louder.
Pierre went to the children, and the shouting and laughter grew still

there--those stockings are to be a surprise for me."
"I know! I know that feeling," said Nicholas. "But I mustn't go

that all was well."
entered the anteroom I heard Andrusha's peals of laughter and that meant
here today, the nearer I got to the house the more anxious I grew. As I
always the first thing that tells me all is well. When I was driving
stopping at the door, "why I'm especially fond of that music? It is
"Oh, I'll go and see," said Pierre, jumping up. "You know," he added,

Mary.
"It means that Anna Makarovna has finished her stocking," said Countess

"That's delightful music!" said he.

never lost sight of) and smiled happily.
Pierre exchanged glances with Countess Mary and Nicholas (Natasha he

"Finished, finished!" little Natasha's gleeful yell rose above them all.

excitement was going on there.
children's voices and laughter from the next room. Evidently some jolly
The melancholy silence that followed was broken by the sounds of the

room.
and with a severe expression sailed back to her table in the sitting
what harm is there in that?" and she rose (everybody else got up too)
she went on: "Nowadays everyone finds fault. A Gospel Society! Well, and
offended tone; and still more offended that they all remained silent,
man. I used to meet him at Mary Antonovna's," said the countess in an
"Well, and how is Prince Alexander to blame? He is a most estimable

are afraid of everything."
whole government! And what a government! They see treason everywhere and
"Arakcheev and Golitsyn," incautiously remarked Pierre, "are now the

founded a society and in consequence has great influence, they say."
things into his mother's language, "Prince Alexander Golitsyn has
"Well, you know, Maman," Nicholas interposed, knowing how to translate

understand."
after her meal. "What are you saying about the government? I don't
finished her tea and evidently needed a pretext for being angry
 "What is that, mon cher ami?" asked the countess, who had

the whole government now!"
"Going on?" Pierre exclaimed. "Why more than ever! The Bible Society is

that weally still going on?"
"Well, and all this idiocy--Gossner and Tatawinova?" Denisov asked. "Is

health of Prince Ivan and Countess Mary Alexeevna.
these things, but Nicholas and Natasha always brought him back to the
Society. Once or twice Pierre was carried away and began to speak of
the Semenovsk regiment, then about Arakcheev, and then about the Bible
Petersburg, kept urging Pierre to tell them about what had happened in
and being, as a malcontent, much interested in what was occurring in
not being a member of the family, did not understand Pierre's caution
much to tell them but dare not say it before the old countess. Denisov,
Pierre's animation that his visit had been interesting and that he had
of hers seemed to be the only serious and real society. Natasha saw by
had sown in earlier years. But to the old countess those contemporaries
world and like herself were garnering the last ears of the harvests they
distinct group, but who were now for the most part scattered about the
the circle of her contemporaries and had once been a real, living, and
told her of external social events and of the people who had formed
knew might interest the old lady and that she could understand. He
Pierre sat between his wife and the old countess. He spoke of what he
gray, sat beside countess Mary with his general's tunic unbuttoned;
him; Denisov, whose curly hair, mustache, and whiskers had turned half
eyes that seemed more prominent than ever, lay on the armchair beside
(daughter of the first Milka), with a quite gray face and large black
where his tea was handed to him; Milka, the old gray borzoi bitch
in their accustomed places: Nicholas beside the stove at a small table
tea and their voices were audible from the next room. At tea all sat
the samovar. The children with their tutors and governesses had had
were assembled near the round tea table at which Sonya presided beside
continued all through teatime. All the grown-up members of the family
Conversation of this kind, interesting to no one yet unavoidable,

to which she herself was indifferent.
and still thought of them, and other matters that interested no one and
Vasili had aged and whether Countess Mary Alexeevna had sent greetings
habit, and Pierre answered the countess' questions as to whether Prince
remember--yet they sat at tea round the samovar in the drawing room from
dead and so-and-so was married, which she would again be unable to
repeat what they had already told her many times: that so-and-so was
presence they would have had to answer inopportune questions and to
far behindhand in many things that had they begun to converse in her
that anything was hidden from her, but because she had dropped so
talk about that they could not discuss before the old countess--not
Though Pierre, Natasha, Nicholas, Countess Mary, and Denisov had much to

Belova admired the presents and was delighted with her dress material.

a box for cards my son has brought us!"
phrases. "Look, Anna Timofeevna," she added to her companion, "see what
anything, doesn't remember anything," she went on, repeating her usual
to do with her? She is like a mad woman when you are away. Doesn't see
anything like it, you ought to give your wife a scolding! What are we
did. "But best of all you have brought yourself back--for I never saw
"Thank you, my dear, you have cheered me up," said she as she always

the box for cards.
glanced indifferently at the portrait and gave her attention chiefly to
long wished for such a box, but as she did not want to cry just then she
Pierre had had done by a miniaturist in Petersburg. The countess had
a lid, and a gold snuffbox with the count's portrait on the lid which
bright-blue Sevres tea cup with shepherdesses depicted on it and with
They consisted of a box for cards, of splendid workmanship, a
She finished her game of patience and only then examined the presents.

attention from the unfinished game.
not pleased by Pierre's arrival at that moment when it diverted her
you give it to me, an old woman..."--yet it was evident that she was
customary remark: "It's not the gift that's precious, my dear, but that
for you. Well, thank God!" and received her presents with another
absence: "High time, my dear, high time! We were all weary of waiting
with the words she always used when Pierre or her son returned after an
playing patience, and so--though by force of habit she greeted him
one of her customary states in which she needed the mental exertion of
When Pierre and his wife entered the drawing room the countess was in


CHAPTER XIII





little children failed to understand this and avoided her.
Only the really heartless, the stupid ones of that household, and the

mori," said these glances.
full of life as themselves, but now so much to be pitied. "Memento
her, to restrain themselves for this once precious being formerly as
that we must all become like her, and that they were glad to yield to
played her part in life, that what they now saw was not her whole self,
But those glances expressed something more: they said that she had

understanding of her condition expressed.
between Nicholas, Pierre, Natasha, and Countess Mary was the common
her needs. Only by a rare glance exchanged with a sad smile
one ever spoke of it, and they all made every possible effort to satisfy
The old lady's condition was understood by the whole household though no

stories over and over again to the same audience.
rest in a darkened room, the pretext would be the retelling of the same
which was usually toward seven o'clock when she had had an after-dinner
pretext would be Countess Mary. When her vocal organs needed exercise,
would be the pretext, and when she felt a need to speak spitefully, the
the pretext. When she wanted to be agitated, Nicholas and his health
game of patience. When she needed to cry, the deceased count would be
her still-existing faculty of thinking--and the pretext for that was a
as she needed to work off her spleen so she had sometimes to exercise
would again be deaf, the snuff damp, and the countess' face yellow. Just
would grow yellow, and her maids knew by infallible symptoms when Belova
or not rubbed fine enough. After these fits of irritability her face
Another pretext would be her snuff, which would seem too dry or too damp

angrily: "O Lord! How stupid and deaf she is!"
And when Belova replied: "Oh yes, they've come," she would mutter

"It seems a little warmer today, my dear," she would murmur.

of the room.
She would begin to say something to her in a low tone from the other end

pretext Belova's deafness.
before--she felt a need of being angry and would choose as the handiest
Thus in the morning--especially if she had eaten anything rich the day

full vigor is an aim was for her evidently merely a pretext.
because her nose had to be cleared, and so on. What for people in their
needed to exercise her tongue and lungs. She cried as a child does,
functions remains unnoticed. She talked only because she physically
when behind the purpose for which they strive that of exercising their
under any external impulse as people in the full vigor of life do,
stomach, a brain, muscles, nerves, and a liver. She did these things not
work, give vent to her anger, and so on, merely because she had a
inclinations was apparent. She had to eat, sleep, think, speak, weep,
no external aims--only a need to exercise her various functions and
and very old people was particularly evident in her. Her life had
to use her vital forces. A peculiarity one sees in very young children
could give her. But until death came she had to go on living, that is,
nothing from life but tranquillity, and that tranquillity only death
awake, but did not live. Life gave her no new impressions. She wanted
without aim or object for her existence. She ate, drank, slept, or kept
felt herself a being accidentally forgotten in this world and left
After the deaths of her son and husband in such rapid succession, she

had sunk in, and her eyes were dim.
frill that surrounded her face. Her face had shriveled, her upper lip
The countess was now over sixty, was quite gray, and wore a cap with a

room with parcels under their arms.
grand-patience as usual, when Pierre and Natasha came into the drawing
The countess was sitting with her companion Belova, playing

the old countess' rooms.
And collecting the presents they went first to the nursery and then to

by then. Well, let's go now."
I take little Masha into society? Perhaps they will be fashionable again
"When am I to wear it?" and Natasha stuck it in her coil of hair. "When

"Adele tempted me: she kept on telling me to buy it," returned Pierre.

of a kind then just coming into fashion.
suppress a smile as she gazed admiringly at a gold comb set with pearls,
Mamma too! Only you need not have bought me this," she added, unable to
"Too dear!" Natasha remarked. "How pleased the children will be and

Pierre told her the price.

"It was a ruble an arshin, I suppose?"
"That's for Belova? Excellent!" She felt the quality of the material.

showed her.
lap, turned her sparkling eyes swiftly from her husband to the things he
Natasha, who was sitting opposite to him with her eldest daughter on her

shopman.
"What do you think of this?" said he, unrolling a piece of stuff like a

With a merry, smiling face Pierre was sorting his purchases.

his power, and so that way of life proved economical.
been settled once for all till death and that to change it was not in
longer his nor did he wish for it. He felt that his way of life had now
luxury, the kind of life that can be changed at any moment, was no
Life was cheaper because it was circumscribed: that most expensive

begun to improve.
in disorder of late, chiefly because of his first wife's debts--had
spent only half as much as before, and that his affairs--which had been
entailing heavy expenditure, he had noticed to his surprise that he
From the time that Pierre began life as a family man on a footing

added stinginess.
to Pierre were qualities) of untidiness and neglect of herself, she now
things. To her other defects (as most people thought them, but which
Natasha's censure it was only for buying too many and too expensive
everyone in the house, and never forgot anything. If he now incurred
unexpected and childlike pleasure in this purchase of presents for
only when he himself had offered to undertake them, he now found an
Natasha asked nothing for herself, and gave him commissions for others
forgot everything. But in time he grew used to this demand. Knowing that
had been taken aback by her serious annoyance when on his first trip he
him not to forget to procure all the things he undertook to buy, and he
of his marriage it had seemed strange to him that his wife should expect
a present to Belova, nor toys for his wife's nephews. In the early days
his mother--and brother-in-law's commissions, nor the dress material for
of a list his wife drew up, had now bought everything, not forgetting
Though the most absent-minded and forgetful of men, Pierre, with the aid

haste to satisfy all their expectations.
Pierre felt the different outlooks of these various worlds and made

especially that Natasha would now be herself again.
The old ladies were pleased with the presents he brought them, and

and peacefully.
pleased to have back a friend whose presence made life run more smoothly
The grown-up members of the family, not to mention his wife, were

any company he was in.
The guests welcomed Pierre because he always helped to enliven and unite

arrived.
tears of sadness and rapture. So the boy also was happy that Pierre had
be pictured, and of whom he never thought without a swelling heart and
whom the boy did not remember appeared to him a divinity who could not
loved Natasha and when dying had left her to his friend. But the father
beginning to guess what love is, derived the notion that his father had
tenderness with which Natasha spoke of him, the boy, who was only just
which Pierre spoke of that dead father, and from the careful, reverent
From broken remarks about Natasha and his father, from the emotion with

made Pierre in his eyes a hero and a saint.
friendship with the father whom Nicholas could not remember--all this
(of whom the lad was also particularly fond), and especially Pierre's
Platon Karataev (of whom he had heard from Pierre), his love for Natasha
some words he had overheard), his adventures in Moscow, his captivity,
to 1812 (of which young Nicholas had formed a vague poetic picture from
everything Pierre had said. Pierre's past life and his unhappiness prior
with Dessalles or by himself, recall and reconsider the meaning of
him. He did not miss a single word he uttered, and would afterwards,
with pleasure and he flushed and was breathless when Pierre spoke to
wise, and kind like Pierre. In Pierre's presence his face always shone
a Knight of St. George like his uncle Nicholas; he wanted to be learned,
contempt. Pierre, however, he adored. He did not want to be an hussar or
little Nicholas did love his uncle, but loved him with just a shade of
had done her utmost to make him love her husband as she loved him, and
whom he saw only occasionally. Countess Mary who had brought him up
passionate affection. No one had instilled into him this love for Pierre
Uncle Pierre as he called him was the object of his rapturous and
with curly light-brown hair and beautiful eyes, was delighted because
Young Nicholas, now a slim lad of fifteen, delicate and intelligent,

sure he had brought presents for them all.
to which, as he said, all possible dances could be danced, and they felt
He alone could play on the clavichord that ecossaise (his only piece)
no one else drew them into the social life of the household as he did.
The children and their governesses were glad of Pierre's return because

also because they would all receive handsome presents for the holidays.
attend to the estate, and would be in better spirits and temper, and
that when he was there Count Nicholas would cease going every day to
acts and way of life--were glad of Pierre's return because they knew
judge not by their conversation or expressions of feeling but by their
The servants--the most reliable judges of their masters because they

all felt it to be so.
For instance, Pierre's return was a joyful and important event and they

over that occurrence independently of the others.
these worlds, but each had its own special reasons to rejoice or grieve
event, joyful or sad, that took place in that house was important to all
retained its own peculiarities and made concessions to the others. Every
distinct worlds which merged into one harmonious whole, though each
As in every large household, there were at Bald Hills several perfectly


CHAPTER XII





shifting the baby he gave him to the nurse.
"Only not for this..." Pierre suddenly exclaimed with a laugh, and

just made for a baby's seat. Just look!"
"Now, Pierre nurses them splendidly," said Natasha. "He says his hand is

vindicating her husband, "but only after they are a year old or so..."
"And yet he's such an affectionate father," said Countess Mary,

lump of flesh. Come along, Pierre!"
"I don't and can't," replied Nicholas, looking coldly at the baby. "A

how it is you don't see the charm of these delicious marvels."
"Now, Nicholas," she added, turning to her husband, "I can't understand
"How sweet!" said Countess Mary, looking at and playing with the baby.

attention.
with the little cap on its unsteady head evidently absorbed all his
in spite of much that was interesting and had to be discussed, the baby
on his hand stooped, kissed them, and replied to their inquiries. But
At that moment Nicholas and Countess Mary came in. Pierre with the baby

"Yes, just fancy..."

that..."
frighten me... You've seen the princess? Is it true she's in love with
"You see, he holds it up." (She meant the baby's head.) "But how he did

"Yes, capitally."

asked.
"And have you talked everything well over with Prince Theodore?" she

her husband and child.
was bright, joyous sunshine on Natasha's face as she gazed tenderly at
with its toothless open mouth. The storm was long since over and there
dandling him. A blissful bright smile was fixed on the baby's broad face
holding his baby son, who was again awake, on his huge right palm and
When Nicholas and his wife came to look for Pierre he was in the nursery

their rooms.
"Come, come!" she said, not letting go of his arm. And they went to

"You are well?"

could see what I was like without you, how I suffered!"
"All right now. Come along! I wonder you're not ashamed! If only you

"I could not, on my honor. But how is Petya?"

frightened face and bent down.
to smile but dared not even think of doing so. He made a piteous,
above all he knew that he himself was bright and happy. He wanted
knew this outburst was unseemly and would blow over in a minute or two;
Pierre knew he was not to blame, for he could not have come sooner; he

death's door. But you were enjoying yourself. Yes, enjoying..."
for the children. I am nursing and my milk was spoiled.... Petya was at
time.... But what about me? You might at least have shown consideration
"Yes, it's all very well for you. You are pleased, you've had a good

reproaches and angry words.
face vanished; she frowned and overwhelmed Pierre with a torrent of
experienced for the last fortnight, and the joy that had lit up her
Then all at once she remembered the tortures of suspense she had

covered with hoarfrost. "Yes, it is he, happy and contented..."
breast, and then pushed him back and gazed at his ruddy, happy face,
to herself, and rushing at him embraced him, pressed his head to her
unwinding his scarf. "It's he! It's really he! He has come!" she said
On reaching the vestibule Natasha saw a tall figure in a fur coat

was delighted that Pierre, whom he did not much care for, had returned.
"He's come!" she exclaimed as she ran past, and Denisov felt that he too

brilliant, joyful light poured from her transfigured face.
pipe, now for the first time recognized the old Natasha. A flood of
Denisov, who had come out of the study into the dancing room with his

Natasha ran with light footsteps to the anteroom.

familiarity that grows up between a nurse and her mistress.
"Go, ma'am! Don't worry, go!" she whispered, smiling, with the kind of

raised elbows was lifting the infant over the rail of his cot.
her joy left the child too soon, and she glanced round. The nurse with
door she stopped as if her conscience reproached her for having in
him to the nurse, and went with rapid steps toward the door. But at the
Cautiously withdrawing her breast, Natasha rocked him a little, handed

smacked his lips.
looked at her. "You're here?" he seemed to be saying, and again lazily
she could not jump up and run out. The baby again opened his eyes and
The blood rushed to Natasha's face and her feet involuntarily moved, but

"He's come, ma'am," whispered the nurse.

she should rouse the dozing baby.
"Has he come?" Natasha asked quickly in a whisper, afraid to move lest

face.
mistress--entered the room inaudibly but hurriedly and with a beaming
at the front door, and the old nurse--knowing how to please her
She was nursing her boy when the sound of Pierre's sleigh was heard

husband more easily.
what she needed. While attending to him she bore the anxiety about her
he fell ill. She was terrified by his illness, and yet that was just
comfort so often, and fussed over him so much, that she overfed him and
During that fortnight of anxiety Natasha resorted to the baby for

that was unanswerable. It was more than true.
like to pay him out, you are afraid--but here am I! And I am he..." and
nose. That creature said: "You are angry, you are jealous, you would
conscious of the movement of his lips and the snuffling of his little
little three-month-old creature when he lay at her breast and she was
else could tell her anything so comforting or so reasonable as this
And she would go to the nursery to nurse Petya, her only boy. No one

in the immense importance of which she firmly believed.
and all those idiotic societies!" Natasha declared of the very affairs
"It's all nonsense, all rubbish--those discussions which lead to nothing

tried to excuse Pierre and suggested reasons for his delay in returning.
her brother, Sonya, or Countess Mary in their efforts to console her
Natasha was sad and irritable all that time, especially when her mother,

the nursery was all he saw and heard from his former enchantress.
person once dear. A dull, dejected look, random replies, and talk about
looked at Natasha with sorrow and surprise as at a bad likeness of a
the present state of affairs, had arrived during that fortnight. He
Denisov, now a general on the retired list and much dissatisfied with

irritability.
before, Natasha had been in a constant state of alarm, depression, and
Ever since that leave of absence had expired, more than a fortnight

He was given four weeks' leave of absence.
replied by asking him to go, but to fix a definite date for his return.
matters. To Pierre's timid look of inquiry after reading the letter she
understand them, and she always dreaded being a hindrance to him in such
her husband's intellectual and abstract interests though she did not
his absence very acutely. She attributed immense importance to all
herself suggested that he should go to Petersburg, though she would feel
On reading that letter (she always read her husband's letters) Natasha

founders.
discussed there by a society of which Pierre was one of the principal
to Petersburg to confer on some important questions that were being
he had received a letter from Prince Theodore, asking him to come
Two months previously when Pierre was already staying with the Rostovs


CHAPTER XI





mysterious reflection.
And this was not the result of logical reasoning but was a direct and
him was reflected in his wife, all that was not quite good was rejected.
inextricably mingled and overlapping. But only what was really good in
himself reflected in his wife. He felt the good and bad within himself
consciousness that he was not a bad man, and he felt this because he saw
After seven years of marriage Pierre had the joyous and firm

opinion.
that in the excitement of the dispute he had added when expressing his
against which she had argued, but divested of everything superfluous
delight would find in his wife's ideas and actions the very thought
would have a dispute, but long afterwards Pierre to his surprise and
It very often happened that in a moment of irritation husband and wife

on having her own way, and after that nursed all her babies herself.
herself, a thing then unheard of and considered injurious--she insisted
himself--who were all vigorously opposed to her nursing her baby
the opposition of her mother, the doctors, and even of her husband
nurse is unnatural and harmful. When her next baby was born, despite
of Rousseau's view, with which he quite agreed, that to have a wet
three times and Natasha fell ill from despair, Pierre one day told her
first child who was delicate, when they had to change the wet nurse
Thus in a time of trouble ever memorable to him after the birth of their

change his mind she would fight him with his own weapons.
arrived at them clung to them tenaciously. When Pierre himself wanted to
deduced the essentials of his wishes quite correctly, and having once
thoughts he expressed in conversation supposed his wishes to be. And she
with regard to Pierre's expressed wishes, but to what Natasha from the
occupations, the children's upbringing, were all selected not merely
life and place of residence, their acquaintances and ties, Natasha's
that is, by his wishes which Natasha tried to guess. Their way of
The entire household was governed according to Pierre's supposed orders,

express a wish and Natasha would jump up and run to fulfill it.
for anything to get just what he liked done always. He had only to
was reading or writing in his study. Pierre had but to show a partiality
and the whole household went on tiptoe when he was occupied--that is,
home Natasha placed herself in the position of a slave to her husband,
regulate his life and that of the whole family exactly as he chose. At
importance. To make up for this, at home Pierre had the right to
she did not in the least understand but to which she attributed great
business--in which his wife included his intellectual pursuits, which
whim, and did not dare absent himself for any length of time, except on
not dare dine at the Club as a pastime, did not dare spend money on a
flirt with, but dared not even speak smilingly to, any other woman; did
Pierre's subjection consisted in the fact that he not only dared not

flattered him, and he submitted to them.
her and to the family. His wife's demands astonished him, but they also
to him a perfectly novel one, that every moment of his life belonged to
announced her demands. Pierre was greatly surprised by his wife's view,
true. From the very first days of their married life Natasha had
opinion was that Pierre was under his wife's thumb, which was really
plain--were habitual subjects of jest to those about her. The general
jealous of Sonya, of the governess, and of every woman, pretty or
and did her hair, her ill-chosen words, and her jealousy--she was
To such an extent had Natasha let herself go that the way she dressed

much better.
from whom she could hear reassuring words to the effect that baby was
joyful face show a yellow instead of a green stain on baby's napkin, and
striding disheveled from the nursery in her dressing gown, and with
and Sonya. She valued the company of those to whom she could come
society of her relatives--Countess Mary, and her brother, her mother,
Natasha did not care for society in general, but prized the more the

different.
imagine and saw no interest in imagining how it would be if things were
soul were intent on serving that husband and family, she could not
no need of any other or better husband, but as all the powers of her
A husband was given her and he gave her a family. And she not only saw
the family--that is, one wife or one husband. Natasha needed a husband.
can digest, and not having more wives or husbands than are needed for
family, the whole question resolves itself into not eating more than one
If the purpose of food is nourishment and the purpose of marriage is the

case will not have a family.
many wives or husbands may perhaps obtain much pleasure, but in that
If the purpose of marriage is the family, the person who wishes to have

purpose, for his stomach will not digest the two dinners.
dinners at once may perhaps get more enjoyment but will not attain his
If the purpose of dinner is to nourish the body, a man who eats two

nourishment it affords; and the purpose of marriage is the family.
and do not now exist for those for whom the purpose of a dinner is the
how to get the greatest gratification from one's dinner, did not then
Discussions and questions of that kind, which are like the question of

lies in the family.
only the beginnings of marriage and not its whole significance, which
marriage but the pleasure married people get from one another, that is,
These questions, then as now, existed only for those who see nothing in

did not understand them.
these topics were not merely uninteresting to Natasha, she positively
though these themes were not yet termed questions as they are now; but
rights, the relations of husband and wife and their freedom and rights,
There were then as now conversations and discussions about women's

was unable to accomplish all that she considered necessary.
appear, so that she concentrated them wholly on that one thing and yet
did that subject grow and the weaker and more inadequate did her powers
soul, her whole being, into the subject that absorbed her, the larger
And the deeper she penetrated, not with her mind only but with her whole

bring into the world, nurse, and bring up.
entirely to her and to the home, and the children whom she had to bear,
that is, her husband whom she had to keep so that he should belong
The subject which wholly engrossed Natasha's attention was her family:

attention is devoted to it.
trivial that it will not grow to infinite proportions if one's entire
a subject however trivial it may be, and that there is no subject so
We know that man has the faculty of becoming completely absorbed in

these things.
or to choosing her words was that she really had no time to spare for
it. The chief reason for devoting no time either to singing, to dress,
have been agreeable--she did not know--but she had no time at all for
herself to attract herself. To adorn herself for others might perhaps
songs to fascinate her husband would have seemed as strange as to adorn
To fluff out her curls, put on fashionable dresses, and sing romantic

else--indefinite but firm as the bond between her own body and soul.
by the poetic feelings that had attracted him to her, but by something
from him. She felt that her unity with her husband was not maintained
entirely--that is, with her whole soul, leaving no corner of it hidden
her husband, to whom she had from the first moment given herself up
taught her to use would now be merely ridiculous in the eyes of
to all those rules. She felt that the allurements instinct had formerly
inconveniencing him by being too exacting. She acted in contradiction
herself to her husband in her most becoming attitudes, or to avoid
her manners or with delicacy of speech, or with her toilet, or to show
just because it was so powerfully seductive. She took no pains with
of which her singing had been an unusually powerful part. She gave it up
husband. Natasha on the contrary had at once abandoned all her witchery,
should fascinate her husband as much as she did before he became her
even more careful of her appearance than when she was unmarried, and
go when she marries, should not neglect her accomplishments, should be
especially by the French, which says that a girl should not let herself
Natasha did not follow the golden rule advocated by clever folk,

bounds," said the countess, "so that it even becomes absurd."
"Only she lets her love of her husband and children overflow all

Natasha would make an exemplary wife and mother.
understood Natasha, and she kept saying that she had always known that
was now surprised at the surprise expressed by those who had never
exclaimed at Otradnoe not so much in fun as in earnest--and her mother
been due to her need of children and a husband--as she herself had once
her maternal instinct had realized that all Natasha's outbursts had
change in her as at something extraordinary. Only the old countess with
society. All who had known Natasha before her marriage wondered at the
she had demands on her time which could be satisfied only by renouncing
nursing of her children, and sharing every moment of her husband's life,
that she did not--but with her pregnancies, her confinements, the
solitude--she did not know whether she liked it or not, she even thought
and found her neither attractive nor amiable. Not that Natasha liked
in society, and those who met her there were not pleased with her
say, in Nicholas' house. The young Countess Bezukhova was not often seen
Petersburg, on their estate near Moscow, or with her mother, that is to
Since their marriage Natasha and her husband had lived in Moscow, in

attractive than in former days.
did kindle in her handsome, fully developed body she was even more
abandoned since her marriage. At the rare moments when the old fire
something happened to induce her to sing, a practice she had quite
was jealous of Prince Andrew's memory), or on the rare occasions when
Prince Andrew (she never mentioned him to her husband, who she imagined
or a sick child was convalescent, or when she and Countess Mary spoke of
happened only when, as was the case that day, her husband returned home,
fertile woman. The old fire very rarely kindled in her face now. That
not visible at all. All that struck the eye was a strong, handsome, and
Now her face and body were often all that one saw, and her soul was
animation that had formerly burned there and constituted its charm.
and serene expression. In her face there was none of the ever-glowing
former days. Her features were more defined and had a calm, soft,
to recognize in this robust, motherly woman the slim, lively Natasha of
now nursing. She had grown stouter and broader, so that it was difficult
three daughters besides a son for whom she had longed and whom she was
Natasha had married in the early spring of 1813, and in 1820 already had


CHAPTER X





instant.
unattainable in this life and of which she involuntarily thought at that
felt, through her happiness, that there is another sort of happiness
sighed, and her deep eyes expressed a quiet sadness as though she
whispered to herself. A smile lit up her face but at the same time she
"I should never, never have believed that one could be so happy," she

Countess Mary remained in the sitting room.

Nicholas went out holding the child by the hand.

added, looking smilingly at the little girl who clung to her father.
Well, come along now, quick, quick! It's time you two were parted," she
seen her ecstasy, and how he caught it for having stayed away so long.
a few minutes later. "Now our Natasha has come to life. You should have
"It is he, it is he, Nicholas!" said Countess Mary, re-entering the room

danced Daniel Cooper with his daughter.
into society and dancing the mazurka with her as his old father had
thought of what she would be like when he was an old man, taking her
him of dancing, and looking at the child's round happy little face he
from his shoulder and pressed her to his heart. His capers reminded
gallop round the room. Out of breath, he took the laughing child quickly
In her absence Nicholas allowed himself to give his little daughter a

the room.
"I am sure it is Pierre. I will go and see," said Countess Mary and left

"Somebody has come."

the hall and anteroom, as if someone had arrived.
At that moment they heard the sound of the door pulley and footsteps in

"Yes, but what am I to do?... I try not to show..."

whispered in French.
"But you know you may be unfair. You are too fond of this one," his wife

on the faces of both father and daughter.
paced the room with her. There was an expression of carefree happiness
lifted her high, placed her on his shoulder, held her by the legs, and
"Yes, yes." And Nicholas, taking his little daughter in his strong hand,

And she was right," said Countess Mary with a happy smile.
logic. I say: 'Papa wants to sleep!' but she says, 'No, he's laughing.'
little Natasha. "You reproach us women with being illogical. Here is our
"You can see the woman in her already," she said in French, pointing to

her turn began thinking aloud. Her thoughts were about the children.
Countess Mary listened till he had finished, made some remark, and in

her of his intention to persuade Pierre to stay with them till spring.
thought had occurred to him and so it belonged to her also. And he told
He did not ask if she was ready to listen to him. He did not care. A

thinking aloud in his wife's presence now that they had made it up.
"Do you know, Mary, what I've been thinking?" he began, immediately

he began to pace the room.
"Awfully angry!" he said, smiling and getting up. And smoothing his hair

me?"
"I'm not like that myself, but I understand. So you're not angry with

finger? I don't love it, but just try to cut it off!"
us like this, I seem lost and can't do anything. Now do I love my
I don't know how to put it. Without you, or when something comes between
loved for their beauty. But do I love my wife? I don't love her, but...
makes us see beauty. It is only Malvinas and women of that kind who are
"Oh, how absurd you are! It is not beauty that endears, it's love that

and now... in this cond..."
"It seems to be that you can't love me, that I am so plain... always...

said gaily.
"Mary, don't talk nonsense. You ought to be ashamed of yourself!" he

that. It always seems to me..."
"You have no idea how unhappy, how lonely, I feel when you are like

question he knew was in his wife's mind.
"I don't know why you think I am cross," said Nicholas, replying to the

where Nicholas had placed the kiss.
"Again!" she commanded, pointing with a peremptory gesture to the spot

Natasha smiled bashfully.

"May I kiss Mamma?" he asked Natasha.

her hair.
seeing her guilty expression, put his other arm around her and kissed
Holding his little girl with one arm, Nicholas glanced at his wife and,

in."
"I did not notice him following me," she said timidly. "I just looked

She went in and sat down by her husband.

"Come in, Mary," he said to his wife.

Nicholas lowered his legs, rose, and took his daughter in his arms.

conviction. "He's laughing."
"No, Mamma, he doesn't want to sleep," said little Natasha with

door. "Papa wants to sleep."
"Natasha, Natasha!" came Countess Mary's frightened whisper from the

face.
which lay under his head. Nicholas turned with a tender smile on his
who was asleep with his back to her, rose on tiptoe and kissed the hand
her sturdy little legs, and having examined the position of her father,
opened the creaking door, went up to the sofa with energetic steps of
to her father unobserved by her mother. The dark-eyed little girl boldly
her brother that Papa was asleep and Mamma was in the sitting room, ran
black-eyed three-year-old Natasha, her father's pet, having learned from
door and took the boy back to the nursery. Five minutes later little
Nicholas coughed and said no more. Countess Mary moved away from the

"I only came in to look and did not notice... forgive me..."

him here?"
"I can't get a moment's peace.... Mary, is that you? Why did you bring

his voice said crossly:
the door she heard Nicholas clearing his throat again and stirring, and
Countess Mary. She knew how Nicholas disliked being waked. Then through
to the boy. He grew silent, and quiet ensued for a moment, terrible to
standing here!" Countess Mary turned pale with fright and made signs
that moment little Andrew shouted from outside the door: "Papa! Mamma's
when he slept. Nicholas suddenly moved and cleared his throat. And at
whole face, as she had so often seen it in the stillness of the night
she saw before her his smooth handsome forehead, his mustache, and his
slightest tone of which was familiar to his wife. As she listened to it
Nicholas was sleeping came the sound of his even breathing, every
to the door. Sonya went away by another door. From the room in which
to avoid obeying Sonya beckoned to Andrew to follow her quietly and went
difficulty refrained from saying something harsh. She made no reply, but
Sonya was right, and for that very reason flushed and with evident
Countess Mary looked round, saw little Andrew following her, felt that

crossed her path everywhere). "Andrew may wake him."
her in the large sitting room (it seemed to Countess Mary that she
"Mary, dear, I think he is asleep--he was so tired," said Sonya, meeting

followed her on tiptoe. She did not notice him.
said to herself. Little Andrew, her eldest boy, imitating his mother,
"Perhaps he is not asleep; I'll have an explanation with him," she

difficulty, went to the small sitting room.
crossness worried her. She got up and, walking on tiptoe with
them a little, but the thought of her husband and his unreasonable
chairs and invited her to go with them. She sat down and played with
The children were playing at "going to Moscow" in a carriage made of

what they were saying, she softly left the room and went to the nursery.
Having sat awhile with her visitors without understanding anything of

irritated.
Sonya was always the first excuse Countess Mary found for feeling

talk, and especially a quick glance Sonya gave her.
And everything annoyed her--Denisov's shouting and laughter, Natasha's

larger than ever.
glass at her pale, sallow, emaciated face in which her eyes now looked
am in this condition." She looked down at her expanded figure and in the
except me. I see... I see that I am repulsive to him, especially when I
"That's always the way," thought Countess Mary. "He talks to everyone

lay down on the sofa.
And without a word to his wife he went to the little sitting room and

shall have to suffer, so today I'll go and rest."
vex her), "I have been on my feet since six this morning. Tomorrow I
cheerfulness (it seemed to Countess Mary that he did it on purpose to
"Well, messieurs et mesdames," said Nicholas loudly and with apparent

pregnancies, and this was such a time.
and hostility, which occurred most frequently during Countess Mary's
had been happiest together, they suddenly had a feeling of estrangement
moments of antagonism. Occasionally, and it was always just after they
could find nothing to reproach them with; but even they had their
old countess, who felt jealous and would have liked them to disagree,
Nicholas and his wife lived together so happily that even Sonya and the

tell you why."
But the word always seemed to her to imply: "Yes, I am angry but I won't

angry," he replied.
"You always have such strange fancies! I didn't even think of being

hand and kissed her husband, and asked him why he was angry with her.
and went as usual to thank the old countess, Countess Mary held out her
lively, and she did not talk to her husband. When they left the table
Thanks to Denisov the conversation at table soon became general and

could not refrain from asking some more questions.
to end the conversation. She knew her remarks sounded unnatural, but
me?" She concluded from his tone that he was vexed with her and wished
"Then I'm not mistaken," thought Countess Mary. "Why is he cross with

unpleasantly and he replied hastily.
everything was going well on the farm. Her unnatural tone made him wince
him where he had been. He replied. She again inquired whether
be angry with her without any reason, and she felt unhappy. She asked
ill-humor. But today she quite forgot that and was hurt that he should
began to talk to him and make him admit that there was no cause for his
a good frame of mind quietly waited till he had had his soup and then
Countess Mary well knew that mood of his, and when she herself was in
came in to dinner straight from the farm--especially before the soup.
before him, that he was out of humor, as was sometimes the case when he
up his table napkin he pushed back the tumbler and wineglass standing
his place she concluded, from the rapid manner in which after taking
Countess Mary sat at the other end of the table. When her husband took

at Bald Hills.
Ivanovich, the late prince's architect, who was living on in retirement
Denisov, Natasha, her three children, their governess, and old Michael
with their governess and tutor, his wife's nephew with his tutor, Sonya,
his mother's old lady companion Belova, his wife, their three children
which the whole household had assembled. At that table were his mother,
with his wife sat down at the long table laid for twenty persons, at
day, he returned to dinner, and without having time for a private talk
drunkenness to be expected on the morrow because it was a great saint's
stables before dinner. Having taken precautions against the general
business letters, and walked over to the granaries, cattle yards and
the village in Ryazan which belonged to his wife's nephew, wrote two
of that day in his usual way. He examined the bailiff's accounts of
of the nobility; but he considered himself entitled to spend the eve
congratulate him, offer them refreshments, and talk about the elections
the new church he had built, and then receive visitors who would come to
a tail coat, and put on narrow boots with pointed toes, and drive to
visitors, Nicholas knew he would have to exchange his Tartar tunic for
On the sixth, which was his name day when the house would be full of

December.
Vasili Dmitrich Denisov was staying with the Rostovs this fifth of
Besides the Bezukhov family, Nicholas' old friend the retired General

expected back every minute.
weeks as he said, but had remained there nearly seven weeks and was
autumn. Pierre had gone to Petersburg on business of his own for three
been staying at her brother's with her husband and children since early
It was the eve of St. Nicholas, the fifth of December, 1820. Natasha had


CHAPTER IX





provided out of the produce of the estate.
ordinary occupations, and its breakfasts, lunches, dinners, and suppers,
or two. The rest of the year life pursued its unbroken routine with its
of the hosts, as many as a hundred visitors would gather there for a day
months. Besides that, four times a year, on the name days and birthdays
Bald Hills with sixteen horses and dozens of servants and stayed for
families of the Rostovs' and Bolkonskis' relations sometimes came to
and had rooms for the house serfs and apartments for visitors. Whole
serf carpenters out of their own birchwood. The house was spacious
very simple hard sofas, armchairs, tables, and chairs made by their own
plastered only inside. It had bare deal floors and was furnished with
simple. The immense house on the old stone foundations was of wood,
The buildings, begun under straitened circumstances, were more than

scale as under the old prince.
The country seat at Bald Hills had been rebuilt, though not on the same

gratitude.
and all this was unconsciously accepted from her with insufficient
was always ready to render the small services for which she had a gift,
home. She waited on the old countess, petted and spoiled the children,
whole. Like a cat, she had attached herself not to the people but to the
She seemed to be fond not so much of individuals as of the family as a
trying, and had grown quite reconciled to her lot as a sterile flower.
explanation. It really seemed that Sonya did not feel her position
understood differently, yet looking at Sonya she agreed with Natasha's
Though Countess Mary told Natasha that those words in the Gospel must be

for her, and sometimes I think she doesn't feel it as you or I would."
flower, you know--like some strawberry blossoms. Sometimes I am sorry
a sort of presentiment that it would not come off. She is a sterile
Formerly I very much wanted Nicholas to marry her, but I always had
everything has been taken away. Sometimes I am dreadfully sorry for her.
Perhaps she lacks egotism, I don't know, but from her is taken away, and
taken away.' You remember? She is one that hath not; why, I don't know.
"'To him that hath shall be given, and from him that hath not shall be

"What?" asked Countess Mary, surprised.

is a passage in them that just fits Sonya."
"You know," said Natasha, "you have read the Gospels a great deal--there

own injustice toward her.
Once she had a talk with her friend Natasha about Sonya and about her

toward her which she could not overcome.
Sonya in any way and tried to be fond of her, but often felt ill-will
wealth had influenced Nicholas' choice. She could not find fault with
had done Sonya, felt herself to blame toward her, and imagined that her
be gentle and kind to his cousin. She thoroughly realized the wrong he
Sonya, blaming himself and commending her. He had asked Princess Mary to
that, Nicholas had told his wife all that had passed between himself and
From the time of his marriage Sonya had lived in his house. Before

closer and he daily discovered fresh spiritual treasures in her.
with their mother. The harmony between him and his wife grew closer and
his family and entering into all the details of his children's relations
excursions, he spent most of his time at home making himself one with
being occupied with serious matters. In winter, except for business
affording him a special kind of pleasure and a consciousness of
imposed upon himself as a duty, but which afterwards became a habit
He would sit in his study with a grave air, reading--a task he first
library, and he made it a rule to read through all the books he bought.
spent a certain sum every year. He was collecting, as he said, a serious
reading. The books he read were chiefly historical, and on these he
his hunt. In winter he visited his other villages or spent his time
business like seriousness--leaving home for a month, or even two, with
on his farm. In autumn he gave himself up to hunting with the same
whole summer, from spring sowing to harvest, he was busy with the work
consequently some thought him proud and others thought him stupid. The
He did not concern himself with the interests of his own class, and
Among the gentry of the province Nicholas was respected but not liked.

control yourself," she would reply sadly, trying to comfort her husband.
"You should go, go away at once, if you don't feel strong enough to

"Mary, you must despise me!" he would say. "I deserve it."

would again promise that this should really be the very last time.
within a twelvemonth, and then he would go and confess to his wife, and
man who was making him angry. But he did forget himself once or twice
turn the broken ring on his finger and would drop his eyes before the
blood rushed to his face and his fists began to clench, Nicholas would
After that, when in discussions with his village elders or stewards the

ring.
and let this always be a reminder to me," and he pointed to the broken
again he flushed. "I give you my word of honor it shan't occur again,
"Today--it was the same affair. Oh, Mary, don't remind me of it!" and

Laocoon's head.
subject, looking at his finger on which he wore a ring with a cameo of
"Nicholas, when did you break your cameo?" she asked to change the

and kissed it.
The tears flowed faster still from the countess' eyes. She took his hand

asking for forgiveness.
I give you my word. Never," he repeated in a trembling voice like a boy
"Mary," he said softly, going up to her, "it will never happen again;

had long been sinning against himself.
love and pain, and he suddenly realized that she was right and that he
Before he had solved that point he glanced again at her face filled with
sentimentality, old wives' tales, or is she right?" he asked himself.
from childhood as quite an everyday event was wrong. "Is it just
not in his heart at once agree with her that what he had regarded
and down the room. He understood what she was weeping about, but could
Nicholas said nothing. He flushed crimson, left her side, and paced up

she covered her face with her hands.
"Nicholas, I saw it... he was to blame, but why do you... Nicholas!" and

and began to cry.
The moment Nicholas took her hand she could no longer restrain herself

pity, and when she wept her radiant eyes acquired an irresistible charm.
tears. She never cried from pain or vexation, but always from sorrow or
The looks of the plain Countess Mary always improved when she was in

"Why, whatever is the matter, my dearest?"

down again and her lips puckered.
Countess Mary raised her head and tried to speak, but hastily looked

But what is the matter with you, Mary?" he suddenly asked.
recollection of him. "If he had told me he was drunk and did not see...
"Such an insolent scoundrel!" he cried, growing hot again at the mere

lips compressed and gave her husband no reply.
Mary turned red and then pale, but continued to sit with head bowed and
morning. Among other things he spoke of the Bogucharovo elder. Countess
frame, and as usual began to tell her what he had been doing that
went up to his wife, who sat with her head bent low over her embroidery
the sound of cries and blows were heard. On returning to lunch Nicholas
to question him, and immediately after the elder had given a few replies
dishonesty and various irregularities. Nicholas went out into the porch
man who had succeeded to the post when Dron died and who was accused of
Once in summer he had sent for the village elder from Bogucharovo, a

punishment suddenly changed.
this, but in the second year of his marriage his view of that form of
free use of his fists. At first he saw nothing reprehensible in
that was his quick temper together with his old hussar habit of making
One matter connected with his management sometimes worried Nicholas, and


CHAPTER VIII





not to be trifled with either--in a word, he was a real master!"
master... the peasants' affairs first and then his own. Of course he was
administration was devoutly preserved among the serfs. "He was a
to beg him to buy them, and long after his death the memory of his
sake. His means increased rapidly; serfs from neighboring estates came
allow himself to think that he was doing good to others for virtue's
And all Nicholas did was fruitful--probably just because he refused to

can do no good either for himself or for me."
if the peasant is naked and hungry and has only one miserable horse, he
clenching his vigorous fist. "And fairness, of course," he added, "for
order and strictness are essential.... That's all about it!" said he,
put our affairs in order while I am alive, that's all. And to do that,
What I want is that our children should not have to go begging. I must
all poetry and old wives' talk--all that doing good to one's neighbor!
it never entered my head and I wouldn't do that for their good! That's
was doing for his serfs, he would be vexed and reply: "Not in the least;
Sometimes when, trying to understand him, she spoke of the good work he

which had laws she had not fathomed.
business. She felt he had a world apart, which he loved passionately and
refuse her, angrily asking her not to interfere in what was not her
to be excused some work; why he, that kind Nicholas, should obstinately
him a petition from some peasant men or women who had appealed to her
anticipate her wishes, should become almost desperate when she brought
Still less did she understand why he, kindhearted and always ready to

under cover."
say: "Well, one more day and my grain and the peasants' will all be
wormwood and gentian in his hair and, gleefully rubbing his hands, would
from the barn, flushed, sunburned, and perspiring, with a smell of
carried away a threatening cloud during the hay harvest he would return
on the dry and thirsty shoots of the young oats, or why when the wind
mustache and winked so joyfully, when warm steady rain began to fall
why he stepped out from the window to the veranda and smiled under his
stacked before anyone else had his harvest in. She did not understand
corn all night; or of the fact that his (Nicholas') sheaves were already
well-to-do peasant Matthew Ermishin, who with his family had carted
with such admiration and delight of the farming of the thrifty and
or reaping to have tea with her. She did not understand why he spoke
fields or on the threshing floor, he returned from the sowing or mowing
when, after getting up at daybreak and spending the whole morning in the
could not understand why he was so particularly animated and happy
vexations he derived from that world, to her so remote and alien. She
that she could not share it; but she could not understand the joys and
Countess Mary was jealous of this passion of her husband's and regretted

way and manner of farming which produced good results.
soul, and for that very reason had understood and assimilated the one
Yet he loved "our Russian peasants" and their way of life with his whole

could not bear them.
say: "What can one do with our Russian peasants?" and imagined that he
Often, speaking with vexation of some failure or irregularity, he would

his own mind.
should or should not do, but the standard was quite firm and definite in
to do so. He could not have said by what standard he judged what he
make things easy for or reward anyone, merely because he felt inclined
He did not allow himself either to be hard on or punish a man, or to

every decision would be approved by them all with very few exceptions.
never felt any hesitation in dealing with the peasants. He knew that his
instead of a land worker he did so without the least hesitation. He
the house; but when it was possible to have a domestic serf conscripted
had to be punished, he always felt undecided and consulted everybody in
a decision had to be taken regarding a domestic serf, especially if one
as he called them--and everyone said he spoiled them by his laxity. When
He disliked having anything to do with the domestic serfs--the "drones"

Nicholas.
and harvested so early and so well, or got so good a return, as did
and corn as of his own, and few landowners had their crops sown
He was as careful of the sowing and reaping of the peasants' hay

from the commune.
on the lazy, the depraved, and the weak, and tried to get them expelled
the family groups to divide into separate households. He was hard alike
peasant families together in the largest groups possible, not allowing
peasants had and increased the number by all possible means. He kept the
credit (as he ironically called it), he found out how many cattle the
analyzing the properties of manure, before entering into the debit and
had the right to choose, and these posts never changed hands. Before
delegate, the very men the serfs would themselves have chosen had they
estates he at once unerringly appointed as bailiff, village elder, and
Guided by some gift of insight, on taking up the management of the

produced very brilliant results.
perform toward them the duties demanded of him. And Nicholas' management
akin to them did he begin boldly to manage his serfs, that is, to
their language, to grasp the hidden meaning of their words, and felt
had understood the peasants' tastes and aspirations, had learned to talk
of speech, and their judgment of what was good and bad. Only when he
orders while in reality learning from them their methods, their manner
considered good and bad, and only pretended to direct them and give
he watched the serfs, trying to understand their aims and what they
a tool, but also a judge of farming and an end in himself. At first
especially attracted his attention. The peasant seemed to him not merely
and began to understand its different branches, it was the serf who
effective--the peasant laborer. When Nicholas first began farming
agent by which nitrogen, oxygen, manure, and plow were made
in the air, nor manures, nor special plows, but that most important
chief thing in his eyes was not the nitrogen in the soil, nor the oxygen
mind's eye the estate as a whole and not any particular part of it. The
particular part of the work on his estate. He always had before his
and the buying of expensive seed corn, and did not make a hobby of any
management, disliked factories, the raising of expensive products,
then coming into vogue. He laughed at theoretical treatises on estate
a plain farmer: he did not like innovations, especially the English ones
that it became his favorite and almost his sole occupation. Nicholas was
Having started farming from necessity, he soon grew so devoted to it

to buy back Otradnoe--that being his pet dream.
was able to buy a small estate adjoining Bald Hills and was negotiating
In another three years, by 1820, he had so managed his affairs that he

inheritance on the death of a cousin he paid his debt to Pierre as well.
selling any of his wife's property, and having received a small
Within four years he had paid off all his remaining debts without

Hills with his wife, his mother, and Sonya.
In the winter of 1813 Nicholas married Princess Mary and moved to Bald


CHAPTER VII





became possible, inevitable, and very near.
another's eyes--and what had seemed impossible and remote suddenly
She turned round. For a few seconds they gazed silently into one

"Princess!"
"Princess, for God's sake!" he exclaimed, trying to stop her.

and was hurrying from the room.
for me to bear.... Excuse me, good-by!" and suddenly she began to cry
voice. "I have had so little happiness in life that every loss is hard
friendship. And that hurts me." There were tears in her eyes and in her
me... I confess it. For some reason you wish to deprive me of our former
"I don't understand your why, Count," she continued, "but it's hard for

He was silent.

him. "Why? Tell me. You must tell me!"
"But why, Count, why?" she almost cried, unconsciously moving closer to

kind, sorrowful face, she suddenly understood the cause of his coldness.
that..." And remembering his former tenderness, and looking now at his
and I am rich.... Yes, that's the only reason.... Yes, were it not for
self-sacrificing spirit too," she said to herself. "Yes, he is poor now
handsome exterior, that I loved in him. I divined his noble, resolute,
"No, it was not only that gay, kind, and frank look, not only that
"So that's why! That's why!" a voice whispered in Princess Mary's soul.

"Thank you, Princess," he added softly. "Sometimes it is hard."
"There are a thousand reasons why," laying special emphasis on the why.

"but you used to be different, and..."
voice trembled. "I don't know why," she continued, recovering herself,
consider my sympathy misplaced, but I was mistaken," and suddenly her
so near to you... and to all your family that I thought you would not
"I thought you would allow me to tell you this," she said. "I had come

was to him that she now spoke.
princess had caught a glimpse of the man she had known and loved, and it
His face again resumed its former stiff and cold expression. But the

interesting or cheerful subject."
contrary I continually reproach myself.... But this is not at all an
"I cannot accept your praise," he interrupted her hurriedly. "On the

with satisfaction, because the self-sacrifice that fills it now..."
As I understand your present life, I think you will always recall it
"Yes, yes," said she, "but you have no reason to regret the past, Count.

his words which would explain his feeling for her.
as he said this. She seemed to be trying to fathom the hidden meaning of
Princess Mary gazed intently into his eyes with her own luminous ones

back."
I would give much to bring back that time... but there's no bringing it
has flowed since then! In what distress we all seemed to be then, yet
seem long ago since we first met at Bogucharovo, but how much water
"Yes, Princess," said Nicholas at last with a sad smile, "it doesn't

They both sat silent, with an occasional glance at one another.

left the room.
"Wait a moment, I'll fetch it," said Mademoiselle Bourienne, and she

countess!"
already, Count? Well then, good-by! Oh, but the cushion for the
"Oh, I beg your pardon," she said as if waking up. "Are you going

She started, flushed, and sighed deeply.

"Good-by, Princess!" said he.

think of nothing to say.
expressed. He wished to help her and say something pleasant, but could
vaguely conscious that he might be the cause of the sadness her face
suffering on her gentle face. He suddenly felt sorry for her and was
again looked at the princess. She still sat motionless with a look of
abstraction, made some remark to Mademoiselle Bourienne and then
Nicholas glanced at her and, wishing to appear not to notice her

luminous eyes gazing fixedly before her, not noticing that he had risen.
happiness in life, that in a fit of absent-mindedness she sat still, her
mind was so full of the question why she alone was granted so little
she was so tired of talking of what did not interest her, and her
conversation very well, but at the very last moment, just when he rose,
With Mademoiselle Bourienne's help the princess had maintained the

elapsed after which a visitor may rise, Nicholas got up to say good-by.
latest war news, and when the ten minutes required by propriety had
They spoke of the countess' health, of their mutual friends, of the

the tone in which he addressed her.
fulfill the demands of politeness, and she firmly resolved to maintain
Her first glance at Nicholas' face told her that he had only come to

for Mademoiselle Bourienne and went with her to the drawing room.
resolution not to betray herself and not show her agitation, she sent
nephew's lessons, she was informed that Rostov had called. With a firm
One day in midwinter when sitting in the schoolroom attending to her

ease.
discover what that something was, she felt that she could not be at
for her (she knew that) but it concealed something, and until she could
relation to Rostov. His cold, polite manner did not express his feeling
she asked herself what distressed her, she had to admit that it was her
matter, she felt herself all the time in an awkward position. And when
firmly resolved not to call on the Rostovs again and to forget the whole
to remorse troubled her when she thought of her visit. Though she had
But she could not pacify herself with these reflections; a feeling akin

obligations."
old lady, who was always kind to me and to whom I am under many
aid. "I have nothing to do with him and I only wanted to see the
"I expected nothing else," she told herself, calling her pride to her

not wishing to be the first to call.
Nicholas, Princess Mary confessed to herself that she had been right in
After her visit to the Rostovs and her unexpectedly chilly reception by

day after that.
The same conversation was repeated next day and the day after, and the

patience, trying to divert his mother's attention to another topic.
Nicholas sighed, bit his mustache, and laid out the cards for a

"It doesn't matter to me. I only wish it for your sake."

"Well, then, I'll go if you wish it."

have secrets from your mother."
Well, I have asked you, and now I won't interfere any more since you
you to return a call. One would think mere politeness required it....
"If I were asking you to do something disagreeable now--but I only ask

"Not at all, Mamma."

me."
have got some notion or other in your head. You hide everything from
admirable young woman and you always liked her, but now suddenly you
"Why, you said yourself you don't want even to see her. She is a very

"But I never said I was dull."

my dear. One day you are dull, and the next you refuse to see anyone."
"You used to want to, and now you don't. Really I don't understand you,

"But I don't in the least want to, Mamma."

think it must be dull for you only seeing us."
must go and call on her. You would at least be seeing somebody, and I
"She is a very admirable and excellent young woman," said she, "and you

but his silence irritated her.
Nicholas tried to keep silence when his mother spoke of the princess,

began to talk about her.
a wish to see her often, but yet always became ill-humored when she
She sang her praises, insisted that her son must call on her, expressed

day.
more. But after her visit the old countess spoke of her several times a
Nicholas did not reply and tried to avoid speaking of the princess any

conceal her delight. "She is so kind and Mamma is so fond of her!"
"Oh, Nicholas, how can you talk like that?" cried Sonya, hardly able to

had disappeared.
evidently unable to repress his vexation, after the princess' carriage
ladies and all these civilities!" said he aloud in Sonya's presence,
"Why does she come prowling here? What does she want? I can't bear these

to you? Leave me in peace," his looks seemed to say.
To her remarks about his mother's health he made no reply. "What's that
and with marked solemnity and stiffness accompanied her to the anteroom.
When the princess came out of the countess' room Nicholas met her again,

left the room.
health, led the way to his mother, and having sat there for five minutes
proud expression she had not seen on it before. He inquired about her
had expected, at his first glance at her his face assumed a cold, stiff,
reached through his. But instead of being greeted with pleasure as she
Nicholas was the first to meet her, as the countess' room could only be

arrival in Moscow.
a great effort she did however go to call on them a few weeks after her
relations with Nicholas in Voronezh she was shy about doing so. Making
family, she thought it her duty to go to see them. But remembering her
relations with all the Rostovs which had made her almost a member of the
feeling a joyous sense of her love for him. Remembering her friendly
"I never expected anything else of him," said Princess Mary to herself,

son has sacrificed himself for his mother," as people were saying.
current in town she learned how the Rostovs were situated, and how "the
At the beginning of winter Princess Mary came to Moscow. From reports


CHAPTER VI





him to endure his position.
carefully to cherish within himself the gloomy mood which alone enabled
up and down the room, and smoke one pipe after another. He seemed
even at home did nothing but play cards with his mother, pace silently
offers of assistance; he avoided all distraction and recreation, and
to avoid his old acquaintances with their commiseration and offensive
satisfaction in an uncomplaining endurance of his position. He tried
for nothing, and deep in his heart experienced a gloomy and stern
death--never entered his head. He wished for nothing and hoped
relations, was repugnant to him. The other way out--his mother's
marrying some rich woman, which was suggested to him by his female
small debts. He could see no way out of this situation. The idea of
anything, but to comply with his mother's demands he even incurred some
aside out of his salary proved a dream. Not only did he not save
Nicholas' position became worse and worse. The idea of putting something

any case be renewed.
that had passed between them had been long forgotten and could never in
her word when she wrote giving him his freedom and now behaved as if all
that the more he valued her the less he loved her. He had taken her at
are valued for, but little that could have made him love her. He felt
because there was nothing to reproach her with. She had all that people
He seemed in his heart to reproach her for being too perfect, and

patience and devotion, but tried to keep aloof from her.
to Sonya for all she was doing for his mother and greatly admired her
from the old countess. Nicholas felt himself irredeemably indebted
whims and secret ill-will, and helped Nicholas to conceal their poverty
Sonya kept house, attended on her aunt, read to her, put up with her

Sonya, or for Nicholas himself.
wine for her son, or money to buy a present as a surprise for Natasha or
send for a friend, now some expensive article of food for herself, or
for her son, kept demanding now a carriage (which they did not keep) to
had been used to from childhood and, unable to realize how hard it was
countess could not conceive of life without the luxurious conditions she
but had to shield his mother from knowledge of their poverty. The
hundred rubles he had not only to keep himself, his mother, and Sonya,
His position was the more difficult because with his salary of twelve
brother-in-law, Nicholas tried to hide his wretched condition from him.
clear idea of Nicholas' circumstances. Having borrowed money from his
Natasha and Pierre were living in Petersburg at the time and had no

house on the Sivtsev Vrazhek.
which he was so fond, and moved with his mother and Sonya to a small
he accepted a post in Moscow in that service, doffed the uniform of
had known him before, and despite his abhorrence of the civil service,
life; and so despite his reluctance to remain in Moscow among people who
the next vacancy, for his mother now clung to him as her one hold on
He could not rejoin the army where he would have been made colonel at

the creditors threatened, he re-entered the government service.
for value received. And to avoid being imprisoned for the remainder, as
brother-in-law Bezukhov to pay off debts he regarded as genuinely due
unpaid. Nicholas accepted thirty thousand rubles offered him by his
auction for half its value, and half the debts still remained
Not one of the plans Nicholas tried succeeded; the estate was sold by

debts and was obviously not guilty of contracting them.
remorselessly pursued the young heir who had voluntarily undertaken the
the old man--the cause of their losses (if they were losses)--now
allowed no respite and no peace, and those who had seemed to pity
as presents now became the most exacting of the creditors. Nicholas was
paid first, and those who like Mitenka held promissory notes given them
always happens in such cases rivalry sprang up as to which should get
careless good nature, all proceeded to enforce their claims at once. As
but powerful influence exerted on them while he lived by the count's
The creditors who had so long been silent, restrained by a vague

inheritance together with the obligation to pay the debts.
held sacred, and therefore would not hear of refusing and accepted the
he regarded such a refusal as a slur on his father's memory, which he
Friends and relations advised Nicholas to decline the inheritance. But

double the value of the property.
debts the existence of which no one had suspected. The debts amounted to
after his death, surprising everyone by the immense total of small
Moscow. The state of the count's affairs became quite obvious a month
without waiting for it to be accepted took leave of absence and went to
father's death reached him. He at once resigned his commission, and
Nicholas was with the Russian army in Paris when the news of his

unexpectedly died.
impossible to say what would happen if he lived another year that he
It was just when the count's affairs had become so involved that it was

which of us has not weaknesses of his own?"
been he was a most worthy man. You don't meet such men nowadays.... And
and emotion, as if justifying themselves: "Well, whatever he may have
often laughed at him, now said, with a common feeling of self-reproach
acquaintances, who had so often dined and danced at his house and had so
to the deceased filled the house rented by the Rostovs. All these
next day a throng of acquaintances who came to pay their last respects
conscious. After receiving communion and unction he quietly died; and
dissipated their property--that being the chief fault of which he was
sobbing, he asked her and his absent son to forgive him for having
his medicine he sobbed and silently kissed her hand. On his last day,
armchair by his pillow without undressing. Every time she gave him
the doctor's encouragement. The countess passed a fortnight in an
bed. He realized from the first that he would not get up again, despite
complain of depression. A few days later he fell ill and took to his
When Pierre and his wife had left, he grew very quiet and began to

evoked the compassion of those who knew and liked him.
his cheerfulness was not infectious as it used to be: on the contrary it
ordered dinners and suppers and obviously tried to appear cheerful, but
The arrangements for Natasha's marriage occupied him for a while. He

and distraught and now unnaturally animated and enterprising.
inviting further blows which would finish him. He seemed now frightened
events, and bowed his old head in a spiritual sense as if expecting and
head. He seemed to be unable to understand the meaning of all these
and the old countess' grief fell blow after blow on the old count's
from it, the death of Prince Andrew, Natasha's despair, Petya's death,
The events of the previous year: the burning of Moscow and the flight

family group broke up.
that same year and, as always happens, after the father's death the
happy event in the family of the old Rostovs. Count Ilya Rostov died
Natasha's wedding to Bezukhov, which took place in 1813, was the last


CHAPTER V





characters and nations.
other manifestations of life. And so it is with the purpose of historic
All that is accessible to man is the relation of the life of the bee to

comprehension.
the more obvious it becomes, that the ultimate purpose is beyond our
higher the human intellect rises in the discovery of these purposes,
the second, or any of the processes the human mind can discern. The
bee. But the ultimate purpose of the bee is not exhausted by the first,
bee helps in this work, and may say that in this lies the purpose of the
existence. Another, observing the migration of plants, notices that the
fertilizes the latter, and sees in this the purpose of the bee's
that the bee flying with the pollen of a male flower to a pistil
a queen, and that it exists to perpetuate its race. A botanist notices
says that the bee gathers pollen dust to feed the young bees and rear
Another beekeeper who has studied the life of the hive more closely
flowers and carry it to the hive, says that it exists to gather honey.
fragrance of flowers. A beekeeper, seeing the bee collect pollen from
bee sucking from the chalice of a flower and says it exists to suck the
of bees and declares that bees exist to sting people. A poet admires the
A bee settling on a flower has stung a child. And the child is afraid

has them to serve a general purpose incomprehensible to man.
comprehend, so each individual has within himself his own aims and yet
yet at the same time only a part of a whole too immense for man to
As the sun and each atom of ether is a sphere complete in itself, and

rest of you. Let me live like a man and think of my soul and of God."
"Not unto us, not unto us, but unto Thy Name!... I too am a man like the

of contemptible men whom he despises, saying only:
of that supposed power, turns away from it, and gives it into the hands
feeling the hand of God upon him, suddenly recognizes the insignificance
had he retained power--Alexander I, having fulfilled his mission and
up childish and mendacious plans of how he would have made mankind happy
welfare of his peoples--at the time when Napoleon in exile was drawing
power and therefore to have the possibility of bringing about the
innovations in his fatherland--now that he seemed to possess the utmost
had striven only for his people's welfare, the originator of the liberal
Alexander I--the pacifier of Europe, the man who from his early years

possible power. How does he use it?
The goal is reached. After the final war of 1815 Alexander possesses all

Europe, led them to the goal.
appeared in his place at the given moment and, uniting the nations of
as soon as the necessity for a general European war presented itself he
During the national war he was inactive because he was not needed. But

Austerlitz, and Tilsit, and Erfurt.
his early liberalism, the advisers who surrounded him, and by
prepared by innumerable so-called chances in his life: his education,
Napoleon. And all this was found in Alexander I; all this had been
a mild and attractive personality; and a personal grievance against
superiority over those sovereigns of the day who co-operated with him;
affairs, but a remote sympathy not dulled by petty interests; a moral
What was needed was a sense of justice and a sympathy with European

that movement from east to west?
What was needed for him who, overshadowing others, stood at the head of

east to west.
Alexander I, the man who stood at the head of the countermovement from
Still greater coherence and inevitability is seen in the life of

understood this.
But dazed by the force of the movement, it was long before people

but I who moved you?"
"See what you believed in! This is he! Do you now see that it was not he

shows him to us.
The manager having brought the drama to a close and stripped the actor

unseen hand directed his actions.
world what it was that people had mistaken for strength as long as an
when the justification is no longer needed, and displaying to the whole
in solitude on his island, justifying his actions by intrigues and lies
And some years pass during which he plays a pitiful comedy to himself

powder and paint: he will not be wanted any more.
The last role is played. The actor is bidden to disrobe and wash off his

That act is performed.

This man is still needed to justify the final collective act.

cursed the day before and will curse again a month later.
strange chance no one does so and all rapturously greet the man they
conspiracy and without soldiers. Any guard might arrest him, but by
The man who had devastated France returns to France alone, without any

history.
diplomatic difficulties and ends the military movement of that period of
occurs: a backwash which serves to solve the apparently insuperable
point as before--Paris. The last backwash of the movement from the west
does not come from the quarter they expect. It rises again from the same
position seems to them insoluble. But the wave they feel to be rising
of natural forces; they anticipate war between their sovereigns; the
think that their disagreements are the cause of this fresh pressure
But the smooth sea again suddenly becomes disturbed. The diplomatists

caused the floods to abate.
formed in which float the diplomatists, who imagine that they have
waves of the great movement abate, and on the calm surface eddies are
The flood of nations begins to subside into its normal channels. The


CHAPTER IV





millions of money are paid him.
is presented to him as his dominion, and guards are given to him and
is sent to an island two days' sail from France, which for some reason
who ten years before and a year later was considered an outlawed brigand
strange chance no one perceives this. His part is not yet ended. The man
years previously and one year later--an outlawed brigand. But by some
craft exposed, he should have appeared to them what he appeared ten
their sufferings. Deprived of power and authority, his crimes and his
occurs. The allies detest Napoleon whom they regard as the cause of
actions are evidently pitiful and mean, but again an inexplicable chance
are destroyed. Napoleon himself is no longer of any account; all his
Paris, the ultimate goal, is reached. The Napoleonic government and army

midway, and the same increasing rapidity as the goal is approached.
of the people of Central Europe to the movement; the same hesitation
same coalescence into a group of enormous dimensions; the same adhesion
1805, 1807, and 1809--precede the great westward movement; there is the
Attempted drives from east to west--similar to the contrary movements of
remarkable resemblance to the preceding movement from west to east.
A countermovement is then accomplished from east to west with a

not for Napoleon but always against him.
The invaders flee, turn back, flee again, and all the chances are now

baseness become evident.
fire, and the frosts--and instead of genius, stupidity and immeasurable
the cold in his head at Borodino to the sparks which set Moscow on
predestined goal, an innumerable sequence of inverse chances occur--from
so consistently led him by an uninterrupted series of successes to the
suddenly instead of those chances and that genius which hitherto had
armies had suffered in the former war from Austerlitz to Wagram. But
city is taken; the Russian army suffers heavier losses than the opposing
The invasion pushes eastward and reaches its final goal--Moscow. That

too are the forces.
reason and to prepare him for his terrible part. And when he is ready so
brothers-in-law. Everything is done to deprive him of the remains of his
great, but so are his ancestors, his brothers, his stepsons, and his
devise for him is a celebration of Jena and Auerstadt. Not only is he
represented as a great deed. The most suitable fete the Germans can
he commits, which in the mouths of those around him is not at once
happening and has to happen. There is no step, no crime or petty fraud
prepare him to take on himself the whole responsibility for what is
for the accomplishment of his role, so much as all those round him who
aggrandizement of the great man. It is not Napoleon who prepares himself
guardian of all that the nations hold sacred, utilizes religion for the
this man receives a daughter of the Caesars into his bed; the Pope, the
the great man's mercy; the Emperor of Austria considers it a favor that
insignificance before him. The King of Prussia sends his wife to seek
glory and grandeur. One after another they hasten to display their
oppose no reasonable ideal to the insensate Napoleonic ideal of
the crowned heads of Europe. The discredited rulers of the world can
the ten-year preparatory period this man had formed relations with all
head of the movement grows with the increased size of the group. During
Europe. The strength of the justification of the man who stands at the
had formed in France unites into one group with the peoples of Central
and 1809, gaining strength and growing. In 1811 the group of people that
western forces push toward the east several times in 1805, 1806, 1807,
As if measuring themselves and preparing for the coming movement, the

reasonable to them all.
himself, and his ideal of grandeur and glory, which seems excellent and
his crimes, now recognize his authority, the title he has given
events about to happen--despite their former horror and detestation of
French but all Europe--except England which does not take part in the
him the victory at Austerlitz; and by chance all men, not only the
the Austrians, who surrender without a battle. Chance and genius give
never carries out that intention, but unexpectedly falls upon Mack and
expedition against England (which would inevitably have ruined him) he
Chance contrives that though he directs all his efforts to prepare an
in any other way that he had the right, since he had the might.
causes him to kill him--thereby convincing the mob more forcibly than
power. Chance puts the Duc d'Enghien in his hands and unexpectedly
a plot against him which not only fails to harm him but confirms his
of Paul I of Russia who recognizes his government; chance contrives
of the rulers of France, who submit to him; chance forms the character
agreement co-operate to confirm that power. Chance forms the characters
Chance, millions of chances, give him power, and all men as if by

said to destroy him and retain their power.
even more bewildered than he, and do not say the words they should have
and shrewd rulers of France, feeling that their part is played out, are
says senseless things that should have ruined him. But the once proud
flee, considering himself lost. He pretends to fall into a swoon and
He is pushed into a meeting of the legislature. In alarm he wishes to

the conspiracy is crowned with success.
mistakes, he is drawn into a conspiracy that aims at seizing power and
his will and despite his indecision, his lack of a plan, and all his
He is needed for the place that awaits him, and so almost apart from

lying--he alone could justify what had to be done.
Egypt, his insane self-adulation, his boldness in crime and frankness in
He alone--with his ideal of glory and grandeur developed in Italy and

him and demanded his participation.
He had no plan, he was afraid of everything, but the parties snatched at

ready for his new role.
only serve to exalt him--and though he himself has no plan, he is quite
his presence there now as a newcomer free from party entanglements can
year earlier might have ruined him, has reached its extreme limit, and
he reaches Paris, the dissolution of the republican government, which a
past. When, intoxicated by the crimes he has committed so successfully,
set down to his credit, and again the enemy's fleet twice lets him slip
ignoble departure from Africa, leaving his comrades in distress, is
imputed to him as a fault. His childishly rash, uncalled-for, and
plague does not touch him. The cruelty of murdering prisoners is not
had scope for its development in Africa. Whatever he does succeeds. The
significance--that ideal, destined to guide this man and his associates,
crime one commits, ascribing to it an incomprehensible supernatural
considering nothing wrong that one does but in priding oneself on every
This ideal of glory and grandeur--which consists not merely in

the Great and is therefore good.
that this is admirable, this is glory--it resembles Caesar and Alexander
men who commit these crimes, especially their leader, assure themselves
outrages are committed against the almost unarmed inhabitants. And the
pass, allows his entire army to elude it. In Africa a whole series of
success. The enemy's fleet, which subsequently did not let a single boat
surrenders without a shot; his most reckless schemes are crowned with
to Africa. Again so-called chance accompanies him. Impregnable Malta
presents itself in the form of an aimless and senseless expedition
out and destroyed. And by chance an escape from this dangerous position
of dissolution in which all those who are in it are inevitably wiped
On his return from Italy he finds the government in Paris in a process

his prestige--do not appear upon the scene till he is no longer there.
considerations the Russian armies--just those which might have destroyed
each time is saved in an unexpected manner. Owing to various diplomatic
the war in Italy he is several times on the verge of destruction and
service, and the appointment he seeks in Turkey comes to nothing. During
predestined path are unsuccessful: he is not received into the Russian
rulers of France turns to his advantage. His attempts to avoid his
accompany him everywhere. The disfavor into which he falls with the
self-confidence secure him military fame. Innumerable so called chances
his opponents' reluctance to fight, and his own childish audacity and
army. The brilliant qualities of the soldiers of the army sent to Italy,
self-confident limitations of this man raise him to the head of the
his opponents, the frankness of his falsehoods, and the dazzling and
The ignorance of his colleagues, the weakness and insignificance of

any one of them is borne forward to a prominent position.
chances--from among all the seething French parties, and without joining
a name, and not even a Frenchman, emerges--by what seem the strangest
A man without convictions, without habits, without traditions, without

coming movement and bear the responsibility for all that had to be done.
traditions, and a man was produced who would stand at the head of the
by step a group was formed of larger dimensions with new customs and
group was destroyed, as well as the old habits and traditions, and step
And beginning with the French Revolution the old inadequately large

during that movement.
the deceptions, robberies, and murders which would have to be committed
should have at their head a man who could justify to himself and to them
traditions and customs, and (3) that during their military movement they
military group of the east, (2) that they should abandon all established
a military group of a size able to endure a collision with the warlike
to Moscow it was necessary: (1) that they should form themselves into
For the peoples of the west to be able to make their warlike movement
The commencement of that movement was the movement from west to east.
the European peoples from west to east and afterwards from east to west.
beginning of the nineteenth century lies in the movement of the mass of
The fundamental and essential significance of the European events of the


CHAPTER III





Alexander with all their antecedents.
smallest detail for the purpose they had to fulfill, than Napoleon and
impossible to imagine any two people more completely adapted down to the
any single plant better suited to it than those it produces, so it is
clearly perceive that just as one cannot imagine a blossom or seed for
By discarding a claim to knowledge of the ultimate purpose, we shall

events were inevitable.
these people what they were, but it will be clear that all those small
recourse to chance for an explanation of those small events which made
be anything but like other men, and we shall not be obliged to have
Napoleon and Alexander, but we shall be unable to consider them to
not only shall we have no need to see exceptional ability and genius in
the east to the west form the essence and purpose of these events, and
and in Russia--and that the movements from the west to the east and from
in France, then in Italy, in Africa, in Prussia, in Austria, in Spain,
convulsions and that we know only the facts--that is, the murders, first
We need only confess that we do not know the purpose of the European

chance and genius become superfluous.
(incommensurable with ordinary human capabilities), and then the words
historic characters and perceive the cause of the effect they produce
ken, may we discern the sequence of experiences in the lives of
intelligible to us, and admitting the ultimate purpose to be beyond our
Only by renouncing our claim to discern a purpose immediately

of chance or genius.
ram did not happen accidentally, and will no longer need the conceptions
they are fattened, they will at least know that all that happened to the
to the ram that was fattened. Even if they do not know for what purpose
and they will at once perceive a unity and coherence in what happened
admit that what happens to them may also have purposes beyond their ken,
happens solely for the attainment of their sheepish aims; they need only
But the rams need only cease to suppose that all that happens to them

with fat, is killed for meat.
a special enclosure where there are oats--that this very ram, swelling
who instead of getting into the general fold every evening goes into
of genius with a whole series of extraordinary chances that this ram,
must seem to be a genius. And it must appear an astonishing conjunction
special enclosure to feed and that becomes twice as fat as the others
To a herd of rams, the ram the herdsman drives each evening into a

genius.
human agencies; I do not understand why this occurs and I talk of
chance. I see a force producing effects beyond the scope of ordinary
think that I cannot know it; so I do not try to know it and I talk about
understanding of phenomena. I do not know why a certain event occurs; I
therefore cannot be defined. Those words only denote a certain stage of
The words chance and genius do not denote any really existing thing and

But what is chance? What is genius?

it," says history.
Because it happened so! "Chance created the situation; genius utilized

Why did it happen in this and not in some other way?

more expedient than by the destruction of wealth and of human lives.
it is easy to see that there are other ways of diffusing civilization
much better than warfare. If the aim was the progress of civilization,
dissemination of ideas, the printing press could have accomplished that
without the Revolution and without the Empire. If the aim was the
the aim was the aggrandizement of France, that might have been attained
accomplished without all the preceding wars and without the invasion. If
century had been the aggrandizement of Russia, that aim might have been
If the aim of the European wars at the beginning of the nineteenth

chance and genius.
to explain the facts of history without introducing the conceptions of
Revolution, general progress, or anything else--then it is impossible
the balance of power in Europe, the diffusion of the ideas of the
attainment of certain ends--the greatness of Russia or of France,
If we assume as the historians do that great men lead humanity to the


CHAPTER II





life is destroyed.
If we admit that human life can be ruled by reason, the possibility of

have been no life, there would have been nothing.
good and beneficent? Their activity would not have existed: there would
the government--an activity that in the opinion of the historians was
activity of all those who opposed the tendency that then prevailed in
and that Alexander had acted on it. What would then have become of the
us assume that this program was possible and had then been formulated,
freedom, equality, and progress (these, I think, cover the ground). Let
program his present accusers would have given him--of nationality,
movement of humanity, he might have arranged matters according to the
from those who blame him and who profess to know the ultimate aim of the
could have done everything differently; let us say that with guidance
which to try historic characters and events; let us say that Alexander
contradictions and possesses an unchanging standard of good and bad by
But let us assume that what is called science can harmonize all

inaccessible to me.
action of every historic character has other more general purposes
to me to be good or bad, I must admit that besides these things the
Europe, or a certain kind of European culture called "progress" appear
freedom of Poland or the greatness of Russia, or the balance of power in
arms, or the prosperity of the Petersburg and other universities, or the
preservation of my father's house in Moscow, or the glory of the Russian
not agree with his limited understanding of what is good. Whether the
If that activity displeases somebody, this is only because it does
harmful, for it is impossible to say for what it was useful or harmful.
The activity of Alexander or of Napoleon cannot be called useful or

Alexander, while others regard it as blameworthy.
constitution to Poland and forming the Holy Alliance as praiseworthy in
what is bad and what is good in history: some people regard giving a
more, we find at one and the same time quite contradictory views as to
once seemed good, ten years later seems bad, and vice versa. And what is
writer, opinion as to what is good for mankind changes; so that what
the movement of history, we see that every year and with each new
This assumption is all the more natural and inevitable because, watching
time turn out to be mistaken in his view of what is good for humanity.
the historian who judges Alexander will also after the lapse of some
his view of what was good for the people, we must inevitably assume that
But even if we assume that fifty years ago Alexander I was mistaken in

lectures and with taking notes from them.
youth upwards has been occupied with learning: that is, with books and
humanity fifty years ago as a present-day professor who from his
accuse him of that)--had not the same conception of the welfare of
this character--though not lacking in virtue (the historians do not
habits, passions, and impulses toward goodness, beauty, and truth--that
a fictitious but a live character who like every man had his personal
felt a responsibility for all that was happening in Europe; and not
inseparable from power; a character who at every moment of his life
strongest of all influences: the intrigues, flattery, and self-deception
blinding light of history focused upon him; a character exposed to those
standing on the highest possible pinnacle of human power with the
It lies in the fact that an historic character like Alexander I,

In what does the substance of those reproaches lie?

Poland, and the reaction of 1820 and later) also flowed?
actions for which they blame him (the Holy Alliance, the restoration of
and life--that made his personality what it was and from which the
flow from the same sources--the circumstances of his birth, education,
Napoleon, the firmness he displayed in 1812 and the campaign of 1813)
(the liberal attempts at the beginning of his reign, his struggle with
Do not the very actions for which the historians praise Alexander I

What do these reproaches mean?

humanity.
historians address to him, based on their knowledge of what is good for
It would take a dozen pages to enumerate all the reproaches the

disbanding the Semenov regiment."
He also acted badly by concerning himself with the active army and
favoring Golitsyn and mysticism, and afterwards Shishkov and Photius.
to Poland, forming the Holy Alliance, entrusting power to Arakcheev,
his reign and during 1812, but acted badly by giving a constitution
well and in that case badly. He behaved admirably at the beginning of
"He ought to have acted in this way and in that way. In this case he did

things he did wrong at this period of his reign.
learned historian, who does not throw his little stone at Alexander for
There is no one in Russian literature now, from schoolboy essayist to

of his reign, being the savior of Russia.
to them was the chief cause of the liberal movement at the commencement
also, and the chief culprit was Alexander I, the same man who according
According to their accounts a reaction took place at that time in Russia

condemned according to whether they conduced to progress or to reaction.
and the rest, pass before their stern judgment seat and are acquitted or
Napoleon to Madame de Stael, Photius, Schelling, Fichte, Chateaubriand,
reaction. All the well-known people of that period, from Alexander and
personages who, in their opinion, caused what they describe as the
In dealing with this period they sternly condemn the historical

reaction."
The historians call this activity of the historical figures "the

and diplomatic combinations, laws, and treaties.
campaigns, and battles, now reflected the restless movement by political
who formerly reflected the movement of the masses by ordering wars,
to rotate on one spot. The historical figures at the head of armies,
borne by the waves from one shore to another as before. They now seemed
previously. It was seething in its depths. Historic figures were not
The sea of history was not driven spasmodically from shore to shore as

kingdoms and displacement of peoples was in course of preparation.
of people formed and dissolved, the coming formation and dissolution of
of humanity went on as unceasingly as the flow of time. Various groups
Though the surface of the sea of history seemed motionless, the movement

their motion are unknown to us) continued to operate.
mysterious forces that move humanity (mysterious because the laws of
subsided within its shores and seemed to have become calm. But the
Seven years had passed. The storm-tossed sea of European history had


CHAPTER I





FIRST EPILOGUE: 1813 - 20





to her own question. "But no, no, he must... Yes, Mary, He must...."
"But why go to Petersburg?" Natasha suddenly asked, and hastily replied

They were silent awhile.

"Natasha, I have asked you not to speak of that. Let us talk about you."

wife and you marry Nicholas!"
"It won't be just yet--someday. Think what fun it will be when I am his

who because of those tears quite forgave Natasha's joy.
"Then why are you crying? I am happy for your sake," said Princess Mary,

"Yes," whispered Natasha.

"You love him?"

Whatever you tell me, I will do. Tell me...."
"Mary," said she, "tell me what I should do! I am afraid of being bad.

the reason of that sadness and suddenly began to cry.
But noticing the grieved expression on Princess Mary's face she guessed

"To Petersburg!" she repeated as if unable to understand.

astounded.
had said. On hearing that he was going to Petersburg Natasha was
And with a sad and rather stern look she told Natasha all that Pierre

"But what's to be done? She can't help it," thought the princess.

love.
these words pained her for a moment. She remembered her brother and his
her seemed to Princess Mary, and sorry as she was to see her agitation,
Understandable and touching as the look with which Natasha gazed at

"I wanted to listen at the door, but I knew you would tell me."

her joy settled on Natasha's face.
And a joyful yet pathetic expression which seemed to beg forgiveness for

"He has spoken? Yes? He has spoken?" she repeated.

Pierre, Natasha met her on the threshold.
When Princess Mary returned to her room after her nocturnal talk with

bright and cheerful.
that she did not try to hide the fact that she was no longer sad, but
 Natasha gave herself up so fully and frankly to this new feeling

no right to reproach her even in her heart.
unexpected by her that in her presence Princess Mary felt that she had
of life that had seized Natasha was so evidently irrepressible and
not vexed with her and did not reproach her. The reawakened power
when she reflected on the change. But when she was with Natasha she was
my brother so little as to be able to forget him so soon?" she thought
but when she understood its meaning it grieved her. "Can she have loved
The change that took place in Natasha at first surprised Princess Mary;

in her eyes and her lips curved with a strange smile.
Princess Mary mentioned him a long-extinguished light once more kindled
make happy plans for the future. She spoke little of Pierre, but when
position, did not say a word about the past, and no longer feared to
forgotten all that had happened to her. She no longer complained of her
surface and demanded satisfaction. From that evening she seemed to have
To her own surprise a power of life and hope of happiness rose to the
Everything: her face, walk, look, and voice, was suddenly altered.

awoke in Natasha's soul.
cropped," something hidden and unknown to herself, but irrepressible,
if he had come out of a Russian bath--in a short coat and with his hair
Princess Mary with a gaily mocking smile: "He looks just, yes, just as
After Pierre's departure that first evening, when Natasha had said to


CHAPTER XX





them.
loving people without cause he discovered indubitable causes for loving
before loving them; his heart was now overflowing with love, and by
discover personal attributes which he termed "good qualities" in people
Pierre's insanity consisted in not waiting, as he used to do, to

understanding in life, because... because I was happy."
more insight than at any other time, and understood all that is worth
not so mad as I seemed. On the contrary I was then wiser and had
"I may have appeared strange and queer then," he thought, "but I was

held at this time of his madness and they always proved correct.
he was in doubt or inwardly at variance, he referred to the views he had
for him always. He not only did not renounce them subsequently, but when
the views he formed of men and circumstances at this time remained true
Often in afterlife Pierre recalled this period of blissful insanity. All

pathetic, kindly old man much to be pitied.
fresh decorations was particularly proud at this time, seemed to him a
now knew. Prince Vasili, who having obtained a new post and some
aroused in him no feeling but pity that she had not known the bliss he
When dealing with the affairs and papers of his dead wife, her memory

everything that was good and worthy of being loved.
himself, and at once without any effort saw in everyone he met
understand it--in the bright light of the emotion that shone within
is, what he was feeling) and those unfortunates who evidently did not
those who, as he imagined, understood the real meaning of life (that
people by his strange comments. But at this time he saw everybody--both
of events, he would listen with a mild and pitying smile and surprise
assumption that everybody's welfare depended on this or that issue
or when the war or any general political affairs were discussed on the
When it was suggested to him that he should enter the civil service,

attention.
that all that occupied them was a mere frivolous trifle unworthy of
them with his whole heart and felt a desire somehow to explain to them
he realized that people might not be aware of his happiness, he pitied
seemed to express a secret understanding between him and them. And when
surprised those he met by his significantly happy looks and smiles which
every word and gesture he saw allusions to his happiness. He often
hide that pleasure by pretending to be busy with other interests. In
other people were all as pleased as he was himself and merely tried to
one thing only--his future happiness. Sometimes it seemed to him that
being loved by her. At times everybody seemed to him to be occupied with
whole world--seemed to him centered in his love and the possibility of
possessed him. The whole meaning of life--not for him alone but for the
A joyful, unexpected frenzy, of which he had thought himself incapable,

with that.
he could attain it, it would be the end of all things. Everything ended
plans. The happiness before him appeared so inconceivable that if only
That was the only doubt often troubling Pierre. He did not now make any

I...? I am something altogether different and higher.'"
deluding himself. Doesn't he know that he is a man, just a man, while
her, and she will be sure to smile and say: 'How strange! He must be
self-confident? I believe all this--and suddenly Princess Mary will tell
a dream? Isn't Princess Mary mistaken? Am I not too conceited and
Only one terrible doubt sometimes crossed his mind: "Wasn't it all
in his mind as to whether what he had undertaken was right or wrong.
only to repeat it again and again. There was now not a shadow of doubt
her face and smile, and did not wish to diminish or add anything, but
every word that he or Natasha had spoken and pictured every detail of
me say 'Je vous aime'?" On the contrary, he now repeated in imagination
he had spoken, or say: "Oh, why did I not say that?" and, "Whatever made
He did not repeat to himself with a sickening feeling of shame the words

during his courtship of Helene.
There was nothing in Pierre's soul now at all like what had troubled it


CHAPTER XIX





am! What is happening to me? How happy I am!" said Pierre to himself.
Yes, 'I shall look forward very much to your return.' Oh, how happy I
look forward very much to your return....' Yes, yes, how did she say it?
memories, interpretations, and happy meditations for Pierre. "'I shall
accompanied them, formed for two months the subject of inexhaustible
And these simple words, her look, and the expression on her face which

your return," she added in a whisper.
"Good-by, Count," she said aloud. "I shall look forward very much to

impossible!..."
day be mine forever, as familiar to me as I am to myself?... No, that's
of feminine charm so strange to me now, is it possible that it will one
"Is it possible that this hand, that face, those eyes, all this treasure

holding it a little longer in his own.
When on saying good-by he took her thin, slender hand, he could not help

filled his soul with joy.
No, it can't be," he told himself at every look, gesture, and word that
existed any longer, that nothing existed but happiness. "Is it possible?
sometimes felt as if he was vanishing and that neither he nor she
she had been the day before; but that day as he looked at her Pierre
Next day Pierre came to say good-by. Natasha was less animated than

tomorrow?"
"To Petersburg? Go there? Very well, I'll go. But I may come again

said.
"Go to Petersburg, that will be best. And I will write to you," she

No, it can't be!" Pierre kept saying as he kissed Princess Mary's hands.
"No, it cannot be! How happy I am! But it can't be.... How happy I am!

happen and my heart tells me it will."
parents, and leave it to me. I will tell her when I can. I wish it to
"Yes, I think so," said Princess Mary with a smile. "Write to her

"What makes you think so? You think I may hope? You think...?"

expression seized Princess Mary's hand.
Before her words were out, Pierre had sprung up and with a frightened

herself.
"I know that she loves... will love you," Princess Mary corrected

"Well?... Well?..." he said.

Pierre was looking into Princess Mary's eyes.

"Leave it to me," said Princess Mary. "I know..."

"But what am I to do?"

"To speak to her now wouldn't do," said the princess all the same.

spoke of his love, but that it was the very thing she wished for.
in Natasha two days before that she would not only not be hurt if Pierre
impossible, but she stopped because she had seen by the sudden change
Princess Mary stopped. She was going to say that to speak of love was

present..."
"This is what I will say. You are right that to speak to her of love at
"I am thinking of what you have told me," answered Princess Mary.

touched her hand as she did not reply.
Tell me what I am to do, dear princess!" he added after a pause, and
possibility... that possibility... is terrible. Tell me, can I hope?
perhaps she might someday be my wife and that I may be missing that
her. I cannot propose to her at present, but the thought that
alone all my life, and I love her so that I cannot imagine life without
"I don't know when I began to love her, but I have loved her and her
"Well," he went on with an evident effort at self-control and coherence.

He paused and rubbed his face and eyes with his hands.

her. No, not that, I don't, I can't..."
know it's impossible to speak of it now. But I want to be a brother to
dear friend, listen! I know it all. I know I am not worthy of her, I
spoken. "Princess, help me! What am I to do? Can I hope? Princess, my
"Yes, I wanted to tell you," said he, answering her look as if she had

moved an armchair toward Princess Mary.
immediately vanished and were replaced by eager excitement. He quickly
When Natasha left the room Pierre's confusion and awkwardness

long-drawn sigh she seemed to be prepared for a lengthy talk.
had plainly shown before had now quite passed off. With a deep and
intently at him with her deep, radiant eyes. The weariness she
instead of going away sank into an armchair, and looked sternly and
Natasha gave him her hand and went out. Princess Mary on the other hand

his departure.
said he, standing before Princess Mary and turning red, but not taking
good-by yet. I will call round in case you have any commissions for me,"
though offended. "Yes... no... to Petersburg? Tomorrow--but I won't say
"No, I am not going," Pierre replied hastily, in a surprised tone and as

"So you are going to Petersburg tomorrow?" she asked.

a headache began to say good night.
Princess Mary, foreseeing no end to this, rose first, and complaining of

his leave.
and embarrassed, but sat on because he simply could not get up and take
when he would go. Pierre noticed this but could not go. He felt uneasy
that Princess Mary and Natasha exchanged glances, evidently wondering
one trivial topic to another and repeatedly broke off. He stayed so long
evening they had talked over everything and the conversation passed from
though all Pierre's interest was now centered in that house, by the
Princess Mary and Natasha were evidently glad to see their visitor and
Next day he came early, dined, and stayed the whole evening. Though

Princess Mary was going to vespers and Pierre left the house with her.
Pierre dined with them and would have spent the whole evening there, but

her face was a friendly and strangely roguish expression.
Andrew's fiancee. A bright questioning light shone in her eyes, and on
She was as he had known her almost as a child and later on as Prince

failed to recognize her.
like this when he entered the day before he could not for a moment have
same way as the day before, yet she was quite different. Had she been
was in the same black dress with soft folds and her hair was done the
presence with his whole being by the loss of his sense of freedom. She
no one there." But he had hardly entered the room before he felt her
talked to her. "Perhaps I imagined it; perhaps I shall go in and find
he had really been there the night before and really seen Natasha and
At the entrance to Princess Mary's house Pierre felt doubtful whether

it!"
eyes that seemed to say: "Ah, there he is! Let's see what will come of
hawkers, and the shopkeepers, all looked at him with cheerful beaming
the carpenters cutting the timber for new houses with axes, the women
the Rhine and the Colosseum. The cabmen he met and their passengers,
of the town, stretching out and concealing one another, reminded him of
of the chimney stacks and tumble-down walls of the burned-out quarters
down, he was surprised by the beauty of those ruins. The picturesqueness
As he drove through the streets past the houses that had been burned

Pierre went to Princess Mary's to dinner.

kind, pleasant face and how he smiles as he looks at me."
That's the way he was brought up, and everybody does it. But what a
and takes bribes. What nonsense! Besides, why shouldn't he take bribes?
bothering about such trifles now! And they actually say he is not honest
of Police. "What a fine, good-looking officer and how kind. Fancy
"And this man too," thought Pierre, looking into the face of the Chief

returned to their owners that day.
a representative to the Faceted Palace to recover things that were to be
On the same day the Chief of Police came to Pierre, inviting him to send

interest to them. And all for me!"
they should trouble about these things now when it can no longer be of
"How kind they all are," thought Pierre. "What is surprising is that

The princess too had prepared provisions for Pierre's journey.

"Better not say anything to her either."
"No, she either doesn't understand or is pretending," thought Pierre.

"I heard about that affair of hers at the time. It was a great pity."

"No; I mean do you know Natasha Rostova?"

thing for the Rostovs, they are said to be utterly ruined."
arranging a match for her with young Rostov. It would be a very good
"I have seen the princess," she replied. "I heard that they were

"Do you know her?" asked Pierre.

had seen Anna Semenovna.
The princess seemed to see nothing more extraordinary in that than if he

Natasha Rostova!"
see Princess Mary the day before and had there met--"Whom do you think?
At breakfast Pierre told the princess, his cousin, that he had been to

another time."
I have a talk with him and see what he thinks?" Pierre reflected. "No,
all! But probably he knows it well enough and is only pretending. Shall
there is no Petersburg for me, and that that must be settled first of
he thought: "But how strange it is that he should not know that now
the trouble I have put you to," said Pierre, and seeing Savelich smile,
"No, I'll put it off for a bit. I'll tell you later. You must forgive

"So what are your orders? Are you starting tomorrow?" asked Savelich.

it is and how dangerous. Too soon or too late... it is terrible!"
"How easy he thinks it," thought Pierre. "He doesn't know how terrible

"If I may take the liberty, your excellency, it would be a good thing."

it might happen," he added with an involuntary smile.
"But what about my heirs?" said Pierre. "Supposing I suddenly marry...

"The children will live just the same. With such masters one can live."

"And your children?"

too, without ever being wronged."
late count--the kingdom of heaven be his!--and we have lived under you
"What's the good of freedom to me, your excellency? We lived under the

asked him.
"Well, Savelich, do you still not wish to accept your freedom?" Pierre

Savelich's old face, "and what a pleasant smile he has!"
how attentive, and how he remembers everything," he thought, looking at
he reflected. "Why? But perhaps I shall go. What a good fellow he is and
before this happened I did for some reason mean to go to Petersburg,"
he asked involuntarily, though only to himself. "Oh, yes, long ago
"What, to Petersburg? What is Petersburg? Who is there in Petersburg?"

packing for the journey.
Friday. When he awoke on the Thursday, Savelich came to ask him about
A few days previously Pierre had decided to go to Petersburg on the

that she and I may be man and wife," he told himself.
"Strange and impossible as such happiness seems, I must do everything

indecision.
he got into bed, happy and agitated but free from hesitation or
Evidently it has to be so," said he to himself, and hastily undressing
"Well, what's to be done if it cannot be avoided? What's to be done?

room.
It was already six in the morning and he still paced up and down the
moment jealous of her past, then reproaching himself for that feeling.
He was thinking of Prince Andrew, of Natasha, and of their love, at one

smiling happily.
and frowning, now suddenly shrugging his shoulders and wincing, and now
up and down his room, now turning his thoughts on a difficult problem
It was a long time before Pierre could fall asleep that night. He paced


CHAPTER XVIII





if it had been forgotten there.
And the same mischievous smile lingered for a long time on her face as

"Well, good night," said Natasha.

"Yes, but he's wonderful."

him--in everything."
they are quite different. That must be true. Really he is quite unlike
"Yes, and yet he is quite different. They say men are friends when

said Princess Mary.
"I understand why he" (Prince Andrew) "liked no one so much as him,"

had come straight from the bath... Papa used to..."
"With a short coat and his hair cropped; just as if, well, just as if he

"Yes," replied Princess Mary. "He has greatly improved."

a Russian bath; do you understand? Out of a moral bath. Isn't it true?"
somehow grown so clean, smooth, and fresh--as if he had just come out of
such as Princess Mary had not seen on her face for a long time, "he has
"Do you know, Mary..." Natasha suddenly said with a mischievous smile

Mary.
"To tell Pierre? Oh, yes. What a splendid man he is!" said Princess

blushing.
him. That is why I told him... Was it all right?" she added, suddenly
painful, but good, very good!" said Natasha. "I am sure he really loved
"It did me so much good to tell all about it today. It was hard and

"Is it possible to forget?" said she.

Natasha's remark, but she did not express agreement in words.
Princess Mary sighed deeply and thereby acknowledged the justice of

doing justice to our feelings, we forget him."
that by not speaking of him" (she meant Prince Andrew) "for fear of not
"Well, good night, Mary!" said Natasha. "Do you know, I am often afraid

Pierre nor did Natasha speak of him.
what Pierre had told them. Princess Mary did not express her opinion of
Princess Mary and Natasha met as usual in the bedroom. They talked of


Pierre rose and took his leave.

It is time for bed."
"Nothing, nothing." She smiled at Pierre through her tears. "Good night!

"What is it, Natasha?" said Princess Mary.

began to cry.
Suddenly Natasha bent her head, covered her face with her hands, and

alive and wishing to live--nor you either."
"It's not true, not true!" cried Pierre. "I am not to blame for being

"Yes, and nothing more," said Natasha.

Pierre looked intently at her.

wish nothing but to relive it all from the beginning."
"Yes, yes," she said, answering something quite different. "I too should

turning to Natasha.
happiness. There is much, much before us. I say this to you," he added,
only then that what is new and good begins. While there is life there is
that when we are thrown out of our usual ruts all is lost, but it is
heaven's sake let me again have captivity and horseflesh! We imagine
you were taken prisoner, or go through all this again?' then for
at this moment I were asked: 'Would you rather be what you were before
"People speak of misfortunes and sufferings," remarked Pierre, "but if

bed.
occurred to none of them that it was three o'clock and time to go to
to say next to introduce a fresh subject. Princess Mary was silent. It
and happy confusion glanced occasionally at her, and tried to think what
something more which he had perhaps left untold. Pierre in shamefaced
with bright, attentive, and animated eyes, as if trying to understand
Pierre finished his story. Natasha continued to look at him intently

stern faces to change the candles, but no one noticed them.
It was three o'clock in the morning. The footmen came in with sad and

first thought of this filled her heart with gladness.
possibility of love and happiness between Natasha and Pierre, and the
now saw something else that absorbed all her attention. She saw the
Princess Mary understood his story and sympathized with him, but she

meaning of all Pierre's mental travail.
flight and took it straight into her open heart, divining the secret
his face, nor a single gesture. She caught the unfinished word in its
no single quiver in Pierre's voice, no look, no twitch of a muscle in
Natasha without knowing it was all attention: she did not lose a word,
a capacity to select and absorb the very best a man shows of himself.
little mental workshop--but the pleasure given by real women gifted with
own and promptly contribute their own clever comments prepared in their
offers to retell it, or who wish to adopt it to some thought of their
to remember what they hear to enrich their minds and when opportunity
when women listen to him--not clever women who when listening either try
telling it all to Natasha he experienced that pleasure which a man has
it were, saw a new meaning in all he had gone through. Now that he was
He told of his adventures as he had never yet recalled them. He now, as

days of their retreat, of Karataev's illness and his death.
And Pierre, his voice trembling continually, went on to tell of the last

"They killed him almost before my eyes."

"Yes, yes, go on!" said Natasha. "Where is he?"

simple fellow."
"No, you can't understand what I learned from that illiterate man--that

her eyes. Then he added:
risen from the table and was pacing the room, Natasha following him with
Pierre began to tell about Karataev, but paused. By this time he had

anything.
over the horrible details, but Natasha insisted that he should not omit
Pierre continued. When he spoke of the execution he wanted to pass

something..." said Natasha and pausing added, "something fine?"
"I am sure you're not telling us everything; I am sure you did

were not looting, that is--were arrested, and I among them."
and grew confused. "Then a patrol arrived and all the men--all those who
their things snatched off and their earrings torn out..." he flushed
One was snatched out before my eyes... and there were women who had
this: "It was an awful sight--children abandoned, some in the flames...
with the child and the woman for protecting whom he was arrested was
but could not, express in words. The account Pierre gave of the incident
that she understood not only what he said but also what he wished to,
Pierre that she understood just what he wished to convey. It was clear
her look, but her exclamations and the brief questions she put, showed
wandered--evidently herself experiencing all that he described. Not only
changing with the narrative, watched Pierre with an attention that never
Natasha, leaning on her elbow, the expression of her face constantly
Natasha. In the whole narrative she saw only Pierre and his goodness.
Princess Mary with a gentle smile looked now at Pierre and now at

has lived through.
emotion of a man re-experiencing in recollection strong impressions he
unconsciously carried away and began speaking with the suppressed
to describe the horrors and sufferings he had witnessed he was
him toward everybody and especially toward himself, but when he came
At first he spoke with the amused and mild irony now customary with

detailed account of his adventures.
Princess Mary's questions and especially by Natasha's into giving a
Pierre admitted that it was true, and from that was gradually led by

Sukharev tower, do you remember?"
asked with a slight smile. "I guessed it then when we met at the
"But it's true that you remained in Moscow to kill Napoleon?" Natasha

captivity was gradually led on to do so.
Supper was over, and Pierre who at first declined to speak about his

nothing about him--I was in much lower company!"
means being Napoleon's guest. Not only did I never see him but I heard
"No, not once! Everybody seems to imagine that being taken prisoner

Pierre laughed.

said Princess Mary.
"And did you really see and speak to Napoleon, as we have been told?"

stern, and he fancied even contemptuous.
at Natasha. When he ventured to glance her way again her face was cold,
Pierre suddenly flushed crimson and for a long time tried not to look

Mary.
"Yes, and so you are once more an eligible bachelor," said Princess

a look of glad approval on Natasha's face.
I am very, very sorry for her," he concluded, and was pleased to notice
alive. And then such a death... without friends and without consolation!
guilt suddenly becomes terribly serious when the other is no longer
When two people quarrel they are always both in fault, and one's own
to how he would speak of his wife, "but her death shocked me terribly.
added quickly, glancing at Natasha and noticing on her face curiosity as
cannot imagine how it shocked me. We were not an exemplary couple," he
Princess Mary had given to his words. "I heard of it in Orel and you
"No," answered Pierre, evidently not considering awkward the meaning

words a meaning he had perhaps not intended.
that her question, following his mention of freedom, ascribed to his
remain in Moscow?" asked Princess Mary and immediately blushed, noticing
"Tell me, you did not know of the countess' death when you decided to

"Yes. Savelich says I must!"

"And are you building?"

not continue, noticing that this theme was too egotistic.
"What I have certainly gained is freedom," he began seriously, but did

become three times as rich as before.
debts and to rebuild his houses, Pierre still maintained that he had
Though the position was now altered by his decision to pay his wife's

"But I am three times as rich as before," returned Pierre.

millions in Moscow. Is that true?"
"We have been told," Princess Mary interrupted her, "that you lost two

Natasha smiled and was on the point of speaking.

invite me out and tell me all about myself."
easy to be an interesting man (I am an interesting man now); people
to tell of my experiences. In general I have noticed that it is very
to have happened, to me. Stepan Stepanych also instructed me how I ought
invited me to her house and kept telling me what had happened, or ought
"They even tell me wonders I myself never dreamed of! Mary Abramovna
"Yes," replied Pierre with the smile of mild irony now habitual to him.

said she. "One hears such improbable wonders about you."
suddenly banished the shadows of the past. "Now tell us about yourself,"
"Do you take vodka, Count?" asked Princess Mary, and those words

also has joy.
both shone with satisfaction and a confession that besides sorrow life
Mary. They had evidently both formed the same resolution; the eyes of
and, resolving to break the silence, looked at Natasha and at Princess
chairs and pushed them up again. Pierre unfolded his cold table napkin
affectation. They went silently to table. The footmen drew back the
awkward, and yet the desire to speak is there and silence seems like
impossible to go back to the same conversation, to talk of trifles is
which usually follows after a serious and heartfelt talk. It is
face. They all three of them now experienced that feeling of awkwardness
was calm, though a severe and grave expression had again settled on her
later he heard footsteps and Princess Mary entered with Natasha. Natasha
Pierre was shown into the large, brightly lit dining room; a few minutes


CHAPTER XVII





time she has talked of him like that."
Before Pierre left the room Princess Mary told him: "This is the first

don't go. I will order supper. Go downstairs, we will come immediately."
"No, Natasha and I sometimes don't go to sleep till after two, so please

him go.
window. He wished to take leave of Princess Mary, but she would not let
the boy he got up quickly, took out his handkerchief, and went to the
resembled his father's, affected Pierre so much that when he had kissed
At that moment of emotional tenderness young Nicholas' face, which

to her nephew who had entered the room.
Princess Mary roused him from his abstraction by drawing his attention

understand why he suddenly felt all alone in the world.
Pierre gazed at the door through which she had disappeared and did not

from the room with a moan either of pain or sorrow.
which was hidden by curtains, struck her head against it, and rushed
She got up quickly just as Nicholas entered, almost ran to the door

"Well, that's all--everything," said Natasha.

Nicholas might come in to say good night.
Dessalles' voice was heard outside the door asking whether little

repeated the same thing twice.
her soul, and it seemed as if she could never finish. Several times she
She spoke, mingling most trifling details with the intimate secrets of

Evidently Natasha needed to tell that painful yet joyful tale.

her brother's and Natasha's love.
Natasha, and heard for the first time the story of those last days of
Princess Mary, frowning in her effort to hold back her tears, sat beside

her, for what she was suffering now while she was speaking.
nor of what she was telling. He listened to her and felt only pity for
tears. As he listened he did not think of Prince Andrew, nor of death,
Pierre listened to her with lips parted and eyes fixed upon her full of

three weeks of their journey and life at Yaroslavl.
never yet mentioned to anyone--all she had lived through during those
And not letting them interrupt her she went on to tell what she had

to see him and be with him," she said, trembling, and breathing quickly.
had no idea and could not imagine what state he was in, all I wanted was
ask about him. Then suddenly Sonya told me he was traveling with us. I
"We knew nothing of it when we started from Moscow. I did not dare to

head and began to speak rapidly.
knees, and then controlling herself with an evident effort lifted her
Natasha's voice broke. She blushed, pressed her clasped hands on her

the room...."
he... he... he said he was wishing for it at the very moment I entered
deep chest notes. "For me it certainly was happiness." She paused. "And
"Yes, that was happiness," she then said in her quiet voice with its

She hesitated for an instant whether to speak or not.
Natasha's face twitched. She frowned and lowered her eyes for a moment.

turning to Natasha and looking at her with eyes full of tears.
soften?... What a happy thing that he saw you again," he added, suddenly
The faults he had--if he had any--were not of his making. So he did
thing--to be perfectly good--so he could not be afraid of death.
grew tranquil and softened? With all his soul he had always sought one
his whole body and eagerly listened to her story. "Yes, yes... so he
"Yes, yes, and so...?" Pierre kept saying as he leaned toward her with

for her own sake.
gradually compelled her to go into details which she feared to recall
quivering with emotion, his questions and his eager restless expression,
the condition in which she had found Prince Andrew. But Pierre's face
Princess Mary--reluctantly as is usual in such cases--began telling of

regarded from her standpoint.
not purposely say things to please her, but whatever he was saying he
considering what impression his words would make on Natasha. He did
him than that of all the rest of the world. As he spoke now he was
judge of his every word and action whose judgment mattered more to
that his freedom had also completely gone. He felt that there was now a
Pierre's confusion had now almost vanished, but at the same time he felt

asking about his friend's last days.
Pierre hurriedly turned away from her and again addressed Princess Mary,
Natasha had already opened her mouth to speak but suddenly stopped.

God ruling us can bear a loss such as hers and... yours."
"And because," Pierre continued, "only one who believes that there is a

inquiringly at Pierre.
Natasha without waiting for Princess Mary to finish again looked

awaits..."
"How can you ask why?" said Princess Mary. "The thought alone of what

"Why is it true?" Natasha asked, looking attentively into Pierre's eyes.

"Yes, yes, that is really true," Pierre hastily interrupted her.

Princess Mary.
"Yes, in these days it would be hard to live without faith..." remarked

Why had such a splendid boy, so full of life, to die?"
"What can one say or think of as a consolation?" said Pierre. "Nothing!

widened and lit up.
Natasha looked at him, and by way of answer to his words her eyes

What a delightful boy he was!"
Natasha. "You know it happened the very day we were rescued. I saw him.
"Yes, is there a family free from sorrow now?" said Pierre, addressing

insisted on her coming with me."
state; but it was necessary for Natasha herself to see a doctor. They
countess will be here in a few days. The countess is in a dreadful
"She has come to stay with me," said Princess Mary. "The count and


CHAPTER XVI





but only by the pleasure that just perceptibly lit up her whole face.
Pierre's confusion was not reflected by any confusion on Natasha's part,

were kindly attentive and sadly interrogative.
glanced at her there was not the least shadow of a smile: only her eyes
a suppressed smile of the joy of life, now when he first entered and
moment he entered because on that face whose eyes had always shone with
that was not what made her unrecognizable; she was unrecognizable at the
her since he last saw her was immense. She had grown thin and pale, but
see her there, but he had failed to recognize her because the change in
Pierre had failed to notice Natasha because he did not at all expect to

saying.
became confused in his speech and stopped in the middle of what he was
a still-stronger agitation of mingled joy and fear seized his soul. He
again glanced at Natasha, and a still-deeper flush suffused his face and
he tried to continue the conversation he had begun with Princess Mary he
"No, it's only the unexpectedness of it," thought Pierre. But as soon as

Princess Mary that he loved her.
than any words could have done--did he betray to himself, to her, and to
agitation. But the more he tried to hide it the more clearly--clearer
He flushed joyfully yet with painful distress. He tried to hide his
and above all to himself, a secret of which he himself had been unaware.
At that moment Pierre involuntarily betrayed to her, to Princess Mary,

it was Natasha and he loved her.
enveloped him completely. When she smiled doubt was no longer possible,
thinking--especially at that moment. It suffused him, seized him, and
a happiness he had long forgotten and of which he had not even been
that opening door came a breath of fragrance which suffused Pierre with
hinges, a smile appeared on the face with the attentive eyes, and from
effort, and stress, like the opening of a door grown rusty on its
But at that moment Princess Mary said, "Natasha!" And with difficulty,
looks so much older! It cannot be she. It merely reminds me of her."
"But no, it can't be!" he thought. "This stern, thin, pale face that

and more than sweet, looked at him from those attentive eyes.
black eyes and peculiar mouth, and something near to him, long forgotten
Pierre looked again at the companion's pale, delicate face with its

"Do you really not recognize her?"

that of the lady in the black dress and said:
greater embarrassment. She again glanced rapidly from Pierre's face to
But when he mentioned the Rostovs, Princess Mary's face expressed still

hinder his conversing freely with Princess Mary.
in the black dress was a good, kind, excellent creature who would not
as often happens when one is talking, felt somehow that this companion
companion's face, saw her attentive and kindly gaze fixed on him, and,
Pierre spoke rapidly and with animation. He glanced once at the

that he fell in with the Rostovs.... What a strange coincidence!"
been killed. All I know I heard at second hand from others. I only know
"Just imagine--I knew nothing about him!" said he. "I thought he had

interrupted her.
uneasiness in her manner and was about to add something, but Pierre
Again the princess glanced round at her companion with even more

news we had received for a long time."
"I was so glad to hear of your safety. It was the first piece of good

shyness that surprised him for an instant.
last," she went on, turning her eyes from Pierre to her companion with a
hand, "so this is how we meet again. He spoke of you even at the very
"Yes," she said, looking at his altered face after he had kissed her

The princess rose quickly to meet him and held out her hand.

thought, glancing at the lady in the black dress.
he never knew or remembered. "This must be one of her companions," he
always had lady companions, but who they were and what they were like
another person dressed in black. Pierre remembered that the princess
In a rather low room lit by one candle sat the princess and with her

would excuse her want of ceremony and come upstairs to her apartment.
word from the princess that she would be very glad to see Pierre if he
A few minutes later the footman returned with Dessalles, who brought

"Yes, sir," said the man. "Please step into the portrait gallery."

"Announce me. Perhaps she will see me," said Pierre.

she received on Sundays.
informed him that the princess had gone to her own apartments, and that
of the old prince had not disturbed the order of things in the house,
stern face as if wishing to make the visitor feel that the absence
general aspect was unchanged. The old footman, who met Pierre with a
The house had escaped the fire; it showed signs of damage but its
Pierre drove up to the house of the old prince in a most serious mood.

felt for both of them.
similar in that they had both lived and both died and in the love he
involuntarily began to compare these two men, so different, and yet so
before he died?" thought Pierre. He recalled Karataev and his death and
Is it possible that the meaning of life was not disclosed to him
"Is it possible that he died in the bitter frame of mind he was then in?

one at Borodino.
friendship, of his various meetings with him, and especially of the last
On his way to the house Pierre kept thinking of Prince Andrew, of their

Vozdvizhenka Street, he drove that same evening to see her.
was in Moscow and living in her house--which had not been burned--in
him with fresh vividness. Having heard at dinner that Princess Mary
Prince Andrew had often occupied Pierre's thoughts and now recurred to
Princess Mary was in Moscow. The death, sufferings, and last days of
On the third day after his arrival he heard from the Drubetskoys that

aroused in himself.
obligations but also from that feeling which, it seemed to him, he had
memory of the distant past. He felt himself not only free from social
Natasha seldom occurred to him. If it did it was only as a pleasant
He had heard that the Rostovs were at Kostroma but the thought of

think so," and so on.
mind taking a parcel for someone?--he replied: "Yes, perhaps," or, "I
Was he going to rebuild? When was he going to Petersburg and would he
him--whether important or quite trifling--such as: Where would he live?
guard for fear of binding himself in any way. To all questions put to
well disposed toward them all, but was now instinctively on his
everyone questioned him about what he had seen. Pierre felt particularly
Everyone was pleased to see Pierre, everyone wished to meet him, and
everything was bubbling with life in the ruined but reviving city.
for Petersburg two days later. Everybody was celebrating the victory,
on some acquaintances who were back in Moscow, and he intended to leave
his house which had not been burned. He called on Count Rostopchin and
At the end of January Pierre went to Moscow and stayed in an annex of


CHAPTER XV





wrote proclamations.
had perished in the fire, and demanded relief. And Count Rostopchin
made out estimates at ten times their value for government stores that
keep all that was found there. They abused the police and bribed them,
houses into this or that house, it would be unfair to allow its owner to
others insisted that as the French had gathered things from different
the injustice of taking everything to the Faceted Palace in the Kremlin;
property had been left, brought there from other houses, complained of
goods left behind by the French. The owners of houses in which much
The higher authorities and the police organized the distribution of
baize-covered tables and their pigeonholes of documents in small rooms.
Church property that had been stolen. Government clerks set up their
in many churches that had not been burned. Donors contributed
opened in partially burned houses. The clergy resumed the services
repaired. Tradesmen began trading in booths. Cookshops and taverns were
all sides logs were being hewn, new houses built, and old, charred ones
of carpenters hoping for high pay arrived in Moscow every day, and on
one another's prices to below what they had been in former days. Gangs
discomfiture, came to town bringing rye, oats, and hay, and beat down
out of the town. Other peasants, having heard of their comrades'
plunder were stopped by the authorities and made to cart the corpses
Within a week the peasants who came with empty carts to carry off

Moscow as blood flows to the heart.
officials of all kinds, tradesmen, artisans, and peasants--streamed into
some by official duties, some by self-interest--house owners, clergy,
Besides the plunderers, very various people, some drawn by curiosity,

of the city and its regular life restored.
the number of people taking part in it the more rapidly was the wealth
began, had an opposite effect: the longer it continued and the greater
plundering by the Russians, with which the reoccupation of the city
wealth of Moscow and the strength of its plunderers was destroyed. But
The more the plundering by the French continued, the more both the

confused, lifeless scene of plunder.
forms of town life perished, until finally all was merged into one
churches, and cathedrals. The longer the French remained the more these
houses filled with luxuries, hospitals, prisons, government offices,
goods--and there were factories and workshops, palaces and wealthy
market stalls, granaries--for the most part still stocked with
lifeless but still existed. There were bazaars, shops, warehouses,
luxury, and governmental and religious institutions. These forms were
regular life, with diverse branches of commerce and craftsmanship, with
The French found Moscow abandoned but with all the organizations of

difficult and assumed more definite forms.
contingent, and with increasing numbers plundering became more and more
But the first plunderers were followed by a second and a third

houses and moved it to their own, pretending that it was their property.
to their camps, and the householders seized all they could find in other
ruined houses and the streets. The Cossacks carried off what they could
Moscow to carry off to the villages what had been abandoned in the
continued what the French had begun. Trains of peasant carts came to
entered Moscow, finding it plundered, plundered it in their turn. They
fled from Moscow and had been hiding in its vicinity. The Russians who
detachment, peasants from the adjacent villages, and residents who had
The first Russians to enter Moscow were the Cossacks of Wintzingerode's

1812.
number, ever increasing and increasing, exceeded what it had been in
fortnight twenty-five thousand, and so on. By the autumn of 1813 the
Within a week Moscow already had fifteen thousand inhabitants, in a

apply their activities there.
common: a desire to get to the place that had been called Moscow, to
for the most part savage and brutal. One motive only they all had in
been cleared of the enemy were most diverse and personal, and at first
The motives of those who thronged from all sides to Moscow after it had

indestructible.
August. All was destroyed, except something intangible yet powerful and
shrines, riches, or houses--it was still the Moscow it had been in
Moscow in the month of October there was no government and no churches,
real strength of the colony, still exists; and similarly, though in
of the heap, something indestructible, which though intangible is the
immense number of the delving insects prove that despite the destruction
we watch the ants round their ruined heap, the tenacity, energy, and
French to throng to the place that had formerly been Moscow. But when
difficult to explain what caused the Russians after the departure of the
jostle, overtake one another, and fight, and it would be equally
rubbish, larvae, and corpses, others back to the heap, or why they
has been destroyed are hurrying: some from the heap dragging bits of
It would be difficult to explain why and whither ants whose heap


CHAPTER XIV





could lead to nothing--and he smiled joyfully as he listened to him.
apparent agreement being the simplest way to avoid discussions that
He did not contradict Willarski and even seemed to agree with him--an
maintained the life of this original, peculiar, and unique people.
and vitality--the strength which in that vast space amid the snows
Where Willarski saw deadness Pierre saw an extraordinary strength
backwardness compared with Europe only heightened Pierre's pleasure.
continually deplored the ignorance and poverty of Russia and its
new significance for him. The presence and remarks of Willarski who
overseers, the peasants on the roads and in the villages--had a
a schoolboy on holiday. Everyone--the stagecoach driver, the post-house
faces, that feeling was intensified. Throughout his journey he felt like
journey he found himself in the open world and saw hundreds of new
experienced a feeling of joy, freedom, and life; but when during his
During the whole time of his convalescence in Orel Pierre had

Willarski was going to Moscow and they agreed to travel together.

would be reduced by three fourths, but he felt it must be done.
did not know, but he knew for certain that it was necessary. His income
wife's affairs and must rebuild in Moscow. Why this was necessary he
pleased him were wrong and that he must go to Petersburg and settle his
debts. And Pierre decided that the steward's proposals which had so
Prince Vasili and other Petersburg acquaintances speaking of his wife's
as of a settled matter. About the same time he received letters from
of the cost of rebuilding the town and country houses, speaking of this
state of things there, and spoke of the estimate an architect had made
But in January Savelich came from Moscow and gave him an account of the

don't need all that at all. By being ruined I have become much richer."
"Yes, of course that's true," said Pierre with a cheerful smile. "I

thousand rubles a year and brought in nothing.
and the country house on his Moscow estate, which had cost him eighty
was under no obligation to meet, and did not rebuild his Moscow house
would even be increased if he refused to pay his wife's debts which he
showing that despite these losses his income would not be diminished but
To console Pierre for these losses the head steward gave him an estimate

head steward's calculation, about two million rubles.
diminished income. The burning of Moscow had cost him, according to the
His head steward came to him at Orel and Pierre reckoned up with him his

and near Moscow.
with regard to his wife's debts and to the rebuilding of his houses in
more settled outlook on practical matters was furnished by his decision
which he was evidently in need. A further proof to Pierre of his own
leaving Orel, to induce the Italian officer to accept some money of
demand he made up his mind that he must have recourse to artifice when
insurmountably difficult. At the same time that he refused the colonel's
surprised how simple and easy had been what used to appear so
refused without the least difficulty or effort, and was afterwards
him four thousand francs to send to his wife and children. Pierre
concluded by making what amounted to a demand that Pierre should give
came to him and, after talking a great deal about his exploits,
had recourse to his new judge was when a French prisoner, a colonel,
certain of what ought and what ought not to be done. The first time he
He was as indifferent as heretofore to money matters, but now he felt

by some rule unknown to him decided what should or should not be done.
perplexity about these questions. There was now within him a judge who
Now to his surprise he found that he no longer felt either doubt or

property, when one person advised one thing and another something else.
similar state of perplexity with regard to every question concerning his
who asked as long as he had anything to give. Formerly he had been in a
unable to find a way out of all these surmises and had given to all
most? And perhaps they are both impostors?" In the old days he had been
it and he needs it. But someone else needs it still more. Who needs it
perplexity. "To give or not to give?" he had asked himself. "I have
he was very exposed, produced in him a state of hopeless agitation and
especially requests for money to which, as an extremely wealthy man,
of gravity he had previously lacked. Formerly all pecuniary questions,
In practical matters Pierre unexpectedly felt within himself a center

him and drew from him an amused and gentle smile.
men's opinions and their lives, and between one man and another, pleased
people. The difference, and sometimes complete contradiction, between
basis of the sympathy he felt for, and the interest he took in, other
each individual which used to excite and irritate Pierre now became a
things each from his own point of view. This legitimate peculiarity of
recognition of the possibility of everyone thinking, feeling, and seeing
the impossibility of changing a man's convictions by words, and his
gained for him the general good will. This was his acknowledgment of
princess, with the doctor, and with all the people he now met, which
There was a new feature in Pierre's relations with Willarski, with the

strange though very familiar phenomenon.
joyful, and amused smile now habitual to him, was interested in this
change the other's views and without condemning him, but with the quiet,
continually absorbed his attention. And Pierre, without trying to
family. Military, administrative, political, and Masonic interests
contemptible because their aim was the welfare of himself and his
occupations as hindrances to life, and considered that they were all
his wife's affairs, and his official duties. He regarded all these
Willarski was a married man with a family, busy with his family affairs,

he had been like that himself but a short time before.
he looked at and listened to Willarski, it seemed strange to think that
formerly to be with Pierre, and came to see him every day. To Pierre as
But for all that Willarski found it pleasanter now than it had been

"You are letting yourself go, my dear fellow," he said.

apathy and egotism.
behind the times, and had sunk, as he expressed it to himself, into
But to his surprise Willarski soon noticed that Pierre had lagged much

circle and, as he supposed, of similar interests.
Willarski felt dull in Orel and was pleased to meet a man of his own
that people who meet in a desert generally express for one another.
intimate, came to him with the professions of friendship and intimacy
Hearing that Bezukhov was in Orel, Willarski, though they had never been

the commissariat department in that town.
had a large estate in Orel province, and he occupied a temporary post in
1807, came to see him. Willarski was married to a Russian heiress who
acquaintance Count Willarski, who had introduced him to the lodge in
During the last days of Pierre's stay in Orel his old Masonic

evoking the best side of his nature and taking a pleasure in so doing.
Pierre had evoked the passionate affection of the Italian merely by

French, do not even feel animosity toward them."
such a nation," he said to Pierre. "You, who have suffered so from the
"If all Russians are in the least like you, it is sacrilege to fight

against Napoleon.
and pour out to him his indignation against the French and especially
with him, tell him about his past, his life at home, and his love,
The Italian seemed happy only when he could come to see Pierre, talk

the tenderness the Italian expressed for him.
This officer began visiting Pierre, and the princess used to make fun of

doctor brought one of them, a young Italian, to see Pierre.
There were several prisoners from the French army in Orel, and the

provincials," he would say.
"It's a pleasure to talk to a man like that; he is not like our

characters of his patients in general, and especially of the ladies.
telling him his favorite anecdotes and his observations on the
was of value to suffering humanity, would sit for hours with Pierre
considered it his duty as a doctor to pose as a man whose every moment
The doctor who attended Pierre and visited him every day, though he

affection for him.
out into the hall with a pleasant sense of intimacy with his master and
talking, or sometimes listening to Pierre's stories, and then would go
the old count, and would stand for a long time holding the clothes and
And Terenty would begin talking of the destruction of Moscow, and of

"Well, tell me... now, how did you get food?" he would ask.

noticing that Terenty wanted a chat, generally kept him there.
over his arm, to see whether he would not start a talk. And Pierre,
night, often lingered with his master's boots in his hands and clothes
"simpler." Terenty, when he had helped him undress and wished him good
that had taken place in Pierre. They considered that he had become much
His servants too--Terenty and Vaska--in their own way noticed the change

bad people but of people such as myself," thought she.
"Yes, he is a very, very kind man when he is not under the influence of

hard, and (in her own way) proud princess.
finding pleasure in drawing out the human qualities of the embittered,
showing sympathy with them. Yet Pierre's cunning consisted simply in
successfully, evoking memories of the best times of her youth and
The most cunning man could not have crept into her confidence more

gratefully, she let him see the hidden, kindly sides of her character.
intimate places of her heart, and, mistrustfully at first but afterwards
of her nature; but now he seemed to be trying to understand the most
herself as she did with others and had shown him only the combative side
that he regarded her with indifference and irony, and so had shrunk into
approval, he merely studied her with interest. Formerly she had felt
that she had become fond of him. Pierre did not in any way seek her
considered it her duty to nurse him--felt to her surprise and vexation
had come intending to show Pierre that in spite of his ingratitude she
the old count's death, now after staying a short time in Orel--where she
hostile to him since she had felt herself under obligations to him after
The princess, who had never liked Pierre and had been particularly

secrets.
knew how to listen so that people readily told him their most intimate
seldom listened; now he was seldom carried away in conversation and
Previously he had talked a great deal, grew excited when he talked, and

presence.
whether they were as contented as he was, and people felt pleased by his
sympathy for others, shone in his eyes with a questioning look as to
him. Now a smile at the joy of life always played round his lips, and
a kindhearted but unhappy man, and so people had been inclined to avoid
and hearing something quite different. Formerly he had appeared to be
was before him and listened to what was said, though evidently seeing
looked with a scarcely perceptible and seemingly ironic smile at what
said to him and still did not see what was before his eyes, but he now
distinguish something at a distance. At present he still forgot what was
him, he had puckered his forehead painfully as if vainly seeking to
formerly when he did not grasp what lay before him or was said to
of his own. The difference between his former and present self was that
occupied not with what was before his eyes but with something special
was just what he used to be. As before he was absent-minded and seemed
In external ways Pierre had hardly changed at all. In appearance he


CHAPTER XIII





hair falls from a man's head."
his soul: "Because there is a God, that God without whose will not one
To that question, "What for?" a simple answer was now always ready in
formerly destroyed all his mental edifices, no longer existed for him.
and happy he became. That dreadful question, "What for?" which had
and infinite life around him. And the closer he looked the more tranquil
and gladly regarded the ever-changing, eternally great, unfathomable,
away the telescope through which he had till now gazed over men's heads,
therefore--to see it and enjoy its contemplation--he naturally threw
had learned to see the great, eternal, and infinite in everything, and
the same pettiness, worldliness, and senselessness. Now, however, he
them, his mind had penetrated to those distances and he had there seen
seemed to him. But even then, at moments of weakness as he had accounted
had European life, politics, Freemasonry, philosophy, and philanthropy
great and infinite merely because it was not clearly seen. And such
petty worldliness hiding itself in misty distance had seemed to him
himself with a mental telescope and looked into remote space, where
what was limited, petty, commonplace, and senseless. He had equipped
had looked for it. In everything near and comprehensible he had only
infinite something. He had only felt that it must exist somewhere and
In the past he had never been able to find that great inscrutable

merely looked in front of him without straining his eyes.
he had looked over the heads of the men around him, when he should have
the far distance finds what he sought at his very feet. All his life
Freemasons. He felt like a man who after straining his eyes to see into
and unfathomable than in the Architect of the Universe recognized by the
captivity he had learned that in Karataev God was greater, more infinite
nurse had told him long ago: that God is here and everywhere. In his
he had learned not by words or reasoning but by direct feeling what his
an aim had been simply a search for God, and suddenly in his captivity
God. Formerly he had sought Him in aims he set himself. That search for
of rule, or words, or ideas, but faith in an ever-living, ever-manifest
He could not see an aim, for he now had faith--not faith in any kind

this time.
complete, joyous sense of freedom which constituted his happiness at
present itself again. And this very absence of an aim gave him the
temporarily--he felt that it no longer existed for him and could not
him now. That search for the aim of life had not merely disappeared
continually sought to find--the aim of life--no longer existed for
The very question that had formerly tormented him, the thing he had

"Well, I shall live. Ah, how splendid!"
What am I going to do?" And he immediately gave himself the answer:
And by old habit he asked himself the question: "Well, and what then?

gone and that his wife was no more. "Oh, how good, how splendid!"
the night on a soft clean bed, or when he remembered that the French had
table was moved up to him with savory beef tea, or when he lay down for
"Oh, how good! How splendid!" said he to himself when a cleanly laid

longer there, since she was no more.
the thought of his wife which had been a continual torment to him was no
demanded anything of him or sent him anywhere. He had all he wanted:
liberty. He was alone in a strange town, without acquaintances. No one
conditions, now had as it were an additional setting of external
to find that this inner freedom, which was independent of external
Moscow--filled Pierre's soul during his convalescence. He was surprised
to man which he had first experienced at the first halt outside
A joyous feeling of freedom--that complete inalienable freedom natural

his wife, and the destruction of the French.
told after his rescue, about the death of Prince Andrew, the death of
same way little by little he came to understand the news he had been
his dreams he still saw himself in the conditions of captivity. In the
would be sure to get his dinner, tea, and supper. But for a long time in
tomorrow, that no one would deprive him of his warm bed, and that he
and got used to the idea that no one would oblige him to go anywhere
impressions he had become accustomed to during the last few months
It was only gradually during his convalescence that Pierre lost the

come to look after him.
living on his estate at Elets and hearing of his rescue and illness had
come from Moscow; and also his cousin the eldest princess, who had been
in attendance on him two of his servants, Terenty and Vaska, who had
immediately fell ill. When he came to himself after his illness he saw
all the strange new facts he had learned; but on reaching Orel he
peaceful refuge where he could recover himself, rest, and think over
possible from places where people were killing one another, to some
significance. Just then he was only anxious to get away as quickly as
the time seemed merely strange to Pierre: he felt he could not grasp its
death, supposing that Pierre had heard of it long before. All this at
at Yaroslavl, and Denisov who told him this news also mentioned Helene's
Borodino for more than a month had recently died in the Rostovs' house
day he had learned that Prince Andrew, after surviving the battle of
On the day of his rescue he had seen the body of Petya Rostov. That same
above all he remembered his incapacity to think and feel all that time.
also remembered his difficulty in procuring a conveyance and horses, and
worried by the curiosity of officers and generals who questioned him, he
impression of the misfortunes and sufferings of people and of being
distress, and pains in his feet and side. He remembered a general
only the dull gray weather now rainy and now snowy, internal physical
to him from the time of his rescue till his illness. He remembered
Scarcely any impression was left on Pierre's mind by all that happened

medicines to drink, he recovered.
despite the fact that the doctors treated him, bled him, and gave him
for three months. He had what the doctors termed "bilious fever." But
day there, when preparing to go to Kiev, he fell ill and was laid up
they were over. After his liberation he reached Orel, and on the third
physical privation and strain he had suffered as prisoner until after
As generally happens, Pierre did not feel the full effects of the


CHAPTER XII





national war but to die, and Kutuzov died.
left to do as a Russian. Nothing remained for the representative of the
been liberated and raised to the summit of her glory, there was nothing
the Russian people, after the enemy had been destroyed and Russia had
Napoleon meant. He could not understand it. For the representative of
Kutuzov did not understand what Europe, the balance of power, or

for the salvation and glory of Russia.
to west and for the refixing of national frontiers as Kutuzov had been
Alexander I was as necessary for the movement of the peoples from east

Kutuzov's and animated by different motives.
leader was necessary, having qualities and views differing from
movement of peoples from east to west, and for this fresh war another
The movement of peoples from west to east was to be succeeded by a

heart, was now to assume another, a European, significance.
The war of 1812, besides its national significance dear to every Russian

place was taken by a new and necessary performer.
when he was needed there--now when his part was played out, Kutuzov's
the Treasury in Petersburg to recruit the militia, and then to the army
So naturally, simply, and gradually--just as he had come from Turkey to

another. And in fact his health was poor.
His health had to be bad for his place to be taken away and given to

marshal's great weakness and failing health.
Ermolov received fresh appointments. Everyone spoke loudly of the field
strength removed and transferred to the Emperor. Toll, Konovnitsyn, and
With this object his staff was gradually reconstructed and its real

change.
chief's feet without upsetting the old man by informing him of the
Emperor himself, thus cutting the ground from under the commander in
the beginning of the Russian campaign--to transfer the authority to the
to do what had been done with him at Austerlitz and with Barclay at
To avoid unpleasant encounters with the old man, the natural method was

as merely a hindrance and obstacle to the impending war.
This being the field marshal's frame of mind he was naturally regarded

the possibility of failure and so forth.
fresh troops, spoke of the hardships already endured by the people, of
gained. He tried to prove to the Emperor the impossibility of levying
but could only spoil and lower the glorious position that Russia had
no fresh war could improve the position or add to the glory of Russia,
Kutuzov alone would not see this and openly expressed his opinion that

all understood that the war was not ended.
about him: "You have not only saved Russia, you have saved Europe!" they
When on the following morning the Emperor said to the officers assembled

importance of the coming campaign.
by the fact that Kutuzov evidently could not or would not understand the
The Emperor's displeasure with Kutuzov was specially increased at Vilna

comedian."
and muttered something in which some people caught the words, "the old
Emperor's feet on his entering the ballroom, the Emperor made a wry face
day, ordered the standards that had been captured to be lowered at the
good-for-nothing. When Kutuzov, conforming to a custom of Catherine's
but everybody understood that the old man was blameworthy and
were observed and the Emperor was the first to set that example,
everyone knew of the imperial dissatisfaction with him. The proprieties
of the First Class and the Emperor showed him the highest honors, but
honored by his presence. Kutuzov had received the Order of St. George
Next day the field marshal gave a dinner and ball which the Emperor


CHAPTER XI





First Class.
object that lay on the salver. It was the Order of St. George of the
across his puffy face, and bowing low and respectfully he took the
Suddenly he seemed to remember; a scarcely perceptible smile flashed

him.
a small object. Kutuzov seemed not to understand what was expected of
Count Tolstoy, who stood before him holding a silver salver on which lay
Kutuzov raised his head and looked for a long while into the eyes of

"Your Serene Highness!"

voice saying:
the ballroom with his heavy waddling gait, he was arrested by someone's
When Kutuzov came out of the study and with lowered head was crossing

on his face now.
Emperor's commands on the field of Austerlitz seven years before settled
submissive, expressionless look with which he had listened to the
future campaign abroad. Kutuzov made no rejoinder or remark. The same
at Krasnoe and the Berezina, and informed him of his intentions for a
dissatisfaction at the slowness of the pursuit and at the mistakes made
When alone with the field marshal the Emperor expressed his

pressing the old man's hand went with him into the castle.
The Emperor greeted the officers and the Semenov guard, and again

usual effect on Kutuzov and he gave a sob.
to a long-standing impression related to his innermost feelings, had its
old man, extended his arms and embraced him. And this embrace too, owing
frowned for an instant, but immediately mastering himself went up to the
The Emperor with a rapid glance scanned Kutuzov from head to foot,

smooth, ingratiating voice.
lifted his eyes to him, handed him the report and began speaking in his
at the very moment when the Emperor, having alighted from the sleigh,
readjusted his hat, and pulling himself together drew himself up and,
on the old general. He carefully and hastily felt himself all over,
From the habit of fifty years all this had a physically agitating effect

descried.
in which the figures of the Emperor and Volkonski could already be
furiously up, and then all eyes were turned on an approaching sleigh
There was running to and fro and whispering; another troyka flew

report he had prepared for the Emperor.
sideways down the steps to the level of the street, took in his hand the
sides and, holding his gloves in his hand and walking with an effort
waddled out into the porch. He put on his hat with its peaks to the
his chest covered with orders and a scarf drawn round his stomach,
A minute later the old man's large stout figure in full-dress uniform,

lodge.
vestibule to inform Kutuzov, who was waiting in the hall porter's little
foam-flecked horses, shouted "Coming!" and Konovnitsyn rushed into the
A courier who galloped to the castle in advance, in a troyka with three

a guard of honor of the Semenov regiment.
officers in full parade uniform stood in front of the castle, as well as
the castle. In spite of the severe frost some hundred generals and staff
Vilna on the eleventh, and in his traveling sleigh drove straight to
Tolstoy, Prince Volkonski, Arakcheev, and others--the Emperor reached
Having left Petersburg on the seventh of December with his suite--Count

the Emperor's arrival led a dissipated life.
affairs reluctantly, left everything to his generals, and while awaiting
and physically feeble during his stay in that town. He attended to army
army at Vilna. Those about him said that he became extraordinarily slack
Contrary to the Emperor's wish Kutuzov detained the greater part of the

smile: "I meant merely to say what I said."
Kutuzov, shrugging his shoulders, replied with his subtle penetrating

animated by the same desire.
spoke to prove his own rectitude and therefore imagined Kutuzov to be
dinner parties," warmly replied Chichagov, who tried by every word he
contrary, I can supply you with everything even if you want to give
"You mean to imply that I have nothing to eat out of.... On the

had been recovered and would be restored to him.
vehicles packed with china that had been captured from him at Borisov
When speaking to Chichagov, Kutuzov incidentally mentioned that the

of the accusations that were being directed against Kutuzov.
expressed in the highest degree by the behavior of Chichagov, who knew
respectful attitude of the younger men to the old man in his dotage was
Kutuzov a garrison report and the keys of the town. The contemptuously
naval uniform, with a dirk, and holding his cap under his arm, he handed
to meet Kutuzov at the castle where the latter was to stay. In undress
securing that peace was really Kutuzov's; this Chichagov was the first
already been concluded, he admitted to the Emperor that the merit of
with Turkey in 1811 independently of Kutuzov, and found that peace had
under an obligation to him because when he was sent to make peace
with which he spoke to the Emperor, and who considered Kutuzov to be
never wished to go where he was sent: Chichagov, noted for the boldness
had first wanted to effect a diversion in Greece and then in Warsaw but
Chichagov, one of the most zealous "cutters-off" and "breakers-up," who

done in the realm of history did not concern him at all.
accustomed, as if all that was taking place and all that had still to be
immersed himself in the quiet life to which he had formerly been
and state and, as far as the passions that seethed around him allowed,
so long been deprived. And he suddenly turned from the cares of army
friends and associations, besides the comforts of life of which he had
Vilna. In that wealthy town, which had not been injured, he found old
as he called it. Twice during his career Kutuzov had been governor of
On the twenty-ninth of November Kutuzov entered Vilna--his "dear Vilna"

of the necessity of physical rest.
he began to be conscious of the physical weariness of his aged body and
ended and felt that his mission was accomplished; and at the same time
one hand that the military business in which he had played his part was
understood this not merely from the attitude of the court. He saw on the
and that the power he was supposed to hold was no longer his. And he
realized at once that his day was over, that his part was played,
to the Emperor's will had decided on the abandonment of Moscow, now
heir--apparent from the army--who on his own authority and contrary
against the sovereign's wishes and who had removed the Grand Duke and
same Kutuzov who in August had been chosen commander in chief
The old man, experienced in court as well as in military affairs--this

time.
advance. The Emperor intended to join the army personally in a few days'
displeasure at the poor success of our forces and the slowness of their
Now having come to the army, he informed Kutuzov of the Emperor's
campaign but had subsequently been removed from the army by Kutuzov.
Pavlovich joined the army. He had taken part in the beginning of the
But after Bennigsen's departure, the Grand Duke Tsarevich Constantine

further commands and appointments from His Imperial Majesty."
be so good as to set off for Kaluga on receipt of this, and there await
"On account of your spells of ill health, will your excellency please

letter:
to Bennigsen (who reported separately to the Emperor) the following
Only once, after the affair of the Berezina, did he get angry and write
maximum. Kutuzov saw this and merely sighed and shrugged his shoulders.
hero Wittgenstein, this mood and the gossip of the staff reached their
After the junction with the army of the brilliant admiral and Petersburg

power, were commanders of genius.
it was evident that he was old and stupid and that they, though not in
simple, while what they proposed was so complicated and clever, that
was necessary to await provisions, or that the men had no boots--was so
and so forth. They had heard all that before. And all he said--that it
impossibility of crossing the frontier with a crowd of tatterdemalions,
they thought were mere phrases) about a "golden bridge," about the
profundity of their plans, that he would answer with his phrases (which
it was useless to talk to the old man; that he would never grasp the
Because they could not understand him all these people assumed that

every turn.
formality, but they winked behind his back and tried to mislead him at
asking for his sanction they appeared to be fulfilling a regrettable
to blame. They did not talk seriously to him; when reporting to him or
respectful form, making it impossible for him to ask wherein he was
expressed. The ridicule and contempt were of course expressed in a
to dissatisfaction, contempt, and ridicule, more and more strongly
the Petersburg Berezina plan would be attributed to Kutuzov led
another and Kutuzov most of all. Anticipation that the failure of
the keener grew the passions of the Russian commanders, who blamed one
Petersburg plan) special hopes had been placed by the Russians, and
remnant, especially after the Berezina, on which (in consequence of the
The farther they fled the more wretched became the plight of the

flight, and on that the whole strength of the French was concentrated.
Their ships had been burned, there was no salvation save in collective
Certain destruction lay behind the French but in front there was hope.

even did that, but they were exceptions.
harmful, or hated, or guilty, were simply unnecessary. Some Russians
hungry and indispensable soldiers to give to the French who, though not
itself exposed. It was impossible to take bread and clothes from our
The French perished from the conditions to which the Russian army was
Frenchmen in the Russian service--could do nothing for the prisoners.
Russian commanders, those favorable to the French--and even the
them; they felt that it could not be otherwise. The most compassionate
do--perished of cold and hunger despite their captors' desire to save
that half the prisoners--with whom the Russians did not know what to
necessities of life. The French did not need to be informed of the fact
pitiful plight, would be on a lower level to claim a share in the
among them. But those who surrendered, while remaining in the same
might hope for help from his fellows and the definite place he held
was equally bad. As long as they remained with their own people each
That impulse was reasonable. The condition of fugitives and of pursuers

did not, surrender.
inertiae--pressed forward into boats and into the ice-covered water and
children who were with the French transport, all--carried on by vis
broke down, unarmed soldiers, people from Moscow and women with
made for crossing as by what took place at the bridges. When the bridges
to block its path. This was shown not so much by the arrangements it
reaching its goal. It fled like a wounded animal and it was impossible
at a continually increasing speed and all its energy was directed to
demanded--namely, simply to follow the enemy up. The French crowd fled
line of action--the one Kutuzov and the general mass of the army
cutting off the enemy's retreat and the soundness of the only possible
that it plainly and indubitably proved the fallacy of all the plans for
The sole importance of the crossing of the Berezina lies in the fact

guns and men lost--than Krasnoe had been, as the figures show.
the results of the crossing were much less disastrous to the French--in
the crossing of the Berezina that destroyed the French army. In reality
would happen according to plan, and therefore insisted that it was just
strategic trap at the Berezina River. Everyone assured himself that all
plan (again one of Pfuel's) had been devised to catch Napoleon in a
Russian side merely because in Petersburg--far from the seat of war--a
into a tragic spectacle that remained in every memory, and on the
had been previously enduring were suddenly concentrated at one moment
because at the broken bridge across that river the calamities their army
and still is written about the Berezina, on the French side this is only
not at all the decisive episode of the campaign. If so much has been
been written was only one intermediate stage in its destruction, and
progression; and that crossing of the Berezina about which so much has
The French army melted away at the uniform rate of a mathematical


CHAPTER X





gladsome and mysterious to one another.
up, now vanishing, now trembling, they were busy whispering something
at them, began to disport themselves in the dark sky: now flaring
They all grew silent. The stars, as if knowing that no one was looking

frost...."
"O Lord, O Lord! How starry it is! Tremendous! That means a hard

coat. "Even wormwood grows on its own root."
"They are men too," said one of them as he wrapped himself up in his

smile.
would occasionally raise himself on an elbow and glance at Morel with a
nonsense, continued to lie at the opposite side of the fire, but one
The older men, who thought it undignified to amuse themselves with such
his third bowl. All the young soldiers smiled gaily as they watched him.
They gave him some more porridge and Morel with a laugh set to work on

starving."
"Give him some porridge: it takes a long time to get filled up after

"Fine! Just like the Frenchie! Oh, ho ho! Do you want some more to eat?"

de-tra-va-ga-la" he sang.
laboriously pursing his lips, "le-trip-ta-la-de-bu-de-ba, e
"Ke..." Zaletaev, brought out with effort: "ke-e-e-e," he drawled,

"It goes smoothly, too. Well, now, Zaletaev!"


      And for being a gallant old boy...
      For drinking, for fighting,
      * Who had a triple talent


    Et d'etre un vert galant." *
    De boire, de battre,
    "Qui eut le triple talent,

"Well, go on, go on!"

Morel, wrinkling up his face, laughed too.

"Bravo! Ha, ha, ha!" rose their rough, joyous laughter from all sides.

his arm and really catching the tune.
"Vivarika! Vif-seruvaru! Sedyablyaka!" repeated the soldier, flourishing


     devil."
     * "Long live Henry the Fourth, that valiant king! That rowdy


diable a quatre..." *
"Vive Henri Quatre! Vive ce roi valiant!" sang Morel, winking. "Ce

it?" said the man--a singer and a wag--whom Morel was embracing.
"Now then, now then, teach us how it goes! I'll soon pick it up. How is

The soldiers simply held their sides as they watched him.
in a hoarse broken voice, with an arm thrown round the nearest soldier.
head over his cap. He was evidently tipsy, and was singing a French song
wearing a woman's cloak and had a shawl tied woman fashion round his
Morel, a short sturdy Frenchman with inflamed and streaming eyes, was

the soldiers.
Meanwhile Morel was sitting in the best place by the fire, surrounded by

of the men like a child.
brave, kind friends," and he leaned his head against the shoulder of one
"Oh, you fine fellows, my kind, kind friends! These are men! Oh, my

necks while they carried him and began wailing plaintively:
soldiers, and carried him to the hut. Ramballe put his arms around their
They surrounded Ramballe, lifted him on the crossed arms of two

came rebukes from all sides addressed to the jesting soldier.
"Oh, you fool! Why talk rubbish, lout that you are--a real peasant!"

turning mockingly to Ramballe.
"You won't do it again, eh?" said one of the soldiers, winking and

fallen had not a soldier standing by held him up.
was told to go. He rose and tried to walk, but staggered and would have
said that the colonel wished the officer to be brought to him, Ramballe
officer into his hut to warm him, and when the messenger returned and
to the fire sent to ask his colonel whether he would not take a French
an officer and ought to be warmed. A Russian officer who had come up
shoulders, tried to impress on the soldiers the fact that Ramballe was
a long-drawn groan and then again became silent. Morel, pointing to his
the Russian soldiers with red and vacant eyes. Occasionally he emitted
resting his head on his elbow lay silent beside the campfire, looking at
soldiers, who could not understand him. Ramballe refused food and
suddenly became unnaturally merry and chattered incessantly to the
When Morel had drunk some vodka and finished his bowl of porridge he

wrapped in the shawl was Morel, his orderly.
The exhausted French officer was Ramballe and the man with his head

buckwheat porridge and vodka for both of them.
spread a greatcoat on the ground for the sick man, and brought some
something, pointing to his mouth. The soldiers surrounded the Frenchmen,
tied round his head, was stronger. He raised his companion and said
sit down, but fell. The other, a short sturdy soldier with a shawl
and seemed quite exhausted. On approaching the fire he had been going to
not understand. One was taller than the other; he wore an officer's hat
to the fire, hoarsely uttering something in a language our soldiers did
These were two Frenchmen who had been hiding in the forest. They came up

one another.
bright firelight stepped two strangely clad human figures clinging to
They all raised their heads to listen, and out of the forest into the

"A bear, lads," said one of the men.

and the crackling of dry branches.
About midnight they heard the sound of steps in the snow of the forest,

branches of trees heavy with hoarfrost.
campfire was blazing brightly in the midst of the snow, lighting up the
The fifth company was bivouacking at the very edge of the forest. A huge


CHAPTER IX





And several of the men went over to the Fifth Company.

"Oh, I'll go across and have a look...."

singing songs...."
turned up. One's quite frozen and the other's an awful swaggerer. He's
"They're having such fun," said he, coming back. "Two Frenchies have

One of the men got up and went over to the Fifth Company.

soldiers, "and what a lot of them there are!"
"Hark at them roaring there in the Fifth Company!" said one of the

of general, merry laughter.
exchanging a few words. From a campfire a hundred paces off came a sound
could be heard. Others turned over and warmed themselves, now and again
In the silence that ensued, the snoring of those who had fallen asleep

sprawling!"
"What are you pushing for? Is the fire only for you? Look how he's

"O Lord!"

"You warm your back and your belly gets frozen. That's queer."

"We shall want some more wood."

"That's a sign of a good harvest next year."

admiration at the Milky Way.
women had spread out their linen," said one of the men, gazing with
"Look at the stars. It's wonderful how they shine! You would think the

The conversation flagged, and the soldiers began settling down to sleep.

the old soldier, yawning.
"Well, anyhow we're going to end it. He won't come here again," remarked

ruined!"
ground with an aspen stake to fix him down. What a lot of men he's
"If he fell into my hands, when I'd caught him I'd bury him in the

"Liar, indeed! It's the real truth."

"You're a first-class liar, Kiselev, when I come to look at you!"

either."
a bird in his hands and flies away. And there's no way of killing him
right charm. He catches him and catches him--no good! He turns into
case. They say Platov took 'Poleon himself twice. But he didn't know the
muskets and went on their knees. 'Pardon!' they say. That's only one
my word, they didn't let us get near before they just threw down their
"And do you know, Daddy, the day before yesterday we ran at them and,

remembering; but since that... it's only been tormenting folk."
"That was a real battle," said an old soldier. "It's the only one worth

says..."
still didn't finish carting the dead away. And as for the wolves, he
called up from ten villages around and they carted for twenty days and
"That peasant near Mozhaysk where the battle was said the men were all

No one contradicted him.

gobble the same food as the gentry."
"It must be from their food," said the sergeant major. "They used to

All were silent.

and not so much smell as a whiff of gunpowder.'"
them off: we can hardly do it. But theirs,' he says, 'are white as paper
'we tie our faces up with kerchiefs and turn our heads away as we drag
says, 'go up to ours and they are all rotten and maggoty. So,' he says,
had been from the cold, ours would not have rotted either. 'But,' he
"You're a clever fellow! From the cold indeed! Why, it was hot. If it

"Was it from the cold?" asked someone.

smoke.'"
as white as paper, clean, and not as much smell as a puff of powder
been lying there for nearly a month, and says the peasant, 'they lie
burying the dead--where the battle was you know--well, those dead had
whiteness, "the peasants at Mozhaysk were saying that when they began
"But it's strange, friends," continued the man who had wondered at their

own way. A queer lot!"
puzzled smile. "I asked him whose subject he was, and he jabbered in his
"But they don't understand our talk at all," said the dancer with a

"Well, what do you think? They make soldiers of all classes there."

you might think they were nobles."
white--as white as birchbark--and some of them are such fine fellows,
"But they're a clean folk, lads," the first man went on; "he was

you believe it, he jabbered something in their lingo."
the dancer. "As they turned them over one seemed still alive and, would
colonel and carried them out. It was pitiful to see them, boys," put in
"The Cossacks have taken their boots. They were clearing the hut for the

starting a new theme. "They were no more than make-believes."
not one of them had what you might call real boots on," said a soldier,
"What a lot of those Frenchies were taken today, and the fact is that

The soldier said no more and the talk went on.

"That'll do, that'll do!" replied the sergeant major quietly.

aching all over; anyway I shan't be able to keep up."
turning to the sergeant major. "Tell them to send me to hospital; I'm
me, now! I've got no strength left," he added, with sudden resolution
fire, "a plump man gets thin, but for a thin one it's death. Take
squeaky and unsteady voice, raising himself at the other side of the
"Well, you know," said the sharp-nosed man they called Jackdaw in a

reproachfully to the man who had spoken of frozen feet.
"Do you want to be doing the same?" said an old soldier, turning

"Eh? Don't talk nonsense!" said a sergeant major.

walk?"
"Yes, it's all very well, but when a man's feet are frozen how can he

"But in the Third Company they say nine men were missing yesterday."

"Well, he's a poor sort of soldier..."

"I've had an eye on him this long while," said the other.

said one sergeant major.
"And that son of a bitch Petrov has lagged behind after all, it seems,"

hammering them, we're to receive double kits!"
"They'll soon be issuing us new ones. They say that when we've finished

toward the fire.
"It's the steam that spoils them," he added, stretching out his feet
knapsack a scrap of blue French cloth, and wrapped it round his foot.
"Right enough, friend," said he, and, having sat down, took out of his

on the fire.
The dancer stopped, pulled off the loose piece of leather, and threw it

fellow you are for dancing!"
noticing that the sole of the dancer's boot was hanging loose. "What a
"Look out, your soles will fly off!" shouted the red-haired man,

musketeer..." he sang, pretending to hiccough after each syllable.
"Mother! The dew is cold but clear.... It's well that I'm a

where he stood.
akimbo, began stamping his cold feet rapidly and deftly on the spot
The handsome young soldier who had brought the wood, setting his arms
the flames hiss and crackle. The men drew nearer and lit their pipes.
their mouths, and fanned it with the skirts of their greatcoats, making
They split up the wood, pressed it down on the fire, blew at it with

"Bring it here--that's fine!"

carrying a load of wood.
the light of the fire the slender, handsome figure of a young soldier
obediently and was about to go but at that instant there came into
they called "Jackdaw," a thin little fellow with a sharp nose, rose
robust he ordered about those weaker than himself. The soldier
This red-haired man was neither a sergeant nor a corporal, but being

some wood!" said he to another soldier.
smoke but not moving back from the fire. "And you, Jackdaw, go and fetch
and red-faced man, screwing up his eyes and blinking because of the
have the wolves eaten you? Fetch some more wood!" shouted a red-haired
"Eh, Makeev! What has become of you, you son of a bitch? Are you lost or

they demanded contributions of fuel.
campfire blazed brighter than others. For leave to sit by their wattle
anywhere else. Two sergeants major were sitting with them and their
More men collected behind the wattle fence of the Eighth Company than

mentally--remained.
left behind and only the flower of the army--physically and
day by day. All the physically or morally weak had long since been
began to grow depressed or who lost strength were sifted out of the army
presented a more cheerful and animated aspect. This was because all who
On the contrary, the army had never under the best material conditions

presented a very sad and depressing spectacle.
commissariat did not always keep up with the troops)--they would have
with eighteen degrees of frost, and without even full rations (the
and sheepskin coats, without a roof over their heads, in the snow
conditions the Russian soldiers were in at that time--lacking warm boots
One would have thought that under the almost incredibly wretched


CHAPTER VIII





themselves naked to steam the lice out of their shirts.
repairing their footgear, some smoking pipes, and some stripping
roll, had supper, and settled down round the fires for the night--some
and a campfire was built before it. They beat the tattoo, called the
Eighth Company as a shelter from the north, propped up by musket rests,
The wattle wall the men had brought was set up in a semicircle by the

and accouterments put in order.
were rigged up for the officers, caldrons were being boiled, and muskets
orders being given. Stores of wood were brought for the night, shelters
Axes and choppers were plied all around. Everything was done without any

down.
to and fro all over the occupied space where the snow had been trodden
crackled, the snow was melting, and black shadows of soldiers flitted
the campfires were blazing on all sides ready for cooking, the wood
By the time the soldiers had dragged the wattle fence to its place

to the left, cut off the Vice-King (Murat) and capture him.
maneuvers suggested for tomorrow. It was proposed to make a flank march
were in animated talk over their tea about the events of the day and the
In the hut which the men had passed, the chief officers had gathered and

before, interlarding their talk with the same aimless expletives.
When they were out of the village they began talking again as loud as

the men moved forward.
"Don't you like it?" said a laughing voice, and moderating their tones

in a frightened whisper when the sergeant major had passed on.
"There, how that devil hits out! He's made my face all bloody," said he

the wattle.
his face, which had been scratched till it bled by his falling against
The men became silent. The soldier who had been struck groaned and wiped

"Can't you make less noise?"
hitting the first man who came in his way a swinging blow on the back.
foul-mouthed devils, you brutes, I'll give it to you!" shouted he,
"There are gentry here; the general himself is in that hut, and you
sergeant major who came upon the men who were hauling their burden.
"What are you up to?" suddenly came the authoritative voice of a

Merry senseless words of abuse flowed freely.

"Get along... Falling? What are you stopping for? There now..."

gasping men.
village street, swaying, pressing upon and cutting the shoulders of the
thirty-five feet long and seven feet high, moved forward along the
village joined the haulers, and the wattle wall, which was about
Some twenty men of the Sixth Company who were on their way into the

will you? You may want us one of these days."
"Here, you of the Sixth Company! Devils that you are! Lend a hand...

in the silence that followed the heavy breathing of the men was audible.
boys!..." but despite their united efforts the wattle hardly moved, and
roared out at once: "Oo-oo-oo-oo! That's it. All together! Heave away,
the end of the third verse as the last note died away, twenty voices
All stood silent, and a soft, pleasant velvety voice began to sing. At

"Now, all together! But wait a moment, boys... With a song!"

you shoving to?"
"Now then, catch hold in twos! Hand up the lever! That's it... Where are

it. Loud, coarse laughter and joyous shouts ensued.
more and at last the wall fell, and with it the men who had been pushing
swaying in the gloom of the night. The lower stakes cracked more and
of the wall, sprinkled with snow and creaking with frost, was seen
"Now then, all together--shove!" cried the voices, and the huge surface

wall of a shed, the roof of which had already been removed.
Some fifteen men with merry shouts were shaking down the high wattle

campfires, or wattle fences to serve for shelter.
dragging away boards, dry wood, and thatch from the roofs, for the
officers, carrying out the French corpses that were in the huts, and
section scattered through the village arranging quarters for the staff
getting out caldrons and rye biscuit, and feeding the horses. A third
regimental wagons and horses which were standing in a group was busy
and merry voices could be heard from there. Another section amid the
immediately the sound of axes and swords, the crashing of branches,
through the snow into a birch forest to the right of the village, and
lair and its food. One part of it dispersed and waded knee-deep
Like some huge many-limbed animal, the regiment began to prepare its

village and stacked its arms in front of the last huts.
The commander rode up to his hut. The regiment passed through the

available for the regimental commander.
Frenchmen, cavalrymen, and members of the staff. There was only one hut
met the regiment announced that all the huts were full of sick and dead
at its halting place--a village on the highroad. The quartermasters who
now numbered only nine hundred was one of the first to arrive that night
An infantry regiment which had left Tarutino three thousand strong but

keener.
snow a purple-black and starry sky showed itself and the frost grew
falling snow and toward evening it began to clear. Through the falling
dusk. All day it had been calm and frosty with occasional lightly
November, the last day of the Krasnoe battles, it was already growing
When the troops reached their night's halting place on the eighth of


CHAPTER VII





answering unexpectedly gave a sob, being evidently greatly moved.
Kutuzov asking whether he wished his caleche to be sent for, Kutuzov in
long-sustained shouts. Afterwards when one of the generals addressed
in the soul of every soldier and found expression in their joyous and
old man's good-natured expletives, was not merely understood but lay
and consciousness of the justice of our cause, exactly expressed by that
speech, the feeling of majestic triumph combined with pity for the foe
into an old man's simplehearted talk; but the hearty sincerity of that
repeated the field marshal's address, begun solemnly and then changing
Kutuzov's words were hardly understood by the troops. No one could have

laughing joyfully and shouting "Hurrah!"
during the whole campaign, and left the broken ranks of the soldiers
And flourishing his whip he rode off at a gallop for the first time

bastards!" he cried, suddenly lifting his head.
"But after all who asked them here? Serves them right, the bloody

his head as if in perplexity.
lips and eyes into a cluster of wrinkles. He ceased speaking and bowed
and brighter with an old man's mild smile, which drew the corners of his
upon him he read sympathy with what he had said. His face grew brighter
He looked around, and in the direct, respectful, wondering gaze fixed

pity them. They are human beings too. Isn't it so, lads?"
While they were strong we didn't spare ourselves, but now we may even
he, pointing to the prisoners. "Worse off than our poorest beggars.
still you are at home while they--you see what they have come to," said
we'll rest. The Tsar won't forget your service. It is hard for you, but
Bear up; it won't be for long now! We'll see our visitors off and then
"You see, brothers, I know it's hard for you, but it can't be helped!

say.
soldiers, who moved that they might hear better what he was going to
There was a stir among the throng of officers and in the ranks of the

tell his comrades something very important.
the commander in chief speaking but an ordinary old man who wanted to
once his voice and the expression of his face changed. It was no longer
"You see, brothers..." said he when the shouts had ceased... and all at

gleam.
and bowed his head, and his eye lit up with a mild and apparently ironic
While the soldiers were shouting Kutuzov leaned forward in his saddle

"Hur-r-rah!" roared thousands of voices.

the men with a rapid movement of his chin.
standards. "Lower, lower, that's it. Hurrah lads!" he added, addressing
lowered the French eagle he was holding before the Preobrazhensk
"Lower its head, lower it!" he said to a soldier who had accidentally

He paused and looked around.

forever."
The victory is complete and Russia will not forget you! Honor to you
distinctly heard. "I thank you all for your hard and faithful service.
officers. In the stillness around him his slowly uttered words were
"I thank you all!" he said, addressing the soldiers and then again the

them.
attentively around at the circle of officers, recognizing several of
and began to speak. A throng of officers surrounded him. He looked
reluctance to the duty imposed by his position, raised his head
Kutuzov was silent for a few seconds and then, submitting with evident
the standards to advance and surround the commander in chief with them.
closed his eyes. One of his suite beckoned to the soldiers carrying
He stopped in front of the Preobrazhensk regiment, sighed deeply, and

all sides awaiting a word from him.
He looked about him absently. Thousands of eyes were looking at him from

difficulty from the thoughts that preoccupied him.
"Ah, the standards!" said Kutuzov, evidently detaching himself with

from the French and standing in front of the Preobrazhensk regiment.
directed the commander in chief's attention to some standards captured
"What were you saying?" he asked the general, who continuing his report

the same expression on his face again swayed his head.
shoulder, saying something to him in a friendly manner, and Kutuzov with
spot he noticed a Russian soldier laughingly patting a Frenchman on the
face, screwed up his eyes, and pensively swayed his head. At another
Kutuzov looked long and intently at these two soldiers. He puckered his

sores immediately turned away and went on with what he was doing.
expression with which, after a glance at Kutuzov, the soldier with the
the fleeting glance they threw at the riders and in the malevolent
flesh with their hands. There was something horrible and bestial in
whom had his face covered with sores, were tearing a piece of raw
One group of the French stood close to the road, and two of them, one of

and cheeks, and nearly all had red, swollen and festering eyes.
wretched appearance. Most of them were disfigured by frost-bitten noses
attentively and fixedly at these prisoners, who presented a specially
saying. He screwed up his eyes with a dissatisfied look as he gazed
Kutuzov seemed preoccupied and did not listen to what the general was

prisoners had been captured.
white horse. One of the generals was reporting to him where the guns and
that bulged on his round shoulders, moved slowly along the road on his
Kutuzov who, wearing a white cap with a red band and a padded overcoat
commander in chief the buzz of talk ceased and all eyes were fixed on
beside a long row of unharnessed French guns. At the approach of the
in anything they had been able to get hold of, were standing in the road
crowd of tattered prisoners, buzzing with talk and wrapped and bandaged
were crowding to warm themselves at campfires. Near Dobroe an immense
French prisoners captured that day (there were seven thousand of them)
whispered among themselves behind his back. All along the road groups of
white horse, followed by an enormous suite of discontented generals who
The day was clear and frosty. Kutuzov rode to Dobroe on his plump little

had that day been transferred.
battle, Kutuzov left Krasnoe and went to Dobroe whither his headquarters
enemy was everywhere in flight and that there could and would be no
been sent about with counterorders--when it had become plain that the
generals who did not go to their proper places, and after adjutants had
Krasnoe. Toward evening--after much disputing and many mistakes made by
The fifth of November was the first day of what is called the battle of


CHAPTER VI





greatness.
To a lackey no man can be great, for a lackey has his own conception of

history has invented.
in the false mold of a European hero--the supposed ruler of men--that
That simple, modest, and therefore truly great, figure could not be cast

them.
not to slaying and destroying men but to saving and showing pity on
pedestal from which he, the commander in chief, devoted all his powers
national war. And only that feeling placed him on that highest human
select him--an old man in disfavor--to be their representative in the
the people in so strange a manner, contrary to the Tsar's wish, to
Only the recognition of the fact that he possessed this feeling caused

full purity and strength.
events then occuring lay in the national feeling which he possessed in
The source of that extraordinary power of penetrating the meaning of the

in all his activity he was never once untrue to it?
so truly discern the importance of the people's view of the events that
But how did that old man, alone, in opposition to the general opinion,

results now lie before us.
existed only in the heads of a dozen individuals--for the events and
only we abstain from attributing to the activity of the mass aims that
It is easy now to understand the significance of these events--if

crossed.
and that a new war should not be begun nor the frontiers of Russia
insisted that battles, which were useless then, should not be fought,
winning a battle was unprecedented. He alone during the whole retreat
lost and despite the fact that for an army to have to retire after
was a victory, despite the assurance of generals that the battle was
contradiction to everyone else, declared till his death that Borodino
the battle of Austerlitz began said that it would be lost, he alone, in
preparations for it with unparalleled solemnity. This Kutuzov who before
this enemy of decisive action, gave battle at Borodino, investing the
This procrastinator Kutuzov, whose motto was "Patience and Time,"

and of our army.
of Russia, minimizing as far as possible the sufferings of our people
conflict with the French, (2) to defeat them, and (3) to drive them out
to one and the same threefold end: (1) to brace all his strength for
events. His actions--without the smallest deviation--were all directed
Nor do words alone prove that only he understood the meaning of the

useless and harmful.
displeasure--said in Vilna that to carry the war beyond the frontier is
to please the Emperor, he alone--incurring thereby the Emperor's
And this courtier, as he is described to us, who lies to Arakcheev

not sacrifice a single Russian for ten Frenchmen.
we must keep some force to reach the frontier with, and that he would
the Tarutino, the Vyazma, nor the Krasnoe battles were necessary; that
desire; that the enemy must be offered "a golden bridge"; that neither
useless, everything is being accomplished of itself better than we could
alone during the retreat of the French said that all our maneuvers are
peace, he said: There can be no peace, for such is the people's will. He
Moscow is not the loss of Russia. In reply to Lauriston's proposal of
and reports up to the time of his death. He alone said that the loss of
was a victory, and repeated this both verbally and in his dispatches
with those about him began, he alone said that the battle of Borodino
Beginning with the battle of Borodino, from which time his disagreement
thoughts with the bitter conviction that he would not be understood.
himself, in very diverse circumstances, he repeatedly expressed his real
toward which he moved throughout the whole war. Obviously in spite of
time of his activity utter one word inconsistent with the single aim
But that man, so heedless of his words, did not once during the whole

meaningless words that happened to enter his head.
words serving as their expression are not what move people--use quite
experience of life had reached the conviction that thoughts and the
Not merely in these cases but continually did that old man--who by

him who was appointed chief of the artillery.
calamities of Moscow to him or to himself? Still less could it matter to
happening--what did it matter to him whether Rostopchin attributed the
crowd understood the whole tremendous significance of what was
contrary. What did it matter to him--who then alone amid a senseless
just saying so myself," though a moment before he had said quite the
be appointed chief of the artillery, Kutuzov replied: "Yes, I was
Arakcheev, coming to him from the Emperor, said that Ermolov ought to
Moscow without a battle," though Moscow was then already abandoned. When
Moscow without a battle?" Kutuzov replied: "And I shall not abandon
destruction of Moscow, and said: "How was it you promised not to abandon
galloped up to Kutuzov with personal reproaches for having caused the
to prove anything to him. When Count Rostopchin at the Yauza bridge
generals, officers, and soldiers, and never contradicted those who tried
Stael, read novels, liked the society of pretty women, jested with
ordinary things. He wrote letters to his daughters and to Madame de
simplest and most ordinary of men, and said the simplest and most
nothing about himself, adopted no prose, always appeared to be the
what he intended to accomplish or had accomplished; in general he said
Pyramids," of the sacrifices he offered for the fatherland, or of
Kutuzov never talked of "forty centuries looking down from the

directed in 1812.
completely accomplished as that to which all Kutuzov's efforts were
an instance in history of the aim of an historical personage being so
will of the whole people. Still more difficult would it be to find
difficult to imagine any aim more worthy or more consonant with the
activity was so unswervingly directed to a single aim; and it would be
And yet it is difficult to imagine an historical character whose

ashamed.
when speaking of him and of the year 1812 they always seem a little
happening--Kutuzov seems to them something indefinite and pitiful, and
and a present consciousness of the future importance of what was
Vilna, presented an example exceptional in history of self-sacrifice
activity in 1812, never once swerving by word or deed from Borodino to
is grand. But Kutuzov--the man who from the beginning to the end of his
human dignity--Napoleon is the object of adulation and enthusiasm; he
insignificant tool of history who never anywhere, even in exile, showed
For Russian historians, strange and terrible to say, Napoleon--that most

the higher laws.
it. The hatred and contempt of the crowd punish such men for discerning
who, discerning the will of Providence, submit their personal will to
does not acknowledge, but of those rare and always solitary individuals
Such is the fate not of great men (grands hommes) whom the Russian mind


     Krasnoe, by Bogdanovich.
     reflections on the unsatisfactory results of the battles at
     * History of the year 1812. The character of Kutuzov and


complete victory over the French. *
Krasnoe and the Berezina he deprived the Russian army of the glory of
liar, frightened of the name of Napoleon, and that by his blunders at
of the Highest Authorities it is said that Kutuzov was a cunning court
was dissatisfied with him. And in a history recently written by order
In 1812 and 1813 Kutuzov was openly accused of blundering. The Emperor


CHAPTER V





useful only because he had a Russian name.
old courtier, and by Russians as something indefinite--a sort of puppet
while Kutuzov is described by foreigners as a crafty, dissolute, weak
in this way, but posterity and history have acclaimed Napoleon as grand,
Not only did his contemporaries, carried away by their passions, talk

with Napoleon and had been bribed by him, and so on, and so on.
lost his head, and that it was probable that he had an understanding
the advance because on learning that Napoleon was there he had quite
Factories because he was comfortable there, that at Krasnoe he checked
nothing but satisfying his passions and would not advance from the Linen
campaign he had prevented their vanquishing Napoleon, that he thought of
deed. They blamed Kutuzov and said that from the very beginning of the
imagined that they were accomplishing a most noble and honorable
most melancholy law of necessity, but considered themselves heroes and
These men, carried away by their passions, were but blind tools of the

especially Kutuzov for having failed to do so.
least a marshal or a hero of some sort, and reproached one another and
achievement--though they much regretted not having taken Napoleon, or at
who had distinguished himself and were pleased with their
cannon, and a stick called a "marshal's staff," and disputed as to
At Krasnoe they took twenty-six thousand prisoners, several hundred

do.
them threw down its arms and surrendered as it had long been anxious to
frost-bitten, and starving--and the column that had been presented to
to them--that is to say, to a crowd of Frenchmen stark with cold,
scarcely move, trotted with much effort to the column presented
And the cavalry, with spurs and sabers urging on horses that could

pointing out the French to the cavalry.
"I give you that column, lads," he said, riding up to the troops and


    * Knight without fear and without reproach.


their surrender, wasted time, and did not do what he was ordered to do.
himself--who was fond of parleys with the French, sent envoys demanding
he was wanted--that chevalier sans peur et sans reproche * as he styled
commissariat affairs of his detachment, and could never be found when
Miloradovich, who said he did not want to know anything about the

continued their flight.
in the forest by night, making their way round as best they could, and
arrive. The French, avoiding the Russians, dispersed and hid themselves
that were running past, and demanded reinforcements which did not
Prince Eugene of Wurttemberg fired from a hill over the French crowds
etc. And as usual nothing happened in accord with the disposition.
Toll wrote a disposition: "The first column will march to so and so,"

days.
of French soldiers by worn-out Russians continued at Krasnoe for three
encounter and to preserve his troops, the massacre of the broken mob
thousand men. Despite all Kutuzov's efforts to avoid that ruinous
French columns and stumbled instead on Napoleon himself with sixteen
So it was at Krasnoe, where they expected to find one of the three

the French army.
to cut off showed itself particularly whenever the Russians stumbled on
This longing to distinguish themselves, to maneuver, to overthrow, and

frontier.
distance than they had already traversed, before they reached the
and who at the best if the flight continued would have to go a greater
month and without fighting a battle had dwindled to half their number,
soldiers--ill-shod, insufficiently clad, and half starved--who within a
another they presented projects of maneuvers to be made with those
somebody. Kutuzov merely shrugged his shoulders when one after
must be horrible and senseless--was the very time to fight and conquer
reason to capture a king or a duke--it seemed that now--when any battle
who wished to distinguish themselves, to astonish somebody, and for some
But to the generals, especially the foreign ones in the Russian army,

the rapidity of which was unparalleled for such a time of the year.
same time he like the soldiers realized all the hardship of this march,
beaten, that the enemy was flying and must be driven out; but at the
his Russian being--what every Russian soldier felt: that the French were
Kutuzov felt and knew--not by reasoning or science but with the whole of

intermittently but so consistently that he never once deviated from it.
directed during the whole campaign from Moscow to Vilna--not casually or
aim was to shorten those marches. To that end Kutuzov's activity was
the army and a lengthening of its marches, whereas the only reasonable
the artful maneuvers suggested by our generals meant fresh movements of
at some distance could one cut across the zigzag path of the French. All
their heels the greater distance they had to cover. Only by following
French would take was unknown, and so the closer our troops trod on
The aim of the Russian army was to pursue the French. The road the
reason for slackening the pace and delaying presented itself to Kutuzov.
army caused by the rapidity of the advance had become evident, another
But besides this, since the exhaustion and enormous diminution of the

army.
Tarutino and Vyazma, to hastening it on while easing the movement of our
army generals, directed his whole activity here, as he had done at
movement of the French as was desired in Petersburg and by the Russian
Kutuzov as far as was in his power, instead of trying to check the

corresponding decrease of the Russian army.
the rapidity of its movement, and a convincing proof of this is the
own people. The chief cause of the wastage of Napoleon's army was
in enemy hands while the sick Russians left behind were among their
as hung over the French, and that the sick Frenchmen were left behind
the Russian army moved voluntarily, with no such threat of destruction
as the flight of the French was to theirs. The only difference was that
The rapidity of the Russian pursuit was just as destructive to our army

hundred thousand strong reached Krasnoe with only fifty thousand.
less than a hundred prisoners, the Russian army which left that place a
losing more than five thousand killed and wounded after Tarutino and
necessary to grasp clearly the meaning of the fact that, while not
To realize the degree of exhaustion of the Russian army it is only

faster.
at the rate of twenty-seven miles a day that they could not go any
The men in the Russian army were so worn out by this continuous marching

information received of the movements of the French was never reliable.
not keep up with them; cavalry and artillery horses broke down, and the
flight was so rapid that the Russian army pursuing the French could
who pursued them, continued as far as Krasnoe without a battle. The
so on, the farther movement of the fleeing French, and of the Russians
back his troops in their anxiety to overwhelm and cut off the enemy and
After the encounter at Vyazma, where Kutuzov had been unable to hold


CHAPTER IV





insisted on Natasha's going with her to consult the doctors.
At the end of January Princess Mary left for Moscow, and the count

from within.
it would soon no longer be seen or noticed. The wound had begun to heal
cover with their living verdure the grief that weighed her down that
young shoots of grass were already sprouting, which taking root would so
of slime that covered her soul and seemed to her impenetrable, delicate
She did not know and would not have believed it, but beneath the layer

to herself.
chest tones in which she had been wont to sing, and listened attentively
again--though she could hear Dunyasha coming--called her in the deep
Another time when she called Dunyasha her voice trembled, so she called

then, testing her strength, ran upstairs again, observing the result.
Unconsciously she immediately invented a reason for going down, and
One day she went quickly upstairs and found herself out of breath.

her that things must be so, and yet it was dreadfully sad.
drawn and, as it seemed to her, piteous face in her glass. It seemed to
carefully, surprised at its thinness, and in the morning noticed her
and loss of good looks, and involuntarily she examined her bare arm
suddenly overcome by fear not only of death but of sickness, weakness,
talked about her health, and this pleased her. But sometimes she was
Natasha had grown thin and pale and physically so weak that they all

conscious of it.
the effect of making them gradually begin to forget him without being
thought) their exalted feelings by words; but this silence about him had
Just as before, they never mentioned him so as not to lower (as they

life: belief in life and its enjoyment.
youth, there also opened out a new and hitherto uncomprehended side of
Princess Mary, listening to Natasha's tales of childhood and early
and loved in another those previously incomprehensible virtues. For
own life, for she was accustomed to seek other joys, but she understood
her. She did not think of applying submission and self-abnegation to her
past too and to understand a side of life previously incomprehensible to
feeling herself bound to Princess Mary by affection, learned to love her
devotion, submission, and the poetry of Christian self-sacrifice, now
lack of understanding had formerly turned away from that life of
mother, her father, and her daydreams; and Natasha, who with a passive
of what was long past. Princess Mary spoke of her childhood, of her
in bed they would begin talking and go on till morning. They spoke most
Sometimes they were silent for hours; sometimes after they were already

feeling of life being possible only in each other's presence.
feeling stronger than friendship sprang up between them; an exclusive
with one another than either of them felt with herself when alone. A
restless and hastened to rejoin her. Together they felt more in harmony
spent most of their time together. When one went out the other became
were continually kissing and saying tender things to one another and
between women was established between Princess Mary and Natasha. They
From that day a tender and passionate friendship such as exists only

Princess Mary feel shy but happy by this demonstration of her feelings.
And Natasha, embracing her, began kissing her face and hands, making

Let us be quite, quite friends."
"Mary, you mustn't think me wicked. No? Mary darling, how I love you!
"Mary," she said timidly, drawing Princess Mary's hand to herself,

does she think about me? Yes, she is splendid!"
is in her heart? All that is good. But how? What is her mind like? What
is quite original, strange, new, and unknown. And she loves me. What
"Is she like him?" thought Natasha. "Yes, like and yet not like. But she

Princess Mary's face.
Natasha lay on the bed and in the semidarkness of the room scanned

"She is much better. She spoke so well today," said Princess Mary.

"No, no. Why did you bring me away? She will be asking for me."

"You are tired--try to sleep."

"I don't want to sleep, Mary, sit by me a little."

called her back.
but when Princess Mary had drawn the blinds and was going away she
her to her own room and made her lie down on the bed. Natasha lay down,
One afternoon noticing Natasha shivering with fever, Princess Mary took

had strained Natasha's physical strength.
she had been a sick child. The last weeks passed in her mother's bedroom
put off her departure, and for three weeks looked after Natasha as if
this new sorrow brought them still closer to one another. Princess Mary
Prince Andrew's last days had bound Princess Mary and Natasha together;

life--love--was still active within her. Love awoke and so did life.
but her love for her mother unexpectedly showed her that the essence of
Natasha's wound healed in that way. She thought her life was ended,

heal completely only as the result of a vital force from within.
heal and its edges join, physical and spiritual wounds alike can yet
a physical wound and, strange as it may seem, just as a deep wound may
A spiritual wound produced by a rending of the spiritual body is like

almost killed the countess, this second blow, restored Natasha to life.
a listless old woman taking no interest in life. But the same blow that
a fresh and vigorous woman of fifty, but a month later she left her room
her half her life. When the news of Petya's death had come she had been
The mother's wounded spirit could not heal. Petya's death had torn from

mother.
because the mere sound of her tender, caressing tones soothed her
in her room, making her eat and drink, and talking to her incessantly
remained constantly at her mother's side, sleeping on a lounge chair
restrain her mother from unreasoning despair. For three weeks Natasha
replace Natasha but could not. They saw that she alone was able to
Princess Mary postponed her departure. Sonya and the count tried to


CHAPTER III





time.
And embracing her daughter, the countess began to weep for the first

"Natasha, he is no more, no more!"

"Mamma! What are you saying..."

manly," continued the countess, taking her daughter's hand.
Natasha went up to her. "You have improved in looks and grown more
"How glad I am you have come. You are tired. Won't you have some tea?"

sitting up in bed and speaking softly.
but opened them again on hearing the bedstead creak. The countess was
and Natasha rested her head on the arm of her chair and closed her eyes,
During the third night the countess kept very quiet for a few minutes,

every moment, not explaining or consoling, but recalling her to life.
persevering and patient love seemed completely to surround the countess
next day and night. She did not sleep and did not leave her mother. Her
Natasha did not remember how that day passed nor that night, nor the

of life, escaped from reality into a world of delirium.
believe that she could live when her beloved boy was killed in the bloom
And again in a futile struggle with reality her mother, refusing to

mother.
find some way of taking on herself the excess of grief that crushed her
"My darling Mummy!" she repeated, straining all the power of her love to

nothing but love and an entreaty for forgiveness.
Natasha looked at her with eyes full of tears and in her look there was

you would not deceive me? You'll tell me the whole truth?"
"Natasha, you love me?" she said in a soft trustful whisper. "Natasha,

daughter's face which was wincing with pain and gazed long at it.
daughter's head with all her strength. Then she turned toward her
glanced vacantly around her, and seeing Natasha began to press her
quiet for a moment. Suddenly she sat up with unaccustomed swiftness,
The countess pressed her daughter's hand, closed her eyes, and became

irrepressible and streaming tears tickling her nose and cheeks.
incessantly, kissing her head, her hands, her face, and feeling her own
"My dearest darling... Mummy, my precious!..." she whispered

mother's dress.
demanded a pillow and hot water, and unfastened and tore open her
She did not let go of her mother but struggled tenderly with her,

whispering, not pausing an instant.
"Mummy!... darling!... I am here, my dearest Mummy," she kept on

herself, and clung to her.
her, and with unexpected strength raised her, turned her face toward
Natasha put one knee on the armchair, stooped over her mother, embraced

It's not true!"
away. "Go away, all of you; it's not true! Killed!... ha, ha, ha!...
true... He's lying... Natasha!" she shrieked, pushing those around her
"Natasha! Natasha!..." cried the countess. "It's not true... it's not

maids were holding her arms.
stretching out and beating her head against the wall. Sonya and the
The countess was lying in an armchair in a strange and awkward position,

to her mother.
at the door for an instant as if struggling with herself, and then ran
Natasha neither saw nor heard her. She went in with rapid steps, pausing
from that room and taking Natasha by the arm said something to her.
mother's door. Princess Mary, pale and with quivering chin, came out
She ran to her father, but he feebly waved his arm, pointing to her

door, made her immediately forget herself and her own grief.
father, the terribly wild cries of her mother that she heard through the
constraint that had prevented her taking part in life. The sight of her
was immediately followed by a feeling of release from the oppressive
something was being torn inside her and she were dying. But the pain
Terrible anguish struck her heart, she felt a dreadful ache as if
Suddenly an electric shock seemed to run through Natasha's whole being.

it, covering his face with his hands.
and quickly shuffling on his feeble legs to a chair, he almost fell into
"Pe... Petya... Go, go, she... is calling..." and weeping like a child

burst into convulsively painful sobs that distorted his soft round face.
choking him. When he saw Natasha he waved his arms despairingly and
had evidently run out of that room to give vent to the sobs that were
her mother's room. His face was puckered up and wet with tears. He
As she entered the ballroom her father was hurriedly coming out of

their own old, quiet, and commonplace life," thought Natasha.
"What misfortune? What misfortune can happen to them? They just live

them.
Dunyasha's words about Peter Ilynich and a misfortune, but did not grasp
merely indifferent to them but regarded them with hostility. She heard
the world in which she had been living of late, and she felt not
so commonplace, that all their words and feelings seemed an insult to
them--her father, mother, and Sonya--were so near to her, so familiar,
a special estrangement from the members of her own family. All of
Besides a feeling of aloofness from everybody Natasha was feeling


CHAPTER II





with a sob.
look. "A misfortune... about Peter Ilynich... a letter," she finished
"Come to your Papa at once, please!" said she with a strange, excited

on her face and showing no concern for her mistress.
her maid, entered the room quickly and abruptly with a frightened look
loud rattle of the door handle struck painfully on her ears. Dunyasha,
when it seemed that the incomprehensible was revealing itself to her a
it seemed to her she was penetrating the mystery.... But at the instant
strained frown she peered toward the world where he was. And now, now
Again everything was shrouded in hard, dry perplexity, and again with a
eyes; then she suddenly asked herself to whom she was saying this.
She was overcome by sweet sorrow and tears were already rising in her

desperate effort...
she said, convulsively pressing her hands and setting her teeth with a
said then but only spoke now: "I love thee!... thee! I love, love..."
imagination she said other tender and loving words which she might have
pressed it that terrible evening four days before his death. And in her
happiness for me," and he took her hand and pressed it as he had
there is nothing in life but you, and to suffer with you is the greatest
him and said: "Terrible for you, but not for me! You know that for me
imagination Natasha this time gave him a different answer. She stopped
now he again seemed to be saying the same words to her, only in her
it. And now it will never, never be possible to put it right." And
nothing... nobody. Did he know that? No, he did not and never will know
I should have been happy compared with what I am now. Now there is
said: even if he had to go on dying, to die continually before my eyes,
I thought quite differently. Had I said what I thought, I should have
And I said it so awkwardly and stupidly! I did not say what I meant.
would be dreadful for me. He then still wished to live and feared death.
been dreadful for him, but he understood it differently. He thought it
he always continued to suffer. I said it then only because it would have
"I agreed," Natasha now said to herself, "that it would be dreadful if

gaze.
and understood the meaning of the rebuke and despair in that protracted
had then felt. She recalled his long sad and severe look at those words
She now saw him from the commencement of that scene and relived what she

well--quite well."
she would say. She said: "This can't go on--it won't. You will get
at her. Natasha as usual answered before she had time to think what
suffering man. It would be continual torture." And he looked searchingly
"One thing would be terrible," said he: "to bind oneself forever to a

watching him, raised his eyes, and began to speak seriously:
does he feel? How does it hurt him?" thought Natasha. He noticed her
terrible pain. "What is that pain like? Why does he have that pain? What
just perceptibly, but rapidly. Natasha knows that he is struggling with
wrinkle comes and goes on his pale forehead. One of his legs twitches
shoulders raised. His lips are firmly closed, his eyes glitter, and a
his head on his thin pale hand. His chest is dreadfully hollow and his
There he is lying back in an armchair in his velvet cloak, leaning

sometimes devised other words they might have spoken.
She saw his face, heard his voice, repeated his words and her own, and

at Mytishchi, at Troitsa, and at Yaroslavl.
otherwise than as he had been here. She now saw him again as he had been
She was gazing where she knew him to be; but she could not imagine him

and indignity.
life, where everything was either emptiness and desolation or suffering
was now nearer and more akin and more comprehensible than this side of
thought and which had formerly seemed to her so far away and improbable,
of life. And that other side of life, of which she had never before
She was gazing in the direction in which he had gone--to the other side

door.
smoothing out the end of her sash while she looked at a corner of the
crouched feet and all in the corner of her sofa, nervously crumpling and
black woolen gown, her plaited hair negligently twisted into a knot, was
One day toward the end of December Natasha, pale and thin, dressed in a

spiritual gaze was fixed.
on which--with a terrible questioning too great for her strength--her
She felt all the time as if she might at any moment penetrate that

intruder to go.
picked up a book or some sewing, evidently waiting impatiently for the
entered she got up quickly, changed her position and expression, and
and tormented her but she was in absolute need of it. As soon as anyone
fixedly at whatever her eyes chanced to fall on. This solitude exhausted
something with her slender nervous fingers and gazing intently and
up feet and all in the corner of the sofa, tearing and twisting
Natasha spent most of the time in her room by herself, sitting huddled
After she felt herself deserted by Princes Mary and alone in her grief,

of sorrow.
difficulty refraining from tears of vexation and irritation rather than
her. "Do please just leave me alone!" And she ran out of the room, with
"I am not going anywhere," Natasha replied when this was proposed to

advice of Moscow doctors would be good for her.
losing strength every day and thought that a change of scene and the
and both parents gladly accepted this offer, for they saw their daughter
Princess Mary asked the countess to let Natasha go with her to Moscow,

preparations for departure, held aloof from her too.
Natasha remained alone and, from the time Princess Mary began making

made preparations for the journey to Moscow.
Alpatych, conferred with Dessalles about her nephew, and gave orders and
involuntarily yielded to them. She went through the accounts with
Natasha alone, yet the cares of life demanded her attention and she
had lived till then, and sorry and almost ashamed as she felt to leave
Mary to emerge from the realm of secluded contemplation in which she
stand still and it was necessary to live. Hard as it was for Princess
had remained uninjured and needed only slight repairs. Life did not
should return to Moscow to the house on the Vozdvizhenka Street, which
on the state of their affairs and with advice and suggestions that they
was damp and he began to cough; Alpatych came to Yaroslavl with reports
which she had to reply; the room in which little Nicholas had been put
for the first fortnight. She received letters from her relations to
be called back to life from that realm of sorrow in which she had dwelt
her own fate and guardian and instructor of her nephew, was the first to
Princess Mary, in her position as absolute and independent arbiter of
But pure and complete sorrow is as impossible as pure and complete joy.

still greater purity and clearness what they were both feeling.
boundary of what they might not mention--brought before their minds with
that might lead up to the subject--this halting on all sides at the
Continued abstention from speech, and constant avoidance of everything

their eyes.
majesty and sacredness of the mystery that had been accomplished before
words, and that any reference to the details of his life infringed the
what they had lived through and experienced could not be expressed in
they avoid anything relating to him who was dead. It seemed to them that
a future seemed to them to insult his memory. Still more carefully did
Both avoided any allusion to the future. To admit the possibility of

unimportant matters.
They spoke little even to one another, and when they did it was of very
Only when alone together were they free from such outrage and pain.

them.
mysterious limitless vistas that for an instant had opened out before
resounded in their imagination, and hindered their gazing into those
they both tried to listen to the stern and dreadful choir that still
irritated the wound, interrupting that necessary quiet in which
word of insincere or feeble sympathy, seemed an insult, painfully
dinner, the maid's inquiry what dress to prepare, or worse still any
Everything: a carriage passing rapidly in the street, a summons to
carefully guarded their open wounds from any rough and painful contact.
death that overhung them, they dared not look life in the face. They
Drooping in spirit and closing their eyes before the menacing cloud of
After Prince Andrew's death Natasha and Princess Mary alike felt this.

aches and shrinks at any external irritating touch.
like a physical wound is sometimes fatal and sometimes heals, but always
the extinction of life there is a severance, a spiritual wound, which
beloved and intimate human being that is dying, besides this horror at
similar to his own is perishing before his eyes. But when it is a
When seeing a dying animal a man feels a sense of horror: substance


CHAPTER I





BOOK FIFTEEN: 1812 - 13





menace than to strike the running animal on the head.
experienced driver knew it was better to hold the whip raised as a
The Russian army had to act like a whip to a running animal. And the

ready to use its strength in case their movement stopped.
thirdly by the fact that a large Russian army was following the French,
attained by the guerrilla warfare which was destroying the French, and
and so it was only necessary not to stop their flight. Secondly it was
was attained in the first place of itself, as the French ran away,
The people had a single aim: to free their land from invasion. That aim

senseless and unattainable.
the imaginations of a dozen people. It could not exist because it was
The aim of cutting off Napoleon and his army never existed except in

easily and simply receive an immediate and certain solution.
direct part in the events, and all the questions that seemed insoluble
consider the movement of those hundreds of thousands of men who took a
Yet one need only discard the study of the reports and general plans and

their investigation.
does not even interest them, for it does not come within the range of
of those fifty thousand men who were left in hospitals and in graves
surmises and the rewards this or that general received; but the question
To them the words of Miloradovich seem very interesting, and so do their

and sentiments of various generals, and not the history of the events.
dealing with the matter have written the history of the beautiful words
facts and the historical accounts only arises because the historians
All that strange contradiction now difficult to understand between the

do what was impossible.
because other Russians, sitting in warm rooms, proposed that they should
done to attain an end worthy of the nation, and they are not to blame
The Russians, half of whom died, did all that could and should have been

French and so on and so on.
in snow) to somewhere else, and how so-and-so "routed" and "cut off" the
another place, and Chichagov should have crossed (more than knee-deep
should have made a flank march to such and such a place, Tormasov to
period of the campaign that the historians tell us how Miloradovich
cold, when half the army perished in a single month--it is of this
months, where they were every moment fighting death from hunger and
discipline fails, not for a few hours only as in a battle, but for
maintained, when men were taken into that region of death where
the rest was night in which the influence of discipline cannot be
of frost, when there were only seven or eight hours of daylight and
was camping out at night for months in the snow with fifteen degrees
and sheepskin coats, was short of provisions and without vodka, and
And it is of this period of the campaign--when the army lacked boots

without a battle.
population of a large provincial town. Half the men fell out of the army
lost fifty thousand sick or stragglers, that is a number equal to the
During the movement of the Russian army from Tarutino to Krasnoe it

itself.
strength to the utmost and could not have done more without destroying
in 1812, and the Russian army in its pursuit of the French strained its
began has a war been fought under such conditions as those that obtained
Fourthly and chiefly it was impossible, because never since the world

them in flight or captivity alike.
consider that this suited them, since death by hunger and cold awaited
tactics, as the Germans did. But the French troops quite rightly did not
prisoners if they surrender according to the rules of strategy and
to catch a swallow if it settles on one's hand. Men can only be taken
prisoners if they agree to be captured, just as it is only possible
example of Krasnoe and of the Berezina. It is only possible to capture
be seen, as the military scientists might convince themselves by the
plenty of room to avoid capture and there is the night when nothing can
off an army--to bar its road--is quite impossible, for there is always
meaning. One can cut off a slice of bread, but not an army. To cut
Thirdly it was impossible, because the military term "to cut off" has no

Russians possessed would have been required.
Napoleon's army was retiring, incomparably greater forces than the
Secondly it was impossible, because to paralyze the momentum with which

desired results.
remarked that diversions planned over great distances do not yield the
impossibility, as in fact thought Kutuzov, who when he received the plan
on time at an appointed place was so remote as to be tantamount to
probability of Chichagov, Kutuzov, and Wittgenstein effecting a junction
movement of columns on a battlefield never coincides with the plans--the
It was impossible first because--as experience shows that a three-mile

been senseless, it was impossible.
But besides the fact that cutting off Napoleon with his army would have

they who had suffered from the trampled beds.
that could be said for those who drew up this project, for it was not
in excuse of that gardener would be that he was very angry. But not even
run to the gate and hit the cow on the head. The only thing to be said
his garden a cow that had trampled down the beds he had planted, should
army were like the plan of a market gardener who, when driving out of
All the profound plans about cutting off and capturing Napoleon and his

already taken were perishing of hunger.
when our men were not always getting full rations and the prisoners
division would have been needed to convoy the corps of prisoners, and
own army had melted away to half before reaching Krasnoe and a whole
would have been the wish to capture army corps of the French, when our
the time (Joseph de Maistre and others) recognized. Still more senseless
degree embarrassing for the Russians, as the most adroit diplomatists of
Emperor, kings, and dukes--whose capture would have been in the highest
Fourthly, it would have been senseless to wish to take captive the

did in December, namely a hundredth part of the original army.
blocked, it could not carry across the frontier more than it actually
was destroying itself at such a rate that, though its path was not
order to destroy the French army, which without external interference
Thirdly, it would have been senseless to sacrifice one's own troops in

whole energy was directed to flight.
Secondly, it would have been senseless to block the passage of men whose

possibly could?
various operations on the French who were running away as fast as they
doing just what every Russian desired. So what was the use of performing
army was flying from Russia with all possible speed, that is to say, was
It would have been senseless, first because Napoleon's disorganized

senseless and its attainment quite impossible.
There never was or could have been such an aim, for it would have been

cutting off and capturing Napoleon with his marshals and his army.
last period of the war of 1812 an aim that never existed, namely that of
from memoirs, reports, projects, and so forth, have attributed to this
studying the events from the letters of the sovereigns and the generals,
The source of this contradiction lies in the fact that the historians

liberation of their country.
of Russian defeats led to the total destruction of their enemy and the
victories brought the French complete destruction, while the series
conclusion involves a contradiction, since the series of French
But putting national vanity entirely aside one feels that such a

Napoleon and defeats for Kutuzov.
that the French retreat from Moscow was a series of victories for
rhapsodies about valor, devotion, and so forth, must reluctantly admit
of logic must admit that conclusion, and in spite of their lyrical
The Russian military historians in so far as they submit to claims

historians.
series of victories, and quite wrongly considered victorious by Russian
period of the campaign is quite rightly considered by the French to be a
all attempts to attain it were most shamefully baffled--then this last
Napoleon and his marshals--and that aim was not merely frustrated but
If the aim of the Russians consisted in cutting off and capturing

superior?
by the disorganized crowds of the French when it was numerically
enemy in full strength at Borodino--defeated at Krasnoe and the Berezina
Why was the Russian army--which with inferior forces had withstood the

Vyazma and Tarutino.
for we know that he could not restrain the troops from attacking at
historians (to the effect that Kutuzov hindered an attack) is unfounded,
The explanation of this strange fact given by Russian military

the Russians aimed at.
with its marshals, kings, and Emperor was not captured, if that was what
at the Berezina (in both cases we had superior forces), the French army
why, the position of the Russian army being what it was at Krasnoe and
were the cause of the Russian failures, it is still incomprehensible
punished? But even if we admitted that Kutuzov, Chichagov, and others
guilty of not carrying out a prearranged plan were they not tried and
But why did they not execute those maneuvers? And why if they were

this man and that man, did not execute such and such maneuvers...
says that this occurred because Kutuzov and Tormasov and Chichagov, and
History (or what is called by that name) replying to these questions

that happen?
surrounded them with superior forces we could not beat them? How could
them? Can the French be so enormously superior to us that when we had
had surrounded the French on three sides and when its aim was to capture
French had given battle at Borodino, did not achieve its purpose when it
How was it that the Russian army, which when numerically weaker than the

capture them all?
the aim of the Russians was to stop the French, to cut them off, and
and freezing, surrendered in crowds, and when (as the historians relate)
surrounded them in superior numbers, when the disordered French, hungry
that the French were not all captured or destroyed when our three armies
dissatisfaction, and perplexity? Who has not asked himself how it is
of 1812, has not experienced an uncomfortable feeling of regret,
What Russian, reading the account of the last part of the campaign


CHAPTER XIX





goodness, and truth are absent.
actions are incommensurable. And there is no greatness where simplicity,
For us with the standard of good and evil given us by Christ, no human

and immeasurable meanness.
the standard of right and wrong is merely to admit one's own nothingness
And it occurs to no one that to admit a greatness not commensurable with


    * "From the sublime to the ridiculous is but a step."


il n'y a qu'un pas.
repeating: "Sublime! Grand! Napoleon le Grand!" Du sublime au ridicule
a qu'un pas," * said he. And the whole world for fifty years has been
"Du sublime (he saw something sublime in himself) au ridicule il n'y


     * (2) That it is great.

     * "It is great."


grand, *(2) and his soul is tranquil.
but were (in his opinion) men he had brought there, feels que c'est
fur coat and leaving to perish those who were not merely his comrades
special animals called "heroes." And Napoleon, escaping home in a warm
grand is bad. Grand is the characteristic, in their conception, of some
good or evil but only "grand" and "not grand." Grand is good, not
"C'est grand!" * say the historians, and there no longer exists either

atrocity for which a "great" man can be blamed.
of right and wrong. For the "great" man nothing is wrong, there is no
conception of "greatness." "Greatness," it seems, excludes the standards
that humanity calls right or even just, the historians produce a saving
ratiocination any farther, when actions are clearly contrary to all
When it is impossible to stretch the very elastic threads of historical

historians' language.
is taught to be ashamed of--even that act finds justification in the
ordinary language as the lowest depth of baseness which every child
characteristic of genius. Even that final running away, described in
army is presented to us by the historians as something great and
And lastly, the final departure of the great Emperor from his heroic

Orsha, abandoning standards, artillery, and nine tenths of his men.
night around through the forest and across the Dnieper and escaped to
of Ney--a greatness of soul consisting in this: that he made his way by
Then we are told of the greatness of soul of the marshals, especially


     the general."
     * "I have acted the Emperor long enough; it is time to act


scattered fragments of the army he left behind.
nevertheless immediately ran away again, abandoning to its fate the
"J'ai assez fait l'empereur; il est temps de faire le general," * but

and said:
and take personal command, and to have walked about with a birch stick
described, where he is reported to have been prepared to accept battle
his retreat from Smolensk to Orsha. Then his heroism at Krasnoe is
considerations. Similarly profound considerations are given for
a devastated road--is explained to us as being due to profound
which Kutuzov afterwards pursued him--this unnecessary retreat along
well-supplied district and the parallel road was open to him along
The retreat from Malo-Yaroslavets when he had a free road into a

military genius shown by his marshals.
maneuvers, and his profound plans which guided the army, as well as the
campaign, and everywhere are described Napoleon's arrangements, the
no! Mountains of books have been written by the historians about this
impossible to make the story of the retreat fit their theory. But
the actions of the mass to the will of one man, would have found it
regarding this period of the campaign the historians, who attributed
movements of the crowd had any sense. So one might have thought that
the Kaluga road to the day their leader fled from the army, none of the
all they could to destroy themselves. From the time they turned onto
This campaign consisted in a flight of the French during which they did


CHAPTER XVIII





leaving those who could not to surrender or die.
abandoning his companions. The others who could do so drove away too,
fur coat and, having seated himself in a sleigh, galloped on alone,
who got across the river fled farther. Their supreme chief donned a
became disorganized, many were drowned and many surrendered, but those
at blindman's buff with the pursuing army. At the Berezina they again
From Orsha they fled farther along the road to Vilna, still playing

Dnieper at night by stealth at a wooded spot.
having abandoned all the rest and all his cannon, and having crossed the
thousand men, reached Napoleon at Orsha with only one thousand men left,
against which they had hurt themselves. Ney, who had had a corps of ten
plight of the French or because of it, they wished to punish the floor
Smolensk which were in nobody's way, because despite the unfortunate
Ney, who came last, had been busying himself blowing up the walls of

getting past the Russians by night by making semicircles to the right.
all their heavy baggage, their artillery, and half their men, and fled,
gauntlet of the Russian army. They abandoned one another, abandoned
(the vice-king's), then Davout's, and then Ney's--ran, as it were, the
Then for three days separate portions of the French army--first Murat's
resumed their flight, abandoning their comrades who were farther behind.
confusion and stopped short from the sudden fright, but then they
our vanguard. Seeing their enemy unexpectedly the French fell into
Krasnoe. And here as in a game of blindman's buff the French ran into
do--themselves turned to the right and came out onto the highroad at
beyond the Dnieper--which was the only reasonable thing for him to
Russian army, expecting Napoleon to take the road to the right
front of them all fled the Emperor, then the kings, then the dukes. The
in their flight and spread out over a distance of twenty-four hours. In
Expecting the enemy from behind and not in front, the French separated

Krasnoe and Orsha.
to the right nor to the left but along the old--the worst--road, through
maneuvers or plans, again began running along the beaten track, neither
undertaken something new. But after a four days' halt the mob, with no
the enemy was, might have arranged some more advantageous plan and
that during their stay of four days they might have learned where
different roads available for the French, and one would have thought
One army fled and the other pursued. Beyond Smolensk there were several

days' march farther on and in quite another position.
third day when something could have been done, that army was already two
that the enemy had been in a certain position the day before, by the
obtained could not be delivered in time. If news was received one day
and rapid change of position by each army, even what information was
scouting--was not available. Besides, as a result of the frequent
of approximately ascertaining the enemy's position--by cavalry
and the consequent exhaustion of the horses, the chief means
Owing to the rapidity of the French flight and the Russian pursuit

often thinking they were escaping ran right into the Russians.
Smolensk road they ran holding the clapper of their bell tight--and
armies made their presence known, but later when they reached the
At first while they were still moving along the Kaluga road, Napoleon's

escape runs straight into his opponent's arms.
a tight place he runs away as quietly as he can, and often thinking to
whereabouts. First he rings his bell fearlessly, but when he gets into
them occasionally rings a little bell to inform the catcher of his
blindman's bluff, in which two players are blindfolded and one of
from Moscow back to the Niemen were like those in a game of Russian
The movements of the Russian and French armies during the campaign


CHAPTER XVII





himself.
was thinking only of himself and of how to get away quickly and save
pay. And though they pretended to be concerned about the army, each
miserable wretches who had done much evil for which they had now to
another Majesties, Highnesses, or Cousins, they all felt that they were
for they could not be carried out, and though they entitled one
orders and reports were only on paper, nothing in them was acted upon
sire, mon cousin, prince d'Eckmuhl, roi de Naples, and so on. But these
commands, letters, reports, and orders of the day; called one another
him. But still he and those about him retained their old habits: wrote
did that genius, Napoleon, know it, for no one issued any orders to
They all went without knowing whither or why they were going. Still less

and when everything had been plundered fled farther.
French, searching for food, killed one another, sacked their own stores,
After staggering into Smolensk which seemed to them a promised land, the


November 9: twenty miles from Smolensk.

control in case of an engagement.
unless a prompt remedy is applied the troops will no longer be under
state of things is continually becoming worse and makes one fear that
Many have died these last days on the road or at the bivouacs. This
hunger and fatigue, need these supplies as well as a few days' rest.
in proportion to the present forces. The soldiers, who are worn out with
cavalry, unnecessary baggage, and artillery material that is no longer
and should first of all be freed from ineffectives, such as dismounted
Majesty's service demands that the army should be rallied at Smolensk
of affairs, whatever your ultimate plans may be, the interest of Your
seen to throw away their cartridges and their arms. In such a state
they hope to recover. During the last few days many of the men have been
escape discipline. In general they regard Smolensk as the place where
go off by themselves in different directions hoping to find food and
of the soldiers remain with the standards of their regiments, the others
two or three days' march. They are almost disbanded. Scarcely a quarter
corps I have had occasion to observe during different stages of the last
I deem it my duty to report to Your Majesty the condition of the various


he said:
from the truth in describing the condition of an army) and this is what
Emperor (we know how far commanding officers allow themselves to diverge
together into one mass, and so went on to the end. Berthier wrote to his
Beyond Vyazma the French army instead of moving in three columns huddled
the pursuit, the barring of the way, or any other particular conditions.
Vilna--independently of the greater or lesser intensity of the cold,
to Smolensk, from Smolensk to the Berezina, and from the Berezina to
away and perished at the same rate from Moscow to Vyazma, from Vyazma
progression could be determined mathematically. The French army melted
had fallen in battle. From this beginning the succeeding terms of the
was reduced to thirty-six thousand, though not more than five thousand
reckoning the Guards (who did nothing during the whole war but pillage)
From Moscow to Vyazma the French army of seventy-three thousand men not

essentially as before.
the process of the flight and disintegration of the French army went on
property that had been stolen by the Emperor, kings, and dukes; but
with people dressed in furs continued to drive past, carrying away the
or roasting themselves to death at the campfires, while carriages
the French assumed a still more tragic character, with men freezing,
After the twenty-eighth of October when the frosts began, the flight of


CHAPTER XVI





in the garden.
who were carrying the body of Petya Rostov to a hole that had been dug
Denisov, bareheaded and with a gloomy face, walked behind some Cossacks


    * "Get along, get along!"


flashed with a cruel light.
from the French, and when his eyes met those of the prisoners they
"Filez, filez!" * Dolokhov kept saying, having adopted this expression

"The second hundred," replied the Cossack.

"How many?" Dolokhov asked the Cossack.

marking off each hundred with a chalk line on the gate.
opposite side stood Dolokhov's Cossack, counting the prisoners and
with cold glassy eyes that boded no good, they became silent. On the
Dolokhov who gently switched his boots with his whip and watched them
happened, were talking loudly among themselves, but as they passed
of disarmed Frenchmen pass by. The French, excited by all that had
Dolokhov stood at the gate of the ruined house, letting a crowd

approached him, and kissed him, weeping.
among them and could not utter a word. He hugged the first soldier who
clothes, another boots, and a third bread. Pierre sobbed as he sat
The hussars and Cossacks crowded round the prisoners; one offered them

they embraced Cossacks and hussars.
"Brothers! Dear fellows! Darlings!" old soldiers exclaimed, weeping, as

around he heard his comrades sobbing with joy.
For a long time he could not understand what was happening to him. All

Russians surrounded Pierre.
"The Cossacks!" one of them shouted, and a moment later a crowd of

French soldiers were running past him.
Before sunrise he was awakened by shouts and loud and rapid firing.

globe, and he sank into water so that it closed over his head.
summertime mingled with memories of bathing and of the liquid, vibrating
from them, Pierre closed his eyes, seeing a vision of the country in
without linking up the events of the day or drawing a conclusion
with a beautiful Polish lady on the veranda of his house in Kiev. And
why, the recollection came to his mind of a summer evening he had spent
that Karataev had been killed, but just at that instant, he knew not
Karataev's absence at this halt--and he was on the point of realizing
Frenchmen as they ran past him, of the lowered and smoking gun, and of
heard from that spot, of the dog's howl, of the guilty faces of the two
the look Platon had given him as he sat under the tree, of the shot
Suddenly and simultaneously a crowd of memories awoke in his fancy--of

"Ah, he's come?" said Pierre. "And Plat-" he began, but did not finish.

sitting beside the soldier, wagging its tail.
with his hand. Looking more closely Pierre recognized the blue-gray dog,
Frenchman had pushed away, was sitting near the fire patting something
away and gazed into the darkness. A prisoner, the Russian soldier the
And twisting the ramrod he looked gloomily at Pierre, who turned

who stood behind him. "Brigand! Get away!"
"It's all the same to him," he muttered, turning quickly to a soldier

the charcoal.
brown morose face with frowning brows was clearly visible by the glow of
hairy, red hands with their short fingers deftly turned the ramrod. His
of meat stuck on a ramrod. His sleeves were rolled up and his sinewy,
soldier away was squatting by the fire, engaged in roasting a piece
He lifted himself and sat up. A Frenchman who had just pushed a Russian

"Do you understand, damn you?" shouted a voice, and Pierre woke up.

teacher.
has spread out and disappeared. Do you understand, my child?" said the
surface, sinks to the depths, and again emerges. There now, Karataev
Him to the greatest extent. And it grows, merges, disappears from the
"God is in the midst, and each drop tries to expand so as to reflect

it before?"
"How simple and clear it is," thought Pierre. "How is it I did not know

"That is life," said the old teacher.

sometimes destroyed it, and sometimes merged with it.
space as possible, but others striving to do the same compressed it,
dividing into many. Each drop tried to spread out and occupy as much
places, sometimes several of them merging into one, sometimes one
drops closely pressed together, and all these drops moved and changed
vibrating ball without fixed dimensions. Its whole surface consisted of
said the old man, and showed Pierre a globe. This globe was alive--a
who had given him geography lessons in Switzerland. "Wait a bit,"
And suddenly he saw vividly before him a long-forgotten, kindly old man

"Karataev!" came to Pierre's mind.

sufferings."
than all else is to love this life in one's sufferings, in innocent
of the divine. To love life is to love God. Harder and more blessed
movement is God. And while there is life there is joy in consciousness
"Life is everything. Life is God. Everything changes and moves and that

been expressed in his dream at Mozhaysk.
gave expression to his thoughts, and even to the same thoughts that had
Again real events mingled with dreams and again someone, he or another,

done at Mozhaysk after the battle of Borodino.
back to the fire, and immediately fell asleep. He again slept as he had
Pierre went up to the fire, ate some roast horseflesh, lay down with his
the village of Shamshevo. The men crowded together round the campfires.
The stores, the prisoners, and the marshal's baggage train stopped at


CHAPTER XV





just as Pierre did, but there was a set look on all their faces.
back at the place where the shot had been fired and the dog was howling,
His comrades, the prisoner soldiers walking beside him, avoided looking

"What a stupid beast! Why is it howling?" thought Pierre.
Behind him, where Karataev had been sitting, the dog began to howl.

drying it at the fire and how they had laughed at him.
remembered that, two days before, that man had burned his shirt while
the young soldier at the execution. Pierre looked at the soldier and
Pierre--there was something resembling what he had seen on the face of
in the expression on their faces--one of them glanced timidly at
whom carried a lowered and smoking gun. They both looked pale, and
he again started reckoning. Two French soldiers ran past Pierre, one of
Smolensk--a calculation he had begun before the marshal went by. And
had not yet finished reckoning up how many stages still remained to
Pierre heard it plainly, but at that moment he remembered that he
From behind, where Karataev had been sitting, came the sound of a shot.

but went limping up the hill.
Frenchmen were talking over his head. Pierre did not look round again
was still sitting at the side of the road under the birch tree and two
When the prisoners again went forward Pierre looked round. Karataev

did not notice that look and moved hastily away.
him. But Pierre was not sufficiently sure of himself. He made as if he
tears, evidently wishing him to come near that he might say something to
Karataev looked at Pierre with his kindly round eyes now filled with

expression of quiet solemnity.
the tale of the merchant who suffered innocently, there was now an
besides the look of joyful emotion it had worn yesterday while telling
He sat in his short overcoat leaning against a birch tree. On his face,
crowd, and Pierre saw Karataev whom he had not yet seen that morning.
While the marshal was passing, the prisoners had huddled together in a

"What did he say? What did he say?" Pierre heard them ask.

looked excited and worried.
formed a group and some soldiers crowded round them. Their faces all
red and frightened face, whipping up his skinny horse. Several officers
The general in charge of the stores galloped after the carriage with a

detected sympathy and a desire to conceal that sympathy.
the expression with which he frowned and looked away Pierre thought he
marshals. His eye fell on Pierre's large and striking figure, and in
tranquil look on his handsome, plump, white face. It was one of the
by. Pierre caught a glimpse of a man in a three-cornered hat with a
sleek cavalry passed, before a carriage drawn by six gray horses rattled
"The Emperor! The Emperor! The Marshal! The Duke!" and hardly had the

pushed off the road. The convoy formed up.
approach of those in authority. The prisoners thronged together and were
trot. The expression on all faces showed the tension people feel at the
smartly dressed cavalrymen on good horses, passing the prisoners at a
prisoners. From all sides came shouts of command, and from the left came
joyful and solemn was aroused among the soldiers of the convoy and the
A pleasant feeling of excitement and an expectation of something


    * "To your places."


"A vos places!" * suddenly cried a voice.


CHAPTER XIV





Karataev's face as he told it, and the mystic significance of that joy.
but by its mysterious significance: by the rapturous joy that lit up
And Pierre's soul was dimly but joyfully filled not by the story itself

gazing before him with a smile.
was, dear fellows!" Karataev concluded and sat for a long time silent,
trembled, "but God had already forgiven him--he was dead! That's how it
the Tsar!' so they began looking for him," here Karataev's lower jaw
man who has been suffering innocently and in vain? A paper has come from
paper arrived and they began to look for the old man. 'Where is the old
merchant free and give him a compensation that had been awarded. The
reached the Tsar. After a while the Tsar's decree came: to set the
papers all in due form--the authorities I mean--time passed. The affair
they were judging, what with one thing and another, filling in the
papers sent off in due form. The place was a long way off, and while
because of me.' So he confessed and it was all written down and the
'but what I am most sorry for is this old man. Don't let him suffer
authorities. 'I have taken six lives,' he says (he was a great sinner),
"What do you think, dear fellows? That murderer confessed to the
to tell contained the chief charm and the whole meaning of his story:
brightening more and more with a rapturous smile as if what he now had
and what do you think, dear friends?" Karataev continued, his face
sight. I suffer for my own sins,' and he wept bitter tears. Well,
"And the old man said, 'God will forgive you, we are all sinners in His

the logs together.
Karataev paused, smiling joyously as he gazed into the fire, and he drew

sake!'"
head while you were asleep. Forgive me, Daddy,' he says, 'for Christ's
nothing! I,' he says, 'did that deed, and I put the knife under your
lads, that this man,' he says, 'is being tortured innocently and for
'You are perishing because of me, Daddy,' he says. 'It's quite true,
So he comes up to the old man like this, and falls down at his feet!
and in what month?' He asked all about it and his heart began to ache.
killed the other merchant. 'Where did it happen, Daddy?' he said. 'When,
to weep. Now it happened that in the group was the very man who had
Only I am sorry for my old wife and the children,' and the old man began
don't grieve for myself,' he says, 'God, it seems, has chastened me.
property. 'And he went on to tell them all about it in due order. 'I
poorer brothers. I was a merchant, my dear brothers, and had much
anyone or taken anything that was not mine, but have only helped my
being punished for my own and other men's sins. But I have not killed
are you being punished for, Daddy?'--'I, my dear brothers,' said he, 'am
been a vagrant and had done nothing. So they asked the old man: 'What
taken two, a third had set a house on fire, while another had simply
had sinned against God. One told how he had taken a life, another had
them. And they began telling what each was suffering for, and how they
night the convicts were gathered just as we are, with the old man among
he should and doing no wrong. Only he prayed to God for death. Well, one
or more passed by. The old man was living as a convict, submitting as
"And so, brother" (it was at this point that Pierre came up), "ten years

he was sent to hard labor in Siberia.
his nostrils having been torn off, "all in due form" as Karataev put it,
was found under the old merchant's pillow. He was tried, knouted, and
companion was found robbed and with his throat cut. A bloodstained knife
Having put up at an inn they both went to sleep, and next morning his

to the Nizhni fair with a companion--a rich merchant.
who lived a good and God-fearing life with his family, and who went once
it communicated itself also to Pierre. The story was of an old merchant
something new, and the quiet rapture Karataev evidently felt as he told
emotion. But well as he knew it, Pierre now listened to that tale as to
to him alone some half-dozen times and always with a specially joyful
Pierre had long been familiar with that story. Karataev had told it

and a particularly happy light in his eyes, "you see, brother..."
"And so, brother," he continued, with a smile on his pale emaciated face

Platon, and at once resumed the story he had begun.
"How am I? If we grumble at sickness, God won't grant us death," replied

"Well, how are you?" he asked.

Platon.
but there was no other fire, and Pierre sat down, trying not to look at
feeling of pity for this man frightened him and he wished to go away,
brightly lit up by the blaze, he felt a painful prick at his heart. His
heard Platon's voice enfeebled by illness, and saw his pathetic face
his fever and particularly lively. When Pierre reached the fire and
was already past midnight, the hour when Karataev was usually free of
effective and pleasant though now feeble voice a story Pierre knew. It
his greatcoat as if it were a vestment, telling the soldiers in his
There Platon Karataev was sitting covered up--head and all--with
Pierre had got up and gone to the next one, which was burning better.
At their yesterday's halting place, feeling chilly by a dying campfire,

conversation with Karataev the day before.
comforting. This something was a most subtle spiritual deduction from a
deep within him his soul was occupied with something important and
It seemed to him that he was thinking of nothing, but far down and

rain, he repeated: "Now then, now then, go on! Pelt harder!"
threes, and reckoning them off on his fingers. Mentally addressing the
Pierre walked along, looking from side to side, counting his steps in

which ran along the ruts in streams.
harder than before. The saturated road no longer absorbed the water,
might cease and the sky clear, but after a short break it began raining
It had been raining since morning and had seemed as if at any moment it

dog could eat all it wanted.
of decomposition; and as the wolves were kept off by the passing men the
the flesh of different animals--from men to horses--in various stages
dog was merrier and sleeker than it had been in Moscow. All around lay
all four and rushing to bark at the crows that sat on the carrion. The
lifting one hind leg and hopping along on three, and then again going on
of the road, sometimes in proof of its agility and self-satisfaction
and his own. The blue-gray bandy legged dog ran merrily along the side
then again at his feet. The former and the latter were alike familiar
the way. Occasionally he glanced at the familiar crowd around him and
the muddy, slippery road, looking at his feet and at the roughness of
At midday on the twenty-second of October Pierre was going uphill along


CHAPTER XIII





and comforting thoughts, memories, and imaginings that came to him.
independent of that position in which he found himself were the joyful
harder his position became and the more terrible the future, the more
have to share that fate. Still less did Pierre think about himself. The
think of Karataev who grew weaker every day and evidently would soon
behind, though more than a hundred perished in that way. He did not
He did not see and did not hear how they shot the prisoners who lagged

superfluous steam to blow off when the pressure exceeds a certain limit.
to another, which is like the safety valve of a boiler that allows
saving power he has of transferring his attention from one thing
Only now did Pierre realize the full strength of life in man and the

but thought of other things.
terrible to look at than before. However, he did not look at them now,
walked without feeling the pain, though at night his feet were more
everybody got up he went along, limping, and, when he had warmed up,
campfire, thought it would be impossible to walk on them; but when
After the second day's march Pierre, having examined his feet by the

The one thing that was at first hard to bear was his feet.
there were the campfires; the lice that devoured him warmed his body.)
no great cold, it was always warm walking in the daytime, and at night
the gunpowder they used instead of salt was even pleasant; there was
(The horseflesh was appetizing and nourishing, the saltpeter flavor of
felt, the worst was the state of his bare, raw, and scab-covered feet.
subsequently termed his sufferings, but which at the time he scarcely
when they locked him up at night in a stable. Of all that he himself
will as it had seemed to him--he had been no more free than now
pieces. He discovered that when he had married his wife--of his own free
that were covered with sores--his footgear having long since fallen to
shoes he had suffered just as he did now when he walked with bare feet
while the other was warming; and that when he had put on tight dancing
he now, sleeping on the bare damp earth with one side growing chilled
person in a bed of roses with one crumpled petal suffered as keenly as
have their limits and that those limits are very near together; that the
need be unhappy and lack freedom. He learned that suffering and freedom
can be happy and entirely free, so there is no condition in which he
is terrible. He had learned that as there is no condition in which man
learned still another new, consolatory truth--that nothing in this world
superfluity. And now during these last three weeks of the march he had
human needs, and that all unhappiness arises not from privation but from
happiness, that happiness is within him, in the satisfaction of simple
but with his whole being, by life itself, that man is created for
While imprisoned in the shed Pierre had learned not with his intellect

moved farther away and did not think about him.
the odor emanating from him which was now stronger than before, Pierre
Karataev generally lay down at the halting places, and when he smelled
go near him. When he did so and heard the subdued moaning with which
since Karataev had begun to grow weaker it had cost him an effort to
gradually weaker Pierre kept away from him. Pierre did not know why, but
fever he had suffered from in the hospital in Moscow, and as he grew
On the third day after leaving Moscow Karataev again fell ill with the

Karataev for its master.
rejoined Karataev and the gray-blue bandy-legged dog that had chosen
All who could walk went together, and after the third stage Pierre had
should be kept separate from the rest, had long since been abandoned.
The arrangement adopted when they started, that the officer prisoners

recaptured by the French and shot.
of the soldier prisoners tunneled under the wall and ran away, but were
prisoners in a stable, had gone off to pillage their own stores, several
At Dorogobuzh while the soldiers of the convoy, after locking the

and severity.
their own plight still worse, treated them with particular moroseness
of giving way to the pity they felt for the prisoners and so rendering
escort, as if afraid, in the grievous condition they themselves were in,
shoot them) was not merely incomprehensible but revolting. And the
froze and lagged behind on the road (in which case the order was to
should have to stand and guard equally cold and hungry Russians who
Junot's spoon might be of some use, but that cold and hungry soldiers
cavalry saddles or Junot's baggage. They understood that the saddles and
remained. The prisoners were more burdensome to the escort than even the
and thirty men who had set out from Moscow fewer than a hundred now
The group of prisoners had melted away most of all. Of the three hundred

marshal had been found in his possession.
shot by the marshal's own order because a silver spoon belonging to the
prisoners, and that one of their comrades, a German soldier, had been
a larger guard had been allotted to that baggage train than to the
from Davout's corps. From the talk of the Germans Pierre learned that
or abandoned. Three wagons had been raided and robbed by stragglers
captured or left behind. Some of Junot's wagons also had been captured
twenty wagons, not more than sixty now remained; the rest had been
Of the artillery baggage train which had consisted of a hundred and

united whole, though each of the groups was rapidly melting away.
prisoners, and Junot's baggage train--still constituted a separate and
These three groups traveling together--the cavalry stores, the convoy of

abused each other for their causeless panic.
headlong, crushing one another, but had afterwards reassembled and
soldiers of the escort had raised their muskets, fired, and run
Several times during the march false alarms had been given and the

lagging behind it.
continually changed about, now joining the moving column, now again
horses; ragged men who had fallen behind from various regiments
The road along which they moved was bordered on both sides by dead

reached the utmost limit.
had noticed at their first halting place after leaving Moscow had now
columns, went on as a single group. The symptoms of disorder that Pierre
From Vyazma onwards the French army, which had till then moved in three

Westphalians. Behind the prisoners came a cavalry baggage train.
now replaced by Marshal Junot's enormous baggage train, convoyed by
the prisoners had seen in front of them during the first days was
front of the prisoners was left; they had all disappeared. The artillery
on ahead. Not one of those dismounted cavalrymen who had marched in
stages with them had been captured by Cossacks, the other half had gone
Moscow. Half the wagons laden with hardtack that had traveled the first
no longer with the same troops and baggage trains with which it had left
among whom was Pierre. On the twenty-second of October that party was
issued by the French authorities concerning the party of prisoners
During the whole of their march from Moscow no fresh orders had been


CHAPTER XII





Bezukhov.
Among the Russian prisoners rescued by Denisov and Dolokhov was Pierre

the wattle fence, and seized hold of it.
sound, like the yelp of a dog, with which Denisov turned away, walked to
recalled Petya's words. And the Cossacks looked round in surprise at the
"I am used to something sweet. Raisins, fine ones... take them all!" he

face which had already gone white.
trembling hands turned toward himself the bloodstained, mud-bespattered
Denisov did not reply; he rode up to Petya, dismounted, and with

called out to Denisov.
were surrounded by Cossacks who had hurried up. "We won't take them!" he
afforded him pleasure, and he went quickly up to the prisoners, who
"Done for!" repeated Dolokhov as if the utterance of these words

lying.
lifeless attitude--very familiar to him--in which Petya's body was
"Killed?" cried Denisov, recognizing from a distance the unmistakably

who was riding toward him.
"Done for!" he said with a frown, and went to the gate to meet Denisov

motionless with outstretched arms.
they surrendered, Dolokhov dismounted and went up to Petya, who lay
with a white handkerchief tied to his sword and announced that
After speaking to the senior French officer, who came out of the house

pierced his skull.
legs jerked rapidly though his head was quite motionless. A bullet had
fell heavily on to the wet ground. The Cossacks saw that his arms and
that was smoldering in the morning light, stopped suddenly, and Petya
to one side in his saddle. His horse, having galloped up to a campfire
both his arms about rapidly and strangely, slipping farther and farther
galloping along the courtyard, but instead of holding the reins he waved
Cossacks, while others ran down the hill toward the pond. Petya was
French threw down their arms and ran out of the bushes to meet the
the gateway of the courtyard. In the dense wavering smoke some of the
against something. The Cossacks and Dolokhov galloped after Petya into
A volley was heard, and some bullets whistled past, while others plashed

smoke was thickest.
galloped to the place whence came the sounds of firing and where the
"Wait?... Hurrah-ah-ah!" shouted Petya, and without pausing a moment

for the infantry!" he exclaimed as Petya rode up to him.
face was of a pale-greenish tint, shouting to his men. "Go round! Wait
Through the smoke, as he approached the gate, Petya saw Dolokhov, whose
bushes and were firing at the Cossacks who crowded at the gateway.
a stand there behind a wattle fence in a garden thickly overgrown with
he had visited the night before with Dolokhov. The French were making
could be heard. The shots came from the yard of the landowner's house
Petya's mind and he galloped on to the place from which the rapid firing
up the Frenchman had already fallen. "Too late again!" flashed through
had been defending himself against the hussars. When Petya galloped
Frenchman, in a blue overcoat, capless, and with a frowning red face,
were shouting something loudly and incoherently. A gallant-looking
Russian prisoners, who had come running from both sides of the road,
He could hear shooting ahead of him. Cossacks, hussars, and ragged

excited horse he galloped forward along the village street.
"Hurrah!... Lads!... ours!" shouted Petya, and giving rein to his

clutching the handle of a lance that had been aimed at him.
first thing he saw was the pale face and trembling jaw of a Frenchman,
of that crowd terrible screams arose. Petya galloped up, and the
Cossacks were crowding about a hut, busy with something. From the midst

feet.
to left across the road. One of them fell in the mud under his horse's
In front of him soldiers, probably Frenchmen, were running from right
he collided with a Cossack who had fallen behind, but he galloped on.
Cossacks were galloping along the road in front of him. On the bridge
fired it suddenly became as bright as noon. He galloped to the bridge.
shouted at him. It seemed to Petya that at the moment the shot was
horse and loosening his rein galloped forward, not heeding Denisov who
At the first sound of trampling hoofs and shouting, Petya lashed his

and then more shots.
of horses galloping forward was heard, shouts came from various sides,
The Cossack raised his arm and a shot rang out. In an instant the tramp

"The signal!" said he.

nodded to a Cossack beside him.
distant objects. Having reached the valley, Denisov looked back and
increasing. It was getting lighter and lighter, but the mist still hid
ravine. Petya rode beside Denisov, the pulsation of his body constantly
haunches and sliding, the horses descended with their riders into the
Denisov touched his horse and rode down the hill. Slipping onto their
the Cossacks rode past Petya and Denisov. When they had all ridden by,
light over the field. Denisov talked in whispers with the esaul and
When they had come to the edge of the forest it was noticeably growing
He did not say another word to Petya but rode in silence all the way.

yourself forward anywhere."
"I ask one thing of you," he said sternly, "to obey me and not shove

glance at him.
Denisov seemed to have forgotten Petya's very existence. He turned to

sake...!" said he.
"Vasili Dmitrich, entrust me with some commission! Please... for God's

up to Denisov.
turning to look at the hussars starting in the darkness behind him, rode
Petya leaped quickly into the saddle unconscious of his own weight and,
foot in the stirrup. His horse by habit made as if to nip his leg, but
saddle girths were too slack, reproved him, and mounted. Petya put his
The horses were brought. Denisov was angry with the Cossack because the

"Well, is ev'wything weady?" asked Denisov. "Bwing the horses."

Cold shivers ran down his spine and his whole body pulsed rhythmically.
in cold water, was all aglow, and his eyes were particularly brilliant.
impatiently awaiting the order to mount. His face, having been bathed
gave some orders to his men. Petya held his horse by the bridle,
of early dawn, hundreds of feet splashing through the mud. The esaul
passed along the road and quickly disappeared amid the trees in the mist
watchman's hut giving final orders. The infantry of the detachment
their saddle girths, and formed companies. Denisov stood by the
The men rapidly picked out their horses in the semidarkness, tightened


CHAPTER XI





orders to get ready.
Denisov came out of the watchman's hut and, having called Petya, gave

"And here's the commander," said Likhachev.

girths.
it. The Cossacks were untying their horses and tightening their saddle
to Likhachev; then he flourished the saber, tested it, and sheathed
Petya shook himself, jumped up, took a ruble from his pocket and gave it
very tails, and a watery light showed itself through the bare branches.
The horses that had previously been invisible could now be seen to their

"It's getting light, it's really getting light!" he exclaimed.

Petya woke up.

"It's ready, your honor; you can split a Frenchman in half with it!"

share it. He was awakened by Likhachev's kindly voice.
time, wondered at his enjoyment and regretted that there was no one to
Petya did not know how long this lasted: he enjoyed himself all the

joining in it.
horses jostled one another and neighed, not disturbing the choir but
trees, and the hissing of the saber, "Ozheg-zheg-zheg..." and again the
With a solemn triumphal march there mingled a song, the drip from the

surpassing beauty in awe and joy.
grew in harmonious triumphant strength, and Petya listened to their
at first from afar he heard men's voices and then women's. The voices
increasingly triumphant sounds. "Now voices join in!" ordered Petya. And
more joyful. Still more and more joyful!" And from an unknown depth rose
"Now softly, softly die away!" and the sounds obeyed him. "Now fuller,

conduct that enormous orchestra.
As much as I like and as I like!" said Petya to himself. He tried to
mingled into the same sweet and solemn hymn. "Oh, this is delightful!
fluttered, grew into harmonies, separated, blended, and again all
He closed his eyes, and, from all sides as if from a distance, sounds

on, my music! Now!..."
forward. "It's in my ears. But perhaps it's music of my own. Well, go
"Oh--why, that was in a dream!" Petya said to himself, as he lurched

music, now into something dazzlingly brilliant and triumphant.
one and again became separate and again blended, now into solemn church
same air, and then with a third and a fourth; and they all blended into
finished the melody merged with another instrument that began almost the
and clearer than violin or horn--played its own part, and before it had
Each instrument--now resembling a violin and now a horn, but better
a fugue--though Petya had not the least conception of what a fugue is.
grew and passed from one instrument to another. And what was played was
fresh and attractive. The music became more and more audible. The melody
melody that unexpectedly came to his mind seemed to him particularly
Nicholas, but had never learned music or thought about it, and so the
sweetly solemn hymn. Petya was as musical as Natasha and more so than
and suddenly Petya heard an harmonious orchestra playing some unknown,
"Ozheg-zheg, Ozheg-zheg..." hissed the saber against the whetstone,

jostled one another. Someone snored.
The trees were dripping. Quiet talking was heard. The horses neighed and

Petya's eyes began to close and he swayed a little.

touch it with one's hand.
high, high overhead, and then it seemed to sink so low that one could
if the black spaces were clouds. Sometimes the sky seemed to be rising
were passing, and a clear black sky appeared. Sometimes it seemed as
sailing as if unveiling the stars. Sometimes it looked as if the clouds
It was clearing, and over the tops of the trees clouds were swiftly
He looked up at the sky. And the sky was a fairy realm like the earth.

fairy kingdom where everything was possible.
Nothing Petya could have seen now would have surprised him. He was in a

vanished--disappeared altogether and dissolved into nothingness.
came for water and went back into the hollow, but perhaps he had simply
world, whom no one knew of. It might really have been that the hussar
might be the kindest, bravest, most wonderful, most splendid man in the
was just the Cossack, Likhachev, who was sitting under the wagon, but it
whole month, or go on falling and never reach the bottom. Perhaps it
tower from which, if he fell, he would have to fall for a whole day or a
very well be that he was not sitting on a wagon but on a terribly high
enormous monster. Perhaps he was really sitting on a wagon, but it might
the earth. Perhaps the red spot was a fire, or it might be the eye of an
watchman's hut or it might be a cavern leading to the very depths of
nothing resembled reality. The big dark blotch might really be the
waited to know anything of all this. He was in a fairy kingdom where
for the cup was an hussar who wanted a drink; but he neither knew nor
the left was the dying embers of a campfire, that the man who had come
blotch to the right was the watchman's hut, and the red blotch below to
it Likhachev was sitting sharpening a saber for him, that the big dark
captured from the French beside which horses were tethered, that under
guerrilla band, less than a mile from the road, sitting on a wagon
Petya ought to have known that he was in a forest with Denisov's

"It must be daylight soon," said he, yawning, and went away.

The hussar took the cup.

"There, by the wheel!"

cup left here?"
"That's right," said the man, whom Petya took to be an hussar. "Was the

"Why, this gentleman's saber."

"What are you sharpening?" asked a man coming up to the wagon.

sounds. He heard footsteps in the darkness and a black figure appeared.
After that Petya remained silent for a long time, listening to the

after his fright. He was that glad!"
"Vesenny? Oh, he's thrown himself down there in the passage. Fast asleep

"Well, and that boy?"

"Some are, and some aren't--like us."

"I say! Are the lads asleep?" asked Petya.

edge. The Cossack was sharpening the saber under the wagon.
sound of steel on whetstone. He climbed onto the wagon and sat on its
Likhachev got up, rummaged in his pack, and soon Petya heard the warlike

"Of course I can."

never had been sharpened.) "Can you do it?"
saber for me? It's got bl..." (Petya feared to tell a lie, and the saber
"Oh yes, another thing! Please, my dear fellow, will you sharpen my

"Just so," said the Cossack.

they're sorry for it afterwards. I don't like that."
"Some fellows do things just anyhow, without preparation, and then
"Because I am accustomed to doing everything accurately," said Petya.

Petya.
The Cossack bent forward from under the wagon to get a closer look at

have some."
pistols worn out? I brought some with me. Don't you want any? You can
"No, I am used to this," said Petya. "I say, aren't the flints in your

"Well, you should get some sleep now," said the Cossack.

than to act "just anyhow."
also of his object, and why he considered it better to risk his life
And Petya gave the Cossack a detailed account not only of his ride but

come back! We've been into the French camp."
"No, ah... Likhachev--isn't that your name? Do you know I have only just

wagon.
"Why aren't you asleep, sir?" said a Cossack who was sitting under a

nostrils and kissing it.
"Well, Karabakh! We'll do some service tomorrow," said he, sniffing its

he called "Karabakh" though it was of Ukranian breed, and went up to it.
munching their oats. In the dark Petya recognized his own horse, which
Someone was snoring under them, and around them stood saddled horses
Petya came out, peered into the darkness, and went up to the wagons.

heard low voices which seemed to be whispering.
sounds of falling drops and the munching of the horses near by, could be
Not all the Cossacks and hussars were asleep; here and there, amid the
were discernible, and in the hollow the dying campfire gleamed red.
the hut the dark shapes of the two wagons with their horses beside them
Cossacks' shanties and of horses tethered together could be seen. Behind
falling from the trees. Near the watchman's hut the black shapes of the
It was still quite dark outside. The rain was over, but drops were still

Then, noticing that Denisov was asleep, he rose and went out of doors.

expedition and vividly picturing to himself what would happen next day.
He sat awhile in the hut joyfully recalling the details of his

sleeping before a battle."
myself, if I fall asleep it's finished. And then I am used to not
"But... no," said Petya, "I don't want to sleep yet. Besides I know

morning."
of you! Well, thank God. Now lie down. We can still get a nap before
Petya's rapturous account. "But, devil take you, I haven't slept because
"Thank God!" he exclaimed. "Yes, thank God!" he repeated, listening to

anxiety, and self-reproach for having let him go.
passage. He was awaiting Petya's return in a state of agitation,
Having returned to the watchman's hut, Petya found Denisov in the


CHAPTER X





vanished into the darkness.
wanted to kiss him. Dolokhov kissed him, laughed, turned his horse, and
and Dolokhov saw through the gloom that Petya was bending toward him and
"All right, all right!" said Dolokhov. But Petya did not let go of him

How I love you!"
"Really!" he cried, "you are such a hero! Oh, how fine, how splendid!

Dolokhov and was about to ride away, but Petya seized hold of him.
"Well now, good-by. Tell Denisov, 'at the first shot at daybreak,'" said

they descended into the hollow where the Cossacks awaited them.
sentinel, who without saying a word paced morosely up and down it, then
When they had descended to the bridge Petya and Dolokhov rode past the
and saw the dark figures of Russian prisoners round their campfires.
"Do you hear?" he asked. Petya recognized the sound of Russian voices
country, but through the village. At one spot he stopped and listened.
Coming out onto the road Dolokhov did not ride back across the open

not the French were running after them, but not daring to.
footpace. Petya rode beside him, longing to look round to see whether or
his horse which would not stand still, then he rode out of the yard at a
officers were whispering together. Dolokhov was a long time mounting
Petya wished to say "Good night" but could not utter a word. The

"Good evening, gentlemen," said Dolokhov.

The horses were brought.

drawing nearer to Dolokhov.
"Will they bring our horses or not?" thought Petya, instinctively

was holding their horses.
something to a companion. Dolokhov got up and called to the soldier who
they could not see (he lay wrapped in a greatcoat) rose and whispered
No one replied a word to Dolokhov's laughter, and a French officer whom

and involuntarily took a step back from the campfire.
that Petya thought the French would immediately detect their disguise,
better to shoot such rabble," and burst into loud laughter, so strange
"A horrid business dragging these corpses about with one! It would be

prisoners with that detachment, Dolokhov said:
how many battalions, and how many prisoners. Asking about the Russian
putting direct questions as to how many men there were in the battalion,
But Dolokhov restarted the conversation which had dropped and began

the campfire listening to the talk.
"Well, now he'll come away," Petya thought every moment as he stood by

attack large detachments?" he added inquiringly. No one replied.
such as his companion and himself, "but probably they would not dare to
Dolokhov remarked that the Cossacks were a danger only to stragglers

fire.
"Those brigands are everywhere," replied an officer from behind the

was safe from Cossacks.
from his pocket began asking the officer in how far the road before them
question, did not reply, but lighting a short French pipe which he took
to what regiment he belonged. Dolokhov, as if he had not heard the
neck. That officer did not take his eyes from Dolokhov and again asked
squatted down on his heels by the fire beside the officer with the long
He handed the horses over to the soldier who was stirring the pot and

night.
Dolokhov replied that they were not hungry and must push on farther that

a voice from behind the fire with a repressed laugh.
"If you were counting on the evening soup, you have come too late," said

hostility and suspicion. For some seconds all were silent.
thought the officers were beginning to look at him and Dolokhov with
anything of the 6th Regiment. None of them knew anything, and Petya
regiment, and addressing the company in general asked whether they knew
Dolokhov said that he and his companion were trying to overtake their

stranger, asking what he could do for him.
his mistake, he broke off short and, with a frown, greeted Dolokhov as a
"Is that you, Clement?" he asked. "Where the devil...?" But, noticing

Dolokhov.
and one tall, long-necked officer, walking round the fire, came up to
There was a stir among the officers in the shadow beyond the fire,


    * "Good day, gentlemen."


"Bonjour, messieurs!" * said Dolokhov loudly and clearly.

horses.
Dolokhov's and Petya's steps as they advanced to the fire leading their
Both fell silent, peering out through the darkness at the sound of

"He'll make them get a move on, those fellows!" said another, laughing.

in the shadow at the other side of the fire.
"Oh, he's a hard nut to crack," said one of the officers who was sitting

kneeling beside it stirring its contents with a ramrod.
a soldier in a peaked cap and blue overcoat, lit up by the fire, was
Something was boiling in a small cauldron at the edge of the fire and
big blazing campfire, around which sat several men talking noisily.
landowner's house. Having ridden in, he dismounted and approached a
heard around the campfires, Dolokhov turned into the courtyard of the
Having ridden up the road, on both sides of which French talk could be

landowner's house.
the hill to the right in the courtyard of the farm, as he called the
a friendly way that the commander and the officers were higher up
Dolokhov's horse, touched it with his hand, and explained simply and in
a soldier with a sack over his shoulder, stopped, came close up to
him and inquired where the commander and officers were. The man,
Noticing the black outline of a man crossing the road, Dolokhov stopped

aside, Dolokhov rode up the incline at a walk.
And without waiting for an answer from the sentinel, who had stepped


     here."
     him for the password.... I am asking you if the colonel is
     * "When an officer is making his round, sentinels don't ask


at the sentinel. "Je vous demande si le colonel est ici." *
mot d'ordre..." cried Dolokhov suddenly flaring up and riding straight
"Quand un officier fait sa ronde, les sentinelles ne demandent pas le

"Mot d'ordre," repeated the sentinel, barring the way and not replying.


    * "Tell me, is Colonel Gerard here?"


"Dites donc, le colonel Gerard est ici?" * he asked.

Dolokhov reined in his horse and advanced at a walk.


    * "Password."


"Mot d'ordre." *

The black figure of a sentinel stood on the bridge.


    * "Lancers of the 6th Regiment."


his horse's pace.
"Lanciers du 6-me," * replied Dolokhov, neither hastening nor slackening

The blood rushed to Petya's face and he grasped his pistol.


    * "Who goes there?"


and the click of a musket.
very moment they heard through the darkness the challenge: "Qui vive?" *
"Don't talk Russian," said Dolokhov in a hurried whisper, and at that

he.
"If we're caught, I won't be taken alive! I have a pistol," whispered

bridge. Petya, his heart in his mouth with excitement, rode by his side.
him to await him there and rode on at a quick trot along the road to the
hollow. On reaching the bottom, Dolokhov told the Cossacks accompanying
and emerging from the forest in pitch darkness they descended into the
the clearing from which Denisov had reconnoitered the French camp,
Having put on French greatcoats and shakos, Petya and Dolokhov rode to


CHAPTER IX





hinder me," said he. "It will only make things worse..."
of us. Besides, I want to go very much and certainly will go, so don't
are... hundreds of lives may depend on it, while there are only two
"For you'll admit that if we don't know for sure how many of them there

never considered personal danger.
accustomed to do everything accurately and not just anyhow, and that he
And to all Denisov's persuasions, Petya replied that he too was

Dolokhov. If he can, so can I!"
that he can order me about. I will certainly go to the French camp with
"But above all Denisov must not dare to imagine that I'll obey him and
distinguished men think so, it must be necessary and right," thought he.
had no time to grasp fully what they were talking about. "If grown-up,
prisoners, Petya had once more felt awkward and restless; but again he
While Dolokhov had been disputing with Denisov what should be done with

glancing at Denisov.
"I? Yes, yes, certainly!" cried Petya, blushing almost to tears and

Well, are you coming with me?" he asked Petya.
Tell the Cossack to fetch my kit. I have two French uniforms in it.
your chivalry just the same." He paused. "However, we must get to work.
they did catch me they'd string me up to an aspen tree, and with all
"Who has told them not to capture me these twenty times over? But if

Dolokhov began laughing.

not by my fault!"
wish to take it on my conscience. You say they'll die. All wight. Only
"That's not the point. I'm not going to discuss the matter. I do not

The esaul, screwing up his light-colored eyes, nodded approvingly.

same not to send them?"
get there. The rest either starve or get killed. So isn't it all the
know those 'receipts' of yours? You send a hundred men away, and thirty
he went on, swaying his head. "Because you are sorry for him! Don't we
this subject which irritated Denisov. "Now, why have you kept this lad?"
continued Dolokhov, as if he found particular pleasure in speaking of
"But for you and me, old fellow, it's time to drop these amenities,"

you," said Petya shyly.
"Why, I've not said anything! I only say that I'll certainly go with

it."
sixteen," said Dolokhov with cold irony, "but it's time for you to drop
"That kind of amiable talk would be suitable from this young count of

bluntly--staining the honor of a soldier?"
thwee hundwed men to town under escort, instead of staining--I speak
on my conscience. Would it be difficult for you to send thirty or
suddenly flushing. "And I say boldly that I have not a single man's life
"Where? I send them away and take a weceipt for them," shouted Denisov,

"Yes, and where do you put the others?" inquired Dolokhov.

"He was taken today but he knows nothing. I'm keeping him with me."

asked Denisov.
French drummer boy. "Have you had that youngster with you long?" he
"Why not?" Dolokhov answered absently, scrutinizing the face of the

all. You'll take me, won't you?" he said, turning to Dolokhov.
"Well, you must excuse me, because... because... I shall go, and that's

"Because it's useless."

"I like that!" exclaimed Petya. "Why shouldn't I go?"

Dolokhov, "and as for him, I won't let him go on any account."
"There's no need for you to go at all," said Denisov, addressing

"I, I... I'll go with you!" cried Petya.

to the French camp with me? I have brought a spare uniform."
accurately. Here now--wouldn't one of these gentlemen like to ride over
affair without knowing for certain how many there are. I like to work
said Dolokhov. "It will be necessary to go there. We can't start the
"That's so. But we must know what troops they are and their numbers,"

he knew of the French detachment.
had brought, and his own replies to both generals. Then he told him all
designs the large detachments had on the transport, of the message Petya
questioning him about the matter in hand. Denisov told him of the
the room, and without greeting anyone went up to Denisov and began
straight on his head. He took off his wet felt cloak in a corner of
an Order of St. George at his buttonhole and a plain forage cap set
the Guards. He was clean-shaven and wore a Guardsman's padded coat with
a Persian costume, had now the appearance of a most correct officer of
did indicated his unusual position. But Dolokhov, who in Moscow had worn
Wonder-Worker on his breast, and his way of speaking and everything he
Denisov wore a Cossack coat, had a beard, had an icon of Nicholas the

Dolokhov's appearance amazed Petya by its simplicity.

high, that he might not be unworthy even of such company.
eyes from him, but braced himself up more and more and held his head
French, so from the moment he entered the hut Petya did not take his
stories of Dolokhov's extraordinary bravery and of his cruelty to the
not sent away with the other prisoners. Petya had heard in the army many
dressed in a Russian coat so that he might be kept with their band and
to whom Denisov had had some mutton and vodka given, and whom he had had
The arrival of Dolokhov diverted Petya's attention from the drummer boy,


CHAPTER VIII





ridiculous to give some to the drummer boy.
he fingered the money in his pocket and wondered whether it would seem
him, considering it beneath his dignity to pay attention to him. But
When the boy had entered the hut, Petya sat down at a distance from

for him?" he thought, and opening the door he let the boy pass in first.
"Come in, come in!" he repeated in a gentle whisper. "Oh, what can I do

the darkness he took the boy's hand and pressed it.
not dare to. He stood irresolutely beside him in the passage. Then in
There were many things Petya wanted to say to the drummer boy, but did


    * "Thank you, sir."


voice, and he began scraping his dirty feet on the threshold.
"Merci, monsieur," * said the drummer boy in a trembling almost childish


     * (2) "Come in, come in."

     afraid, they won't hurt you."
     * "Ah, it's you! Do you want something to eat? Don't be


the boy's hand. "Entrez, entrez." *(2)
ne vous fera pas de mal," * he added shyly and affectionately, touching
"Ah, c'est vous!" said Petya. "Voulez-vous manger? N'ayez pas peur, on

darkness, and the drummer boy came to the door.
The sound of bare feet splashing through the mud was heard in the

something to eat a while ago. He was awfully hungry!"
"He's a smart lad," said an hussar standing near Petya. "We gave him

the darkness.
Vesenya!--Vesenny!" laughing voices were heard calling to one another in
"He is warming himself there by the bonfire. Ho, Vesenya!

made by the young lad.
these adaptations the reference to spring (vesna) matched the impression
Vesenny (vernal) and into Vesenya by the peasants and soldiers. In both
Vincent, the boy's name, had already been changed by the Cossacks into

"Ah, Vesenny?" said a Cossack.

day.
Petya replied that he wanted the French lad who had been captured that

"Who do you want, sir?" asked a voice in the darkness.

"Bosse! Vincent!" Petya cried, stopping outside the door.

And having kissed Denisov he ran out of the hut.

"Let me kiss you, dear old fellow! Oh, how fine, how splendid!"

between the officers, came close to Denisov, and said:
Petya was standing at the door when Denisov said this. He slipped in

"Yes, yes, call him. A poor little fellow," Denisov repeated.

"I'll call him," said Petya.

Bosse. Have him fetched."
nothing shameful in this reminder. "Call him in. His name is Vincent
"Yes, he's a poor little fellow," said Denisov, who evidently saw

eat?... Perhaps..."
"May I call in that boy who was taken prisoner and give him something to

ironical, he said:
blushing and looking anxiously at the officers to see if they appeared
seem odd if I ask?" Petya thought. "Well, never mind!" and immediately,
he pities the boy.' I'll show them tomorrow whether I'm a boy. Will it
"I might ask," he thought, "but they'll say: 'He's a boy himself and so

afraid to speak out.
But having caught himself saying too much about the flints, he was now
put him? Have they fed him? Haven't they hurt his feelings?" he thought.
drummer boy. "It's capital for us here, but what of him? Where have they
foolish. And running over the events of the day he remembered the French
He tried to remember whether he had not done anything else that was

blushed.
Then suddenly, dismayed lest he had said too much, Petya stopped and

as many as you want, or all if you like...."
showed a bag--"a hundred flints. I bought them very cheap. Please take
sometimes, you know. I have brought some with me, here they are"--and he
perhaps your flints are giving out, or are worn out--that happens
honest, that's the chief thing. I'll be sure to send it to you. Or
capital one from our sutler! He has splendid things. And he's very
"You want a coffeepot, don't you?" he asked the esaul. "I bought a

of raisins. "Have some, gentlemen, have some!"
his Cossack and brought back some bags which contained about five pounds
sweet. Would you like some?..." and Petya ran out into the passage to
he has such capital things. I bought ten pounds. I am used to something
raisins, fine ones; you know, seedless ones. We have a new sutler and
"Heavens! I was quite forgetting!" he suddenly cried. "I have some
"Please keep it. I have several like it," said Petya, blushing.

And he handed him his clasp knife. The officer admired it.

said, turning to an officer who wished to cut himself a piece of mutton.
Petya went on. "What would it be to you?... Oh, you want a knife?" he
"Only, please let me command something, so that I may really command..."

"Into the vewy chief..." Denisov repeated with a smile.

flourishing his arms.
Petya clenched his teeth and looked around, throwing back his head and

don't want a reward... But I want..."
am finding out.... Only do let me into the very... into the chief... I
answered his own question: "You see I was told to find out--well, I
all right my staying a day with you?" And not waiting for a reply he
"So then what do you think, Vasili Dmitrich?" said he to Denisov. "It's

others loved him in the same way.
childish state of love for all men, and consequently of confidence that
with his hands, down which the grease trickled, Petya was in an ecstatic
Sitting at table with the officers and tearing the fat savory mutton

table were vodka, a flask of rum, white bread, roast mutton, and salt.
In ten minutes the table was ready and a napkin spread on it. On the

helping the officers to fix up the dinner table.
Petya took off his wet clothes, gave them to be dried, and at once began
three officers of Denisov's band were converting a door into a tabletop.
Cossack with sleeves rolled up was chopping some mutton. In the room
could not see the smoke. In the passage of the small watchhouse a
were kindling glowing fires in a hollow of the forest where the French
Cossacks and hussars who had rigged up rough shelters in the glade and
to the watchhouse. In the twilight saddled horses could be seen, and
It was already growing dusk when Denisov, Petya, and the esaul rode up

them at a moment of difficulty.
and Tikhon a hero too, and that it would be shameful for him to leave
then, was a rubbishy German, that Denisov was a hero, the esaul a hero,
change their views, that the general, whom he had greatly respected till
attack that night, he decided, with the rapidity with which young people
French and saw Tikhon and learned that there would certainly be an
out his instructions strictly and return at once. But when he saw the
ridden to the outskirts of the forest Petya had considered he must carry
confused when Denisov asked him whether he could stay. Before they had
action whatever of Denisov's. That was why Petya had blushed and grown
his pistol. So now the general explicitly forbade his taking part in any
advanced line under the fire of the French and had there twice fired
the road to the place to which he had been sent, he had galloped to the
Petya's mad action at the battle of Vyazma, where instead of riding by
that the general could not refuse. But when dispatching him he recalled
somebody to Denisov's detachment, Petya begged so piteously to be sent
When on the twenty-first of October his general expressed a wish to send

hurry to get where he was not.
performed just where he did not happen to be. And he was always in a
it always seemed to him that the really heroic exploits were being
with what he saw and experienced in the army, but at the same time
miss any chance to do something really heroic. He was highly delighted
excitement at being grown-up and in a perpetual ecstatic hurry not to
the battle of Vyazma, Petya had been in a constant state of blissful
and especially since he had joined the active army and taken part in
large guerrilla detachment. From the time he received his commission,
his regiment and was soon taken as orderly by a general commanding a
Petya, having left his people after their departure from Moscow, joined


CHAPTER VII





me about yourself."
Denisov at once cheered up and, calling Petya to him, said: "Well, tell

news that Dolokhov was soon coming and that all was well with him.
The officer who had been sent to inquire met Denisov on the way with the

he might not be unworthy of the company in which he found himself.
the esaul with an air of importance about tomorrow's undertaking, that
it necessary to hold his head higher, to brace himself, and to question
a pang in his heart. But this uneasiness lasted only a moment. He felt
man, he felt uneasy. He looked round at the captive drummer boy and felt
had passed and Petya realized for a moment that this Tikhon had killed a
When the fit of laughter that had seized him at Tikhon's words and smile

and at him, about some pair of boots he had thrown into the bushes.
Tikhon followed behind and Petya heard the Cossacks laughing with him

in silence and frowning angrily.
"Well, let's go," said Denisov, and rode all the way to the watchhouse

them you want--three if you like."
your Frenchmen! Only wait till it gets dark and I'll fetch you any of
"But why are you angry?" remonstrated Tikhon, "just as if I'd never seen

fool!" said Denisov severely.
"I'll give you a hundwed sharp lashes--that'll teach you to play the

Denisov's eyes.
them all,'" Tikhon concluded, looking cheerfully and resolutely into
in name,' he says. 'Shout loud at them,' he says, 'and you'll take
'There are a lot of us,' he says, 'but all poor stuff--only soldiers
"But I questioned him," said Tikhon. "He said he didn't know much.

"You are a bwute!" said Denisov. "I wanted to question..."

he says: 'I'm a general's son myself, I won't go!' he says."
on him--poor stuff! How could I bring him? And so rude, your honor! Why,
"Oh, but he was a regular good-for-nothing," said Tikhon. "The clothes

peal of merry laughter in which Tikhon himself joined.
Shcherbaty--the gap-toothed). Denisov smiled, and Petya burst into a
disclosing a gap where he had lost a tooth (that was why he was called
then suddenly his whole face expanded into a beaming, foolish grin,
Tikhon scratched his back with one hand and his head with the other,

bwing the first one?"
"Don't play the fool!" said Denisov, coughing angrily. "Why didn't you

and Denisov's, unable to make out what it all meant.
laughing. He turned his eyes rapidly from Tikhon's face to the esaul's
Petya badly wanted to laugh, but noticed that they all refrained from

puddles!" said the esaul, screwing up his glittering eyes.
"Yes, we saw from the hill how you took to your heels through the

throwing out his chest.
be with you!'" shouted Tikhon, waving his arms with an angry scowl and
for them with my ax, this way: 'What are you up to?' says I. 'Christ
were four of them. They rushed at me with their little swords. So I went
along to the colonel,' I said. He starts yelling, and suddenly there
I grabbed him, like this." (He jumped up quickly and lightly.) "'Come
with a supple movement to show how he had done it.) "One turned up and
through the wood and lay down." (He suddenly lay down on his stomach
"I went for another one," Tikhon continued, "and I crept like this

"What a bwute you are!... Well?"

sort you want!"
angrily--"that one wouldn't have done for you. As if I don't know what
"What was the good of bringing him?" Tikhon interrupted hastily and

esaul. "Why didn't you bwing that one?"
"You see?... What a wogue--it's just as I thought," said Denisov to the

likelier one."
into the forest. Then I see he's no good and think I'll go and fetch a
out his flat feet with outturned toes in their bast shoes. "I took him
"You see, I took him first thing at dawn," Tikhon continued, spreading

"Where is he?"

"Oh, I took one all right," said Tikhon.

haven't you taken one?"
"Why did you push yourself in there by daylight? You ass! Well, why

boldly and hurriedly, in a husky but melodious bass voice.
"Where did I disappear to? I went to get Frenchmen," answered Tikhon

"Well, where did you disappear to?" inquired Denisov.

lifted his head high and gazed at Denisov as if repressing a laugh.
face and narrow little eyes beamed with self-satisfied merriment. He
approached his commander. It was Tikhon. His wrinkled and pockmarked
into the bushes, removed his sodden hat by its floppy brim, and
stuck in his girdle. When he espied Denisov he hastily threw something
with long, light steps. He had a musketoon over his shoulder and an ax
wearing a short jacket, bast shoes, and a Kazan hat, was approaching
forest. Among the trees a man with long legs and long, swinging arms,
As they approached the watchhouse Denisov stopped, peering into the

"Now, my lad, we'll go and get dwy," he said to Petya.

definitely decided on, Denisov turned his horse and rode back.
which now, seeing how near they were to the French, he seemed to have
After talking for some time with the esaul about next day's attack,


CHAPTER VI





them.
French and, as Denisov had witnessed from above, had been detected by
through the night, he had crept by day into some bushes right among the
had not been content to take only one Frenchman or because he had slept
overnight to Shamshevo to capture a "tongue." But whether because he
and willingly accepted that role. Now he had been sent by Denisov
and consequently he was made the buffoon of all the Cossacks and hussars
opportunities for attacking, no one captured or killed more Frenchmen,
He was the bravest and most useful man in the party. No one found more

brought in prisoners.
of this incident on Tikhon was that after being wounded he seldom
angry and swore at the French with the funniest curses. The only effect
him. And Tikhon, purposely writhing and making faces, pretended to be
"Hallo, mate! Never again? Gave you a twist?" the Cossacks would banter

Tikhon readily joined.
subject of the liveliest jokes by the whole detachment--jokes in which
treated only with internal and external applications of vodka) was the
and shot him in the fleshy part of the back. That wound (which Tikhon
Once a Frenchman Tikhon was trying to capture fired a pistol at him

"It won't hurt that devil--he's as strong as a horse!" they said of him.

more than thirty miles in a day--everybody pointed laughingly at Tikhon.
out of a swamp by its tail, skin it, slink in among the French, or walk
done--to push a cart out of the mud with one's shoulders, pull a horse
position. When anything particularly difficult or nasty had to be
or carve spoons. In Denisov's party he held a peculiar and exceptional
arm's length, or holding the head of the ax would cut thin little pegs
thick bones. Tikhon with equal accuracy would split logs with blows at
its teeth, with equal ease picking fleas out of its fur or crunching
rather as a joke), a pike and an ax, which latter he used as a wolf uses
behind the cavalry. He was armed with a musketoon (which he carried
Tikhon did not like riding, and always went on foot, never lagging

enrolled among the Cossacks.
began taking him with him when he went out on expeditions and had him
in French captives also. Denisov then relieved him from drudgery and
brought back French clothing and weapons, and when told to would bring
for partisan warfare. At night he would go out for booty and always
flaying dead horses, and so on, soon showed a great liking and aptitude
Tikhon, who at first did rough work, laying campfires, fetching water,

orders to let him do so.
to their party and asked to be allowed to remain with it. Denisov gave
this peasant, it was reported to him that Tikhon had attached himself
Next day when Denisov had left Pokrovsk, having quite forgotten about

We killed a score or so of 'more-orderers,' but we did no harm else..."
Denisov's words. "We only fooled about with the lads for fun, you know!
"We don't do the French any harm," said Tikhon, evidently frightened by

the hatred of the French that all sons of the fatherland should cherish.
in the elder's presence about loyalty to the Tsar and the country and
Tikhon called and, having praised him for his activity, said a few words
Shcherbaty was the only man who dealt with such matters. Denisov had
"more-orderers" had really been at their village, but that Tikhon
asked if no French had strayed that way, the elder replied that some
when Denisov explained that his purpose was to kill the French, and
elders did, that he had neither seen nor heard anything of them. But
the elder, as though shielding himself, had replied, as all village
summoned the village elder and asked him what he knew about the French,
come to Pokrovsk at the beginning of his operations and had as usual
He was a peasant from Pokrovsk, near the river Gzhat. When Denisov had
Tikhon Shcherbaty was one of the most indispensable men in their band.

it.
he understood it all, though he really did not understand anything of
"Oh, yes," said Petya, nodding at the first words Denisov uttered as if

"He's our plastun. I sent him to capture a 'tongue.'"

"Who is he?" asked Petya.

he been doing all this time?"
"What a beast!" said Denisov with his former look of vexation. "What has

"Smart, that!" said the esaul.

The French who had been pursuing him stopped.
instant, scrambled out on all fours, all black with the wet, and ran on.
so that the water splashed in the air, and, having disappeared for an
The man whom they called Tikhon, having run to the stream, plunged in

"He'll get away!" said the esaul, screwing up his eyes.

"The wascal!" said Denisov.

"So it is! It is!"

"Why, that's our Tikhon," said the esaul.

marsh. The French were evidently firing and shouting at him.
to them. Down below, a man wearing something red was running through the
of the firing and shouting. But the firing and shouting did not relate
esaul drew back. They were so near that they thought they were the cause
shouting together came up from the slope. For a moment Denisov and the
another, and the sound of hundreds of seemingly merry French voices
from the low ground by the pond, a puff of white smoke appeared, then
While they were talking in undertones the crack of a shot sounded

horses would sink. We must ride round more to the left...."
"The hollow is impassable--there's a swamp there," said the esaul. "The

with my hussars fwom here. And at the signal shot..."
Cossacks"--he pointed to a spot in the forest beyond the village--"and I
"They'll cweep up to the garden; you'll wide up fwom there with the
"We'll send the infantwy down by the swamps," Denisov continued.

"It is a very suitable spot," said the esaul.

a merry sparkle in his eyes.
"Whether Dolokhov comes or not, we must seize it, eh?" said Denisov with

along the road, trying not to miss anything of importance.
at Denisov, now at the esaul, and now at the French in the village and
Petya, rapidly turning his head, looked now at the drummer boy, now

frowning and addressed the esaul, conveying his own conjectures to him.
assenting to everything Denisov asked him. Denisov turned away from him
an evident desire to say all he knew gave confused answers, merely
lifting his eyebrows, looked at Denisov in affright, but in spite of
of them were. The boy, thrusting his cold hands into his pockets and
Pointing to the French troops, Denisov asked him what these and those
A Cossack dismounted, lifted the boy down, and took him to Denisov.

eyes off the French.
"Bwing the prisoner here," said Denisov in a low voice, not taking his

carts, and their calls to one another, could be clearly heard.
un-Russian shouting at their horses which were straining uphill with the
away, crowds of men could be seen through the shimmering mist. Their
bridge leading to the village, not more than five hundred yards
over all the rising ground, and all along the road uphill from the
In the village, in the house, in the garden, by the well, by the pond,
ravine, was a small village and a landowner's house with a broken roof.
downward slope, lay a field of spring rye. To the right, beyond a steep
standing they could see the French. Immediately beyond the forest, on a
Denisov and Petya rode up to him. From the spot where the peasant was

them with his hand.
had not yet shed its leaves, he stopped and beckoned mysteriously to
the screen of trees was less dense. On reaching a large oak tree that
He ascended an incline, stopped, looked about him, and advanced to where

silently led them to the edge of the forest.
and moving noiselessly in his bast shoes over the roots and wet leaves,
peasant in the knitted cap who, stepping lightly with outturned toes
the trees. Denisov, the esaul, and Petya rode silently, following the
The rain had stopped, and only the mist was falling and drops from


CHAPTER V





edge of the forest.
hussar who had the prisoner, rode to the left across a ravine to the
Denisov, Petya, and the esaul, accompanied by some Cossacks and the

Shamshevo."
"Well, old fellow," said he to the peasant guide, "lead us to

of the French bivouac they were to attack next day.
the forest where it reached out to Shamshevo, to have a look at the part
Denisov himself intended going with the esaul and Petya to the edge of
find out where Dolokhov was and whether he would come that evening.
the Kirghiz horse (who performed the duties of an adjutant) to go and
arranged near the watchman's hut in the forest, and told the officer on
And turning to his men he directed a party to go on to the halting place

"Well, all wight," said Denisov.

"He gave me no instructions. I think I could?" he returned, inquiringly.

Petya blushed.

Denisov.
"But, just what did the genewal tell you? To weturn at once?" asked

"Oh, please... May I stay with you?" cried Petya.

tomowwow?"
"Orders?" Denisov repeated thoughtfully. "But can you stay till

which he had prepared himself, "or shall I remain with your honor?"
hand at the salute and resuming the game of adjutant and general for
"Will there be any orders, your honor?" he asked Denisov, holding his

possible.
that no one should notice it, while maintaining as martial an air as
trousers--furtively tried to pull them down under his greatcoat so
cold tone and supposing that it was due to the condition of his
While Denisov was talking to the esaul, Petya--abashed by Denisov's

added.
"If we don't take it tomowwow, he'll snatch it fwom under our noses," he

with him for an attack on the transport.
repetition of the German general's demand that he should join forces
And Denisov told the esaul that the dispatch just delivered was a

German, you know. He"--he indicated Petya--"is serving under him."
"Michael Feoklitych," said he to the esaul, "this is again fwom that

again assumed its anxious expression.
"Well, I am glad to see you," Denisov interrupted him, and his face

near Vyazma and how a certain hussar had distinguished himself there.
rehearsing, and began telling him how he had already been in a battle
up, blushed with pleasure, forgot the official manner he had been
acquaintance. But as soon as Denisov smiled at him Petya brightened
befitted a grownup man and an officer--without hinting at their previous
All the way Petya had been preparing himself to behave with Denisov as

The officer was Petya Rostov.

his hand to the lad.
"Why didn't you say who you were?" and turning with a smile he held out
"Wostov! Petya!" exclaimed Denisov, having run through the dispatch.

action? May I speak to him?"
noticing the French drummer boy. "A prisoner? You've already been in
prepared. We have each of us two pistols.... But what's this?" he asked,
the dispatch. "But Komarov and I"--he pointed to the Cossack--"were
said the officer, addressing the esaul while Denisov was reading
"There, they kept telling us: 'It's dangerous, it's dangerous,'"

Denisov, frowning, took the envelope and opened it.

dry."
"From the general," said the officer. "Please excuse its not being quite

and handed him a sodden envelope.
lad with a broad rosy face and keen merry eyes, galloped up to Denisov
standing in the stirrups, trotted a Cossack. The officer, a very young
drenched, whose trousers had worked up to above his knees. Behind him,
gallop and using his leather whip, rode an officer, disheveled and
visible, but they reappeared a few minutes later. In front, at a weary
The approaching riders having descended a decline were no longer

of using words the Cossacks did not know.
that it is the lieutenant colonel himself," said the esaul, who was fond
"There are two, an officer and a Cossack. But it is not presupposable

The esaul looked in the direction Denisov indicated.

"There's someone coming," said he.

right, Denisov stopped.
On coming to a path in the forest along which he could see far to the

hoping to see a messenger from Dolokhov.
from under our noses," thought Denisov, continually peering forward,
another day one of the big guerrilla detachments will snatch the prey
It's too risky to attack them by oneself, and if we put it off till
"There'll hardly be another such chance to fall on a transport as today.

had not returned.
still had no news from Dolokhov and the man sent to capture a "tongue"
(none of them had eaten anything since morning), and yet more because he
Denisov was out of sorts both because of the rain and also from hunger

comrades with mud.
struck his horse three times with his whip, splashing himself and his
"Oh, the devil!" exclaimed Denisov angrily, and showing his teeth he

his rider's knee against a tree.
Denisov's horse swerved aside to avoid a pool in the track and bumped

splashed through the water that lay in the ruts.
been hitched on in front, rumbled over the tree stumps and branches and
wagons, drawn by French horses and by saddled Cossack horses that had
back of their necks. In the midst of the outspread line of Cossacks two
water that was leaking in under their seats, their knees, and at the
water that had trickled to their bodies and not admit the fresh cold
the road. The men sat huddled up trying not to stir, so as to warm the
slippery, and sodden, like the ground and the fallen leaves that strewed
thin. Steam rose from them. Clothes, saddles, reins, were all wet,
Their necks, with their wet, close-clinging manes, looked strangely
being drenched by the rain, all looked black whether chestnut or bay.
greatcoats, and some with horsecloths over their heads. The horses,
threes and fours, and then Cossacks: some in felt cloaks, some in French
Behind them along the narrow, sodden, cutup forest road came hussars in

with surprise. This was the French drummer boy captured that morning.
hussar with cold, red hands, and raising his eyebrows gazed about him
blue cap behind him on the crupper of his horse. The boy held on to the
Beside him rode an hussar, with a boy in a tattered French uniform and

French overcoat.
tail and mane and a bleeding mouth, rode a young officer in a blue
A little behind, on a poor, small, lean Kirghiz mount with an enormous

wearing a gray peasant coat and a white knitted cap.
A little ahead of them walked a peasant guide, wet to the skin and

with his horse, a being consequently possessed of twofold strength.
and that he was not a man who had mounted a horse, but a man who was one
esaul one saw that he was as comfortable and as much at ease as always
uncomfortable and was a man mounted on a horse, while looking at the
glance at the esaul and Denisov one saw that the latter was wet and
say in what the peculiarity of the horse and rider lay, yet at first
self-satisfaction in his face and bearing. Though it was impossible to
pale-faced, fair-haired, with narrow light eyes and with calm
Esaul Lovayski the Third was a tall man as straight as an arrow,


    * A captain of Cossacks.


cloak and sheepskin cap, and riding a large sleek Don horse.
Beside Denisov rode an esaul, * Denisov's fellow worker, also in felt

black beard looked angry.
rain and gazed anxiously before him. His thin face with its short, thick
which turned its head and laid its ears back, he shrank from the driving
was riding a thin thoroughbred horse with sunken sides. Like his horse,
Denisov in a felt cloak and a sheepskin cap from which the rain ran down

suddenly heavy slanting rain came down.
the color of muddy water. At times a sort of mist descended, and then
It was a warm rainy autumn day. The sky and the horizon were both


CHAPTER IV





French quartermasters who had been sent on in advance.
peasant of his party, to Shamshevo to try and seize at least one of the
putting the whole column on the alert, so he sent Tikhon Shcherbaty, a
Denisov considered it dangerous to make a second attack for fear of

could tell them nothing definite about the troops in that column.
little drummer boy had been taken alive, and as he was a straggler he
hastily that the Frenchmen with the wagons had all been killed; only a
the enemy column. That morning's attack on the wagons had been made so
and to learn that he had to capture a "tongue"--that is, a man from
deter Denisov. All that he now wanted to know was what troops these were
Dolokhov might have as many more, but the disparity of numbers did not
that the convoy had fifteen hundred men. Denisov had two hundred, and
find out at what distance there were other French troops. They reckoned
Beyond Shamshevo, Dolokhov was to observe the road in the same way, to

columns of French should show themselves.
right up to the road, six Cossacks were posted to report if any fresh
In their rear, more than a mile from Mikulino where the forest came

them all at one blow.
like an avalanche on their heads from two sides, and rout and capture
less than a mile from Shamshevo, to surprise the French at dawn, falling
to come that evening to a consultation at a watchman's hut in the forest
quietly without alarming them and then, after joining Dolokhov who was
without attacking. It was necessary to let the French reach Shamshevo
and until evening, the party had watched the movements of the French
far from Mikulino where the forest ran close to the road. Since then,
two wagons loaded with cavalry saddles, which had stuck in the mud not
Cossacks of Denisov's party had seized and carried off into the forest
edge, but never losing sight of the moving French. That morning,
sometimes keeping well back in them and sometimes coming to the very
from it. Through these forests Denisov and his party rode all day,
some places up to the road itself though in others a mile or more back
between Mikulino and Shamshevo there were large forests, extending in
the village of Mikulino to that of Shamshevo. To the left of the road
convoy with their own small forces. On October 22 it was moving from
reporting matters to the higher command, to attack and seize that
Having arranged matters thus, Denisov and Dolokhov intended, without

him that he was already under the command of the German.
general. To the Polish general he replied to the same effect, informing
that pleasure because he was already under the command of the Polish
desire to serve under so valiant and renowned a general, he had to forgo
these documents, and he wrote to the German that, despite his heartfelt
"No, bwother, I have gwown mustaches myself," said Denisov on reading

divisions to attack the convoy.
to Denisov almost simultaneously, requesting him to join up with their
of large parties--one a Pole and the other a German--sent invitations
expressed it, were sharpening their teeth for it. Two of the commanders
large divisions with staffs also knew of this convoy and, as Denisov
a small party and moved in Denisov's vicinity), the commanders of some
strong escort to Smolensk. Besides Denisov and Dolokhov (who also led
army, which--as was learned from spies and prisoners--was moving under a
cavalry baggage and Russian prisoners separated from the rest of the
from the forest that skirted the highroad a large French convoy of
and his party had been on the move. All day long he had been watching
group at the height of the guerrilla enthusiasm. Since early morning he
On October 22, Denisov (who was one of the irregulars) was with his

now considered everything possible.
to contemplate. The Cossacks and peasants who crept in among the French
things possible which the commanders of the big detachments did not dare
long before and had already observed the French closely considered
things as impossible. The small bands that had started their activities
according to rules at a distance from the French, still regarded many
not. Now only the commanders of detachments with staffs, and moving
clear to all what could be ventured against the French and what could
of October this kind of warfare had taken definite shape: it had become
hardly daring to dismount and always expecting to be pursued. By the end
and captured by the French, and hid in the forests without unsaddling,
amazed at their own boldness, feared every minute to be surrounded
October. Its first period had passed: when the partisans themselves,
The partisan warfare flamed up most fiercely in the latter days of

French.
was Vasilisa, the wife of a village elder, who slew hundreds of the
captured several hundred prisoners in the course of a month; and there
landowners that remained unknown. A sacristan commanded one party which
also small scratch groups of foot and horse, and groups of peasants and
comforts of life. Others consisted solely of Cossack cavalry. There were
all the army methods and had infantry, artillery, staffs, and the
companies, of various sizes and characters. There were some that adopted
the French were fleeing toward Smolensk, there were hundreds of such
French army--and sometimes shook that tree itself. By October, when
fallen leaves that dropped of themselves from that withered tree--the
The irregulars destroyed the great army piecemeal. They gathered the

numerous these detachments became.
others were recognized. The further the campaign progressed the more
On August 24 Davydov's first partisan detachment was formed and then

step toward regularizing this method of warfare.
destroyed the French, and to him belongs the credit for taking the first
this terrible cudgel which regardless of the rules of military science
with his Russian instinct, was the first to recognize the value of
as instinctively as dogs worry a stray mad dog to death. Denis Davydov,
been destroyed by the Cossacks and the peasants, who killed them off
government, thousands of enemy stragglers, marauders, and foragers had
Before partisan warfare had been officially recognized by the

Smolensk.
The so-called partisan war began with the entry of the French into


CHAPTER III





dangers.
any compulsion to induce them to expose themselves to hardships and
individuals, without orders, dealt blows at the French without needing
into small units, because their spirit had so risen that separate
to tactics to have attacked in mass, but in fact they split up
held the army together. The Russians, on the contrary, ought according
a mass because the spirit of the army had so fallen that only the mass
have separated into detachments to defend themselves--congregated into
The French, retreating in 1812--though according to tactics they should

fall in the spirit of the troops occurs, as in all national wars.
particularly striking contrast to the facts when some strong rise or
account the spirit of the army continually proves incorrect and is in
than is needed to resist attacks. But this rule which leaves out of
fire more discipline (obtainable only by movement in masses) is needed
strength of an army depends on its spirit. To lead men forward under
in smaller groups in retreat, unconsciously confirms the truth that the
The tactical rule that an army should act in masses when attacking, and

discovered.
could be obtained in which certain laws should exist and might be
campaigns, periods of war) into such equations, a series of numbers
unknowns. And by bringing variously selected historic units (battles,
give us the value of the unknown factor but gives us a ratio between two
therefore 4x = 15y. Consequently x/y = 15/4. This equation does not
fifteen were lost. Consequently the four were equal to the fifteen, and
themselves losing four, so that on the one side four and on the other
divisions, conquer--that is, kill or take captive--all the others, while
Ten men, battalions, or divisions, fighting fifteen men, battalions, or

significance of this factor, can we hope to define the unknown.
expressing known historic facts by equations and comparing the relative
the greater or lesser desire to fight and to face danger. Only then,
and if we recognize this unknown quantity in its entirety as being
and so on--mistaking these for the real significance of the factor,
apparent--such as the commands of the general, the equipment employed,
for the unknown x itself the conditions under which that force becomes
This problem is only solvable if we cease arbitrarily to substitute

unknown factor--the spirit of an army--is a problem for science.
the resulting force. To define and express the significance of this
The spirit of an army is the factor which multiplied by the mass gives

conditions for fighting.
who want to fight will always put themselves in the most advantageous
with cudgels or with rifles that repeat thirty times a minute. Men
fighting under the command of a genius, in two--or three-line formation,
composing an army, quite independently of whether they are, or are not,
greater or lesser readiness to fight and face danger felt by all the men
That unknown quantity is the spirit of the army, that is to say, the

commanders, in order to find this unknown quantity.
the "heroes") of the efficacy of the directions issued in wartime by
Yet it is only necessary to abandon the false view (adopted to gratify

facts.
to the factor does not yield results which accord with the historic
genius of the commanders. But the assignment of these various meanings
formation, now in the equipment employed, now, and most usually, in the
of this unknown factor and tries to discover it--now in a geometric
small detachments defeat larger ones, obscurely admits the existence
that the size of any army does not coincide with its strength and that
Military science, seeing in history innumerable instances of the fact

and some unknown x.
In military affairs the strength of an army is the product of its mass

Momentum (quantity of motion) is the product of mass and velocity.

to each other simply because the masses involved are equal or unequal.
by reference to the mass only: stating that momenta are equal or unequal
For military science to say this is like defining momentum in mechanics


    * Large battalions are always victorious.


bataillons ont toujours raison. *
science says that the more troops the greater the strength. Les gros
the strength of an army to be identical with its numbers. Military
This contradiction arises from the fact that military science assumes

that rule.
Guerrilla war (always successful, as history shows) directly infringes

opponent at the moment of conflict.
attacker should concentrate his forces in order to be stronger than his
of tactics which is accepted as infallible. That rule says that an
not fit in under any rule and is directly opposed to a well-known rule
by so calling it they have explained its meaning. But such a war does
People have called this kind of war "guerrilla warfare" and assume that

by the Russians in 1812.
by the guerrillas in Spain, by the mountain tribes in the Caucasus, and
stronger forces, but again attack when opportunity offers. This was done
each other, the men disperse, attack singly, run away when attacked by
national character. In such actions, instead of two crowds opposing
together in a mass. Such action always occurs in wars that take on a
laws of war is the action of scattered groups against men pressed
One of the most obvious and advantageous departures from the so-called


CHAPTER II





compassion.
resentment and revenge in their soul yields to a feeling of contempt and
cudgel that comes to hand and strike with it till the feeling of
have adopted in similar cases, simply and easily pick up the first
conqueror, but at the moment of trial, without asking what rules others
of their rapier gracefully and politely, hand it to their magnanimous
1813--salute according to all the rules of art, and, presenting the hilt
And it is well for a people who do not--as the French did in

till the whole invasion had perished.
fell with stupid simplicity, but consistently, and belabored the French
anyone's tastes or rules and regardless of anything else, it rose and
with all its menacing and majestic strength, and without consulting
thrust en prime, and so on--the cudgel of the people's war was lifted
quarte or en tierce according to all the rules, and to make an adroit
disgraceful to fight with a cudgel and they wanted to assume a pose en
spite of the fact that to some highly placed Russians it seemed rather
the complaints of the French as to the nonobservance of the rules, in
the rules--as if there were any rules for killing people. In spite of
the Emperor Alexander that the war was being carried on contrary to all
raised above his head, he did not cease to complain to Kutuzov and to
attitude in Moscow and instead of his opponent's rapier saw a cudgel
Napoleon felt this, and from the time he took up the correct fencing

transports, and the guerrilla war were all departures from the rules.
retreat, the burning of Moscow, the capture of marauders, the seizure of
retreats after battles, the blow dealt at Borodino and the renewed
previous traditions of war. The burning of towns and villages, the
After the burning of Smolensk a war began which did not follow any

the event.
according to the rules of fencing are the historians who have described
the cudgel was the Russian people; those who try to explain the matter
the French army; his opponent who threw away the rapier and snatched up
The fencer who demanded a contest according to the rules of fencing was

confusion and obscurity would result from such an account of the duel.
with the rapier according to all the rules of art. One can imagine what
conceal the facts of the case, insisted that he had gained his victory
at the same time influenced by traditions of chivalry and, desiring to
so sensibly employed the best and simplest means to attain his end was
hand begins to brandish it. Then let us imagine that the combatant who
life, throws down his rapier, and seizing the first cudgel that comes to
wounded and understanding that the matter is no joke but concerns his
gone on for some time; suddenly one of the combatants, feeling himself
according to all the rules of the art of fencing. The fencing has
Let us imagine two men who have come out to fight a duel with rapiers

them, but burned it instead.
peasants, did not bring their hay to Moscow for the high price offered
any heroic feelings), and the whole innumerable multitude of such
carts to pillage the town, and in general personally failed to manifest
Karp and Vlas (who after the French had evacuated Moscow drove in their
The victory gained did not bring the usual results because the peasants

let the French have it.
remedy, for the peasants of the district burned their hay rather than
forage for the horses or the cattle. That was a misfortune no one could
except the cavalry, the artillery, and the transport--there was no
before it left Moscow, affirm that all was in order in the Grand Army,
The French historians, describing the condition of the French army

the conquerors, nor even in armies and battles, but in something else.
it proved that the force which decides the fate of peoples lies not in
produce a conquest and is not even an invariable indication of conquest;
expulsion of the French proved that the winning of a battle does not
The period of the campaign of 1812 from the battle of Borodino to the

all known wars.
life or death of their fatherland, and it happened in the greatest of
occurred before our fathers' eyes, and for them it was a question of the
of troops took part, we might treat it as an exception; but this event
if the matter concerned some brief conflict in which only a small number
historians' usual expedient when anything does not fit their standards);
we might say that it was not an historic phenomenon (which is the
does this mean? If it were an example taken from the history of China,
any that were at all serious, yet the French army ceased to exist. What
After the French victory at Borodino there was no general engagement nor

that destroyed Napoleon's army, is impossible.
hands of the Russians, or that after Moscow there were other battles
history: to say that the field of battle at Borodino remained in the
then Napoleonic France itself. To strain the facts to fit the rules of
ceases to exist, but the French army of six hundred thousand, and
taken and after that, with no further battles, it is not Russia that
But then, in 1812, the French gain a victory near Moscow. Moscow is

existence of Prussia.
victories of the French at Jena and Auerstadt destroy the independent
its rights, and the rights and the strength of France increase. The
rule. In proportion to the defeat of the Austrian army Austria loses
and so it is to our own day. All Napoleon's wars serve to confirm this
So according to history it has been found from the most ancient times,

suffers a complete defeat the nation is quite subjugated.
rights in proportion to the severity of the reverse, and if its army
defeated. An army has suffered defeat, and at once a people loses its
rights of the conquering nation have increased to the detriment of the
that whole nation to submit. An army gains a victory, and at once the
why the defeat of an army--a hundredth part of a nation--should oblige
decrease in the strength of the nation--even though it is unintelligible
is the cause, or at least an essential indication, of an increase or
statement that the greater or lesser success of one army against another
the facts of history (as far as we know it) confirm the truth of the
subjugates a kingdom and an entire nation of several millions, all
army, gains a victory by killing three, five, or ten thousand men, and
having quarreled with another, collects an army, fights his enemy's
Strange as may be the historical account of how some king or emperor,

of states and nations increases or decreases.
direct result of greater or less success in war the political strength
in their conflicts with one another is expressed in wars, and that as a
All historians agree that the external activity of states and nations

most instructive phenomena in history.
and the flight of the French without further conflicts, is one of the
The Battle of Borodino, with the occupation of Moscow that followed it


CHAPTER I





BOOK FOURTEEN: 1812





away, to pursue its fatal path to Smolensk.
closing up more firmly at the danger, continued, while steadily melting
But they did not cut off or overthrow anybody and the French army,

of men.
attack with music and with drums beating, and killed and lost thousands
trying to bar the road. Infantry regiments, we are told, advanced to the
And try as Kutuzov might to restrain the troops, our men attacked,

sent him a blank sheet of paper in an envelope.
French corps, and by way of reporting their intention to Kutuzov they
near Vyazma could not resist their desire to cut off and break up two
Ermolov, Miloradovich, Platov, and others in proximity to the French

rending and exulting over the dying beast.
bridge, and they laughed at and slandered him, flinging themselves on,
aged wisdom what they could understand, he told them of the golden
road from Moscow to Vyazma without any battle?" But drawing from his
is the use of that, when a third of their army has melted away on the
losing our own men and inhumanly slaughtering unfortunate wretches? What
He could not tell them what we say now: "Why fight, why block the road,

case of any commander in chief) to prevent an attack.
Kutuzov alone used all his power (and such power is very limited in the

clamored for action.
to cut off, to seize, to capture, and to overthrow the French, and all
to occur. The superior officers all wanted to distinguish themselves,
Konovnitsyn had foreseen on the night of the eleventh of October began
of the French army along the Smolensk road became well defined, what
Of the Russian commanders Kutuzov alone understood this. When the flight

becomes.
the contrary the greater the heat the more solidified the remaining snow
limit of time in less than which no amount of heat can melt the snow. On
A lump of snow cannot be melted instantaneously. There is a certain

body could hasten the process of decomposition.
their energies. Beyond a certain limit no mechanical disruption of the
Russians to stop this movement, to which the French were directing all
possibility and rendered it not only difficult but impossible for the
very numbers and their crowded and swift movement deprived them of that
slightest decent pretext, such pretexts did not always occur. Their
convenient opportunity to detach themselves and to surrender on the
to a company, and though the French availed themselves of every
the same direction; on the other hand an army corps could not surrender
of this common attraction to Smolensk, their goal, drew each of them in
to escape from all this horror and misery; but on the one hand the force
Each of them desired nothing more than to give himself up as a prisoner

hundreds of thousands they moved like a whole nation.
their enormous mass drew the individual human atoms to itself. In their
them together--their great numbers. As with the physical law of gravity,
supplied them with a certain energy, there was another cause binding
common impulse which bound the whole crowd of French into one mass and
and unheard-of rapidity toward the goal they had fixed on. Besides the
Coming out onto the highroad the French fled with surprising energy

pushed on to Smolensk as to a promised land.
both those who knew and those who did not know deceived themselves, and
give them strength to move on and endure their present privations. So
knew that provisions were scarce there), but because this alone could
told so (on the contrary their superior officers, and Napoleon himself,
much food and fresh troops awaited them in Smolensk, nor that they were
intensified in the mass, urged them on. It was not that they knew that
was Smolensk, toward which all their desires and hopes, enormously
goal--their native land--was too remote, and their immediate goal
For the French retreating along the old Smolensk road, the final

the impulses felt by a single person are always magnified in a crowd.
eclipses his ultimate goal and attracts all his hopes and desires. And
spend the night," and during the first day's journey that resting place
shall get to a place twenty-five miles off where I shall rest and
necessary to set aside his final goal and to say to himself: "Today I
was too far off, and for a man going a thousand miles it is absolutely
during their retreat it was their native land. But that native land
The promised land for the French during their advance had been Moscow,

land to have the strength to move.
end of those thousand miles. One must have the prospect of a promised
a thousand miles he must imagine that something good awaits him at the
A man in motion always devises an aim for that motion. To be able to go


CHAPTER XIX





the Smolensk) road acted simultaneously on him also.
influenced the whole army and directed it along the Mozhaysk (that is,
not prove that Napoleon caused it to retreat, but that the forces which
That Napoleon agreed with Mouton, and that the army retreated, does

orders--as the historians tell us--to retreat by the Smolensk road.
the Cossacks had given him he at once agreed with Mouton and issued
former agility and boldness, and under the influence of the fright
with his forty-year-old stomach understood that hint, not feeling his
to fly as fast as possible along the nearest, familiar road. Napoleon
in the midst of his army, it was clear that there was nothing for it but
When les enfants du Don might so easily have taken the Emperor himself

managed to escape.
men. Disregarding Napoleon they rushed after the plunder and Napoleon
Cossacks fell. Here as at Tarutino they went after plunder, leaving the
thing that was destroying the French army, the booty on which the
Cossacks did not capture Napoleon then, what saved him was the very
booty fell in with the Emperor and very nearly captured him. If the
previous and of the impending battle. Some Cossacks on the prowl for
an escort, on the pretext of inspecting the army and the scene of the
the morning amid the lines of his army with his suite of marshals and
The day after the council at Malo-Yaroslavets Napoleon rode out early in

due time. It was what the French called "le hourra de l'Empereur."
external shock was needed to overcome that shame, and this shock came in
still remained a feeling of shame at admitting that they must flee. An
But though they all realized that it was necessary to get away, there

recognized.
even Napoleon, could say anything against that truth which they all
needful was to get away as quickly as possible; and no one, not
Mouton who, speaking last, said what they all felt: that the one thing
mouths were closed by the opinion uttered by the simple-minded soldier
generals pretending to confer together expressed various opinions, all
So it came about that at the council at Malo-Yaroslavets, when the

which they were all more or less vaguely conscious.
escape as quickly as possible from this position, of the hopelessness of
soldiers fled--without knowing whither, each concerned only to make his
The members of what had once been an army--Napoleon himself and all his

chemical elements of dissolution.
and the pillage of Moscow it had borne within itself, as it were, the
That army could not recover anywhere. Since the battle of Borodino

consuming what was set ablaze?
as those who lived in Moscow, and where fire had the same property of
army recuperate in Kaluga province, which was inhabited by Russians such
Smolensk had looted provisions instead of storing them--how could that
trampled them underfoot instead of keeping them, and on arriving at
could that army--which had found abundant supplies in Moscow and had
then already it bore within itself the germs of inevitable ruin. How
way), the historians forget that nothing could have saved his army, for
into those southern provinces (for the Russian army did not bar his
But not to speak of the fact that nothing prevented him from advancing

provinces.
happened had Napoleon been in time to penetrate into the rich southern
and Malo-Yaroslavets, and make conjectures as to what would have
Napoleon's historians describe to us his skilled maneuvers at Tarutino

retreat fled in the opposite direction.
Everywhere Kutuzov retreated, but the enemy without waiting for his

to him quite possible.
orders for the evacuation of Kaluga--a retreat beyond which town seemed
Malo-Yaroslavets, but Kutuzov lingered with the main army and gave
maneuvers, or encounters with the perishing enemy. Dokhturov went to
authority, by guile, and by entreaty, from useless attacks,
Kutuzov's activity was directed toward restraining his troops, by
From the time he received this news to the end of the campaign all


CHAPTER XVIII





Lord!" and he wept.
tremulous voice with folded hands. "Russia is saved. I thank Thee, O
"O Lord, my Creator, Thou has heard our prayer..." said he in a

the room, to the corner darkened by the icons that hung there.
wrinkled; he waved his arm at Toll and turned to the opposite side of
him. He tried to say something, but his face suddenly puckered and
instructions. Toll was beginning to say something but Kutuzov checked
Bolkhovitinov told him everything and was then silent, awaiting

"Speak quicker, quicker! Don't torture me!" Kutuzov interrupted him.

been told to report.
Bolkhovitinov gave a detailed account from the beginning of all he had

has left Moscow? Are you sure? Eh?"
"come nearer--nearer. What news have you brought me? Eh? That Napoleon
voice, as he pulled together the shirt which gaped open on his chest,
"Tell me, tell me, friend," said he to Bolkhovitinov in his low, aged

read in his face what preoccupied his own mind.
seeing eye to scrutinize the messenger more carefully, as if wishing to
resting against the other which was doubled under him. He screwed up his
Kutuzov sat up with one leg hanging down from the bed and his big paunch

"Call him in, call him here."

"There can be no doubt about it, your Highness."

lit, struck Toll by its cold severity.
"Who brought it?" asked Kutuzov with a look which, when the candle was

of the news.
While a footman was lighting a candle, Toll communicated the substance

out to them.
"Eh, who's there? Come in, come in! What news?" the field marshal called

Konovnitsyn, and Bolkhovitinov.
There was a stir in the next room and he heard the steps of Toll,

thinking of that.
On the night of the eleventh of October he lay leaning on his arm and

alone foresaw, was his heart's one desire.
with Petersburg, and so on. But the destruction of the French, which he
the reading of novels, the distribution of awards, his correspondence
with the staff, the letters he wrote from Tarutino to Madame de Stael,
customary routine. To such customary routine belonged his conversations
absorbed all his mental powers. All else was to him only life's
he desired it the less he allowed himself to believe it. This question
in such cases they omit all that makes for the contrary. And the more
so that it appears to confirm what they desire, and he knew how readily
to rumors, knew how apt people who desire anything are to group all news
Kutuzov. With his sixty years' experience he knew what value to attach
only suppositions, which seemed important to the younger men but not to
the French army was beaten and preparing for flight. But these were
of preparations for leaving Moscow, all confirmed the supposition that
division, the guerrillas' reports of distress in Napoleon's army, rumors
extermination of the French. Dorokhov's report about Broussier's
possible what Kutuzov had not yet even dared to think of--the complete
during its first eleven days after leaving Moscow: a stampede which made
what happened--the insane, convulsive stampede of Napoleon's army
through Medyn and Yukhnov, but the one thing he could not foresee was
awaiting him. Kutuzov even imagined that Napoleon's army might turn back
Napoleon might fight him with his own weapon and remain in Moscow
He thought too of the possibility (which he feared most of all) that
in sections--against Petersburg, or against him, or to outflank him.
imagined all sorts of movements of the Napoleonic army as a whole or
longer he thought the more contingencies presented themselves. He
contingencies instead of two or three and based nothing on them. The
the younger men, but with this difference, that he saw thousands of
for doing. He imagined all sorts of possible contingencies, just like
sleepless nights he did just what he reproached those younger generals
more impatient the longer he waited. Lying on his bed during those
case proofs were needed; he had waited a whole month for them and grew
Russians had put their whole strength must have been mortal. But in any
with all his being that the terrible blow into which he and all the
hand the French had occupied Moscow. On the other Kutuzov felt assured
mortal or not had hung over Kutuzov's head for a whole month. On the one
The undecided question as to whether the wound inflicted at Borodino was

foreseen everything. But the contingencies are endless."
remembered the general plan sent him from Petersburg) "they have
them that when they have thought of two or three contingencies" (he
"And what ingenious maneuvers they all propose to me! It seems to

that's not what is needed now.
happened because they all want to show how well they can fight. But
like children from whom one can't get any sensible account of what has
Only to distinguish themselves! As if fighting were fun. They are
see! Continual maneuvers, continual advances!" thought he. "What for?
"They want to run to see how they have wounded it. Wait and we shall

needed further proofs and it was necessary to wait.
guerrillas, Kutuzov was almost sure that the wound was mortal. But he
Lauriston and Barthelemi having been sent, and by the reports of the
wounded or not was still an undecided question. Now by the fact of
strength of Russia could have wounded it, but whether it was mortally
he knew that the beast was wounded, and wounded as only the whole
is harmed, and your teeth are set on edge. Like an experienced sportsman
of itself when ripe, but if picked unripe the apple is spoiled, the tree
knew that an apple should not be plucked while it is green. It will fall
Patience and time are my warriors, my champions," thought Kutuzov. He
"They must understand that we can only lose by taking the offensive.

pain, must, he thought, have some effect on others too.
Tarutino battle and of the day before it, which Kutuzov remembered with
obliged to take part in useless aggressive movements. The lesson of the
was more at ease as to the possibility of himself and his troops being
influence than anyone else on the staff, had begun to avoid him, Kutuzov
Since Bennigsen, who corresponded with the Emperor and had more

darkness.
his plump hand, with his one eye open, meditating and peering into the
So he lay now on his bed, supporting his large, heavy, scarred head on

without undressing, he generally remained awake thinking.
asleep unexpectedly in the daytime, but at night, lying on his bed
Kutuzov like all old people did not sleep much at night. He often fell


CHAPTER XVII





go to see his Highness.
Konovnitsyn, who listened in weary silence, reminded him that they must
began to expound his plans to a general sharing his quarters, until
And in fact Toll, to whom he went to communicate the news, immediately

though he knew it could not be helped.
orders, and rescind them. And this premonition was disagreeable to him
drawn with Kutuzov; and how they would make suggestions, quarrel, issue
especially Bennigsen, who ever since Tarutino had been at daggers
of influential men on the staff would be stirred up by this news,
the unpleasant thought that occurred to him, of how all that nest
frowned--partly from an increased pain in his head and partly at
Coming out of the hut into the damp, dark night Konovnitsyn

constitute the most essential part of the machine.
was one of those unnoticed cogwheels that, without clatter or noise,
for it and feared to send him to the front, and like Dokhturov he
him up. In battle he was always under fire, so that Kutuzov reproved him
door open, giving orders that every messenger should be allowed to wake
Since his appointment as general on duty he had always slept with his
battle but was always found where the situation was most difficult.
capacity and information, and like Dokhturov he never made plans of
Like Dokhturov he had the reputation of being a man of very limited
1812--the Barclays, Raevskis, Ermolovs, Platovs, and Miloradoviches.
merely for propriety's sake in the list of the so-called heroes of
Peter Petrovich Konovnitsyn, like Dokhturov, seems to have been included

And he did his work, giving his whole strength to the task.
and still less speak about it, but must only attend to one's own work.
conviction that all would be well, but that one must not trust to this
reason but by something else. There was within him a deep unexpressed
regarded the whole business of the war not with his intelligence or his
himself whether the news was good or bad. That did not interest him. He
importance and that no time must be lost. He did not consider or ask
Konovnitsyn had understood at once that the news brought was of great

"Did you get here quickly? Let us go to his Highness."

and donned his cap.
boots. Then he took off his nightcap, combed his hair over his temples,
their woolen stockings to the earthen floor and began putting on his
read the dispatch. Hardly had he done so before he lowered his legs in
While listening to the officer's report Konovnitsyn broke the seal and

blinking at the light.
"Well, what is it? From whom?" he asked immediately but without hurry,

its habitual calm and firm appearance.
from present affairs, but then he suddenly started and his face assumed
there still remained for an instant a faraway dreamy expression remote
Konovnitsyn's handsome, resolute face with cheeks flushed by fever,
And in fact the head in the nightcap was lifted at once. On

be sure to arouse him.
the General Staff!" he said with a smile, knowing that those words would
greatcoat. "Peter Petrovich!" said he. (Konovnitsyn did not stir.) "To
rising and going up to the man in the nightcap who lay covered by a
"There's nothing to be done, we'll have to wake him," said Shcherbinin,

the scouts all say the same thing."
"The news is reliable," said Bolkhovitinov. "Prisoners, Cossacks, and

"Who gave the report?" inquired Shcherbinin, taking the envelope.

all over with mud and had smeared his face by wiping it with his sleeve.
running away, and looked at the messenger. Bolkhovitinov was bespattered
the candlestick of which the cockroaches that had been gnawing it were
up, first blue and then red, Shcherbinin lit the tallow candle, from
When the flame of the sulphur splinters kindled by the tinder burned

This was Konovnitsyn.
as he held the candle, and the face of another man who was still asleep.
By the light of the sparks Bolkhovitinov saw Shcherbinin's youthful face

"Oh, the nasty beasts!" said he with disgust.

something on the candlestick.
The orderly was striking a light and Shcherbinin was fumbling for

found it, I've found it!" he added.
to the orderly. (This was Shcherbinin, Konovnitsyn's adjutant.) "I've
always hide it?" said the voice of the man who was stretching himself,
"Wait a moment, I'll light a candle. You damned rascal, where do you

once to the general on duty."
"Here is the dispatch," said Bolkhovitinov. "My orders are to give it at

ill. Perhaps this is only a rumor."
"I don't like waking him," he said, fumbling for something. "He is very

The man who had wakened yawned and stretched himself.

guessing by the voice that it was not Konovnitsyn.
said Bolkhovitinov, unable to see in the dark who was speaking but
"From Dokhturov and from Alexey Petrovich. Napoleon is at Forminsk,"

"What? What's that? From whom?" came a sleepy voice.

"Your honor, your honor! A courier."

The orderly had gone in before him and began waking somebody.

the dark.
Bolkhovitinov, entering the open door which he had found by feeling in
"But this is very important, from General Dokhturov," said

wake the captain first."
he has not slept," said the orderly pleadingly in a whisper. "You should
"He has been very unwell since the evening and this is the third night

who had risen and was sniffing in the dark passage.
"The general on duty, quick! It's very important!" said he to someone

a dark passage.
hung a signboard, GENERAL STAFF, and throwing down his reins, he entered
one o'clock at night. Dismounting at a cottage on whose wattle fence
half over a sticky, muddy road, Bolkhovitinov reached Litashevka after
Having changed horses twice and galloped twenty miles in an hour and a
It was a warm, dark, autumn night. It had been raining for four days.


CHAPTER XVI





accompanied by a Cossack with spare horses.
dispatch and verbal instructions, galloped off to the General Staff
a written report. Toward midnight Bolkhovitinov, having received the
was to explain the whole affair by word of mouth, besides delivering
For this purpose a capable officer, Bolkhovitinov, was chosen, who

instructions. So it was decided to send a dispatch to the staff.
on his own judgment, but Dokhturov insisted that he must have Kutuzov's
that time and now the whole French army was there. Ermolov wished to act
been ordered to attack Forminsk. But only Broussier had been there at
any action, as it was not clear to him now what he ought to do. He had
direction--along the Kaluga road. Dokhturov was unwilling to undertake
was now the whole French army marching from Moscow in an unexpected
evident that where they had expected to meet a single division there
Guards marching along the road to Borovsk. From all these reports it was
Cossacks of Dokhturov's detachment reported having sighted the French
Borovsk said he had seen an immense army entering the town. Some
days previously. That same evening a house serf who had come from
army, that Napoleon was there and the whole army had left Moscow four
troops that had entered Forminsk that day were the vanguard of the whole
with a French guardsman he had captured. The prisoner said that the
On the evening of October 11 Seslavin came to the Aristovo headquarters

Seslavin.
Dorokhov's detachment, the two small guerrilla detachments of Figner and
been till then. At that time Dokhturov had under his command, besides
Kaluga road and began to enter Forminsk, where only Broussier had
battle--suddenly without any reason turned off to the left onto the new
movement, reached Murat's position apparently in order to give
orders he had received, the whole French army having, in its convulsive
stopped at the village of Aristovo, preparing faithfully to execute the
On the tenth of October when Dokhturov had gone halfway to Forminsk and

not the shaving which merely harms and hinders the working.
revolves quietly is one of the most essential parts of the machine, and
the machine cannot conceive that the small connecting cogwheel which
important part. The man who does not understand the construction of
and is interfering with its action and tossing about in it is its most
machine to imagine that a shaving that has fallen into it by chance
It is natural for a man who does not understand the workings of a

his merit.
dubiously. And this silence about Dokhturov is the clearest testimony to
campaign, but of Dokhturov nothing or very little is said and that
and we are told of many geniuses and heroes of that period of the
fought and where the obvious disintegration of the French army began;
Malo-Yaroslavets, the place where the last battle with the French was
It was Dokhturov again whom they sent to Forminsk and from there to

us in verse and prose, but of Dokhturov scarcely a word has been said.
greatest glory of the Russian army. Many heroes have been described to
And the quiet little Dokhturov rode thither, and Borodino became the
rectify a mistake he had made by sending someone else there first.
this same irresolute and undiscerning Dokhturov--Kutuzov hastening to
French artillery fire was directed against it, the man sent there was
tenths of the men of our left flank had fallen and the full force of the
day long. At the battle of Borodino, when Bagration was killed and nine
was awakened by the bombardment of the town--and Smolensk held out all
Malakhov Gate, he had hardly dozed off in a paroxysm of fever before he
to defend the town against Napoleon's whole army. In Smolensk, at the
guard. Ill with fever he went to Smolensk with twenty thousand men
were flying and perishing and not a single general was left in the rear
Augezd dam, rallying the regiments, saving what was possible when all
Austerlitz to the year 1813. At Austerlitz he remained last at the
the position was most difficult all through the Russo-French wars from
as undecided and undiscerning--but whom we find commanding wherever
on batteries, and so on, and who was thought to be and was spoken of
plans of battles, dashing about in front of regiments, showering crosses
modest little Dokhturov whom no one had described to us as drawing up
difficult and important one, was entrusted to Dokhturov--that same
By a strange coincidence, this task, which turned out to be a most

sent to Forminsk to attack Broussier.
The result was a compromise which was inevitable: a small detachment was
Dorokhov's suggestion. Kutuzov did not consider any offensive necessary.
memory of the easy victory at Tarutino, urged Kutuzov to carry out
officers again demanded action. Generals on the staff, excited by the
rest of the French army they might easily be destroyed. The soldiers and
division had been seen at Forminsk and that being separated from the
detachment operating to the left of Tarutino that troops of Broussier's
Soon after that a report was received from Dorokhov's guerrilla

brought by Lauriston, saying that there could be no question of peace.
Kutuzov replied to this letter as he had done to the one formerly
Napoleon was already not far from Kutuzov on the old Kaluga road.
from Napoleon proposing peace and falsely dated from Moscow, though
In the early days of October another envoy came to Kutuzov with a letter


CHAPTER XV





sleep beside his companions.
into a shed boarded up with planks!" He smiled, and went and lay down to
and it is all I!" thought Pierre. "And they caught all that and put it
stars in its faraway depths. "And all that is me, all that is within me,
lured one to itself. Pierre glanced up at the sky and the twinkling
those forests and fields, the bright, oscillating, limitless distance
before, were now visible in the distance. And farther still, beyond
sky hung the full moon. Forests and fields beyond the camp, unseen
red campfires were growing paler and dying down. High up in the light
crackling of campfires and the voices of many men had grown quiet, the
The huge, endless bivouac that had previously resounded with the

the inquisitive man, and looked around him.
all by himself. Pierre stopped laughing, got up, went farther away from
A man got up and came to see what this queer big fellow was laughing at

till tears started to his eyes.
What, me? Me? My immortal soul? Ha-ha-ha! Ha-ha-ha!..." and he laughed
did not let me pass. They took me and shut me up. They hold me captive.
"Ha-ha-ha!" laughed Pierre. And he said aloud to himself: "The soldier

evidently solitary laughter could mean.
men from various sides turned with surprise to see what this strange and
burst out into a fit of his broad, good-natured laughter, so loud that
cart and remained motionless a long while sunk in thought. Suddenly he
dropping his head he sat down on the cold ground by the wheel of the
unharnessed cart where there was nobody. Tucking his legs under him and
Pierre turned back, not to his companions by the campfire, but to an

the road he was stopped by a French sentinel who ordered him back.
common soldier prisoners were stationed. He wanted to talk to them. On
campfires to the other side of the road where he had been told the
come. Pierre got up and left his new companions, crossing between the
haze. It grew light. The evening was ending, but the night had not yet
rising full moon, and that vast red ball swayed strangely in the gray
sky. A red glow as of a conflagration spread above the horizon from the
The sun had set long since. Bright stars shone out here and there in the

their present situation.
scenes they had witnessed during the campaign, and avoided all talk of
animated and gay. They spoke of personal reminiscences, of amusing
against the worsening of their position they were all particularly
order to shoot them which had been announced to them. As if in reaction
Moscow, or of the roughness of their treatment by the French, or of the
Neither Pierre nor any of the others spoke of what they had seen in

comrades.
He ate his supper of buckwheat soup with horseflesh and chatted with his

of it.
him, there grew and strengthened in his soul a power of life independent
he felt that in proportion to the efforts of that fatal force to crush
imprisonment, now again controlled his existence. It was terrible, but
crushed him during the executions, but which he had not felt during his
those who lagged behind. Pierre felt that that fatal force which had
ill and could not walk, the officer replied that the order was to shoot
Russian. To the noncommissioned officer's excuse that the prisoner was
court-martial a noncommissioned officer on account of the escape of the
the road, and heard his friend the captain reprimand and threaten to
a Frenchman beat a Russian soldier cruelly for straying too far from
soldier, who had pretended to suffer from colic, had escaped. Pierre saw
prisoners, it was found that in the bustle of leaving Moscow one Russian
This spite increased still more when, on calling over the roll of

their former friendly relations.
personal spite against each of the prisoners, in unexpected contrast to
From the officer down to the lowest soldier they showed what seemed like

received horseflesh for their meat ration.
had done at the start. It was here that the prisoners for the first time
During this halt the escort treated the prisoners even worse than they

much that was painful and difficult awaited them on this journey.
to understand that they did not yet know where they were going, and that
that had seized them at the start. Once at a standstill they all seemed
feeling of unpleasant awakening from the hurry and eagerness to push on
in the chill dusk of the autumn evening, experienced one and the same
It seemed that all these men, now that they had stopped amid fields

by a sword.
themselves, and Pierre saw that one German was badly wounded on the head
carriage horses on their heads, turning them aside, others fought among
soldiers ran toward the cart from different sides: some beat the
into one of the carts and knocked a hole in it with its pole. Several
be heard from all sides. A carriage that followed the escort ran
dissatisfied. For a long time, oaths, angry shouts, and fighting could
began to prepare for their night's rest. They all appeared angry and
began to set. The baggage carts drew up close together and the men
They marched very quickly, without resting, and halted only when the sun

onto the Kaluga road.
the baggage trains, and the prisoners, hemmed in on all sides, emerged
collected his men and with shouts and quarrels forced his way in among
It was not till nearly evening that the officer commanding the escort

corporal's face when the drums were beating.
and coldly cruel expression that had struck Pierre that morning on the
side to side, and all the faces bore the same swaggeringly resolute
teeth gleamed, brows frowned, ever the same words of abuse flew from
they all jostled one another, began to grow angry and to fight, white
the different streets with one and the same desire to get on quickly;
power. During the hour Pierre watched them they all came flowing from
All these people and horses seemed driven forward by some invisible

Pierre did not see the people as individuals but saw their movement.

more soldiers, and now and then women.
wagons, soldiers, gun carriages, carriages, soldiers, ammunition carts,
The women's vehicles drove by. Behind them came more carts, soldiers,

receive impressions that might weaken it.
on him--as if his soul, making ready for a hard struggle, refused to
ruins of Moscow. All that he now witnessed scarcely made an impression
smeared with soot for fun nor these women hurrying away nor the burned
force nothing had seemed to him strange or dreadful: neither the corpse
From the moment Pierre had recognized the appearance of the mysterious

colors, who were shouting something in shrill voices.
squeezed together, sat women with rouged faces, dressed in glaring
curiosity. In three carriages involved among the munition carts, closely
his stature, saw over the heads of the others what so attracted their
bore all the prisoners forward onto the road, and Pierre, thanks to
Again, as at the church in Khamovniki, a wave of general curiosity

carriages--see how comfortably they've settled themselves!"
there's no end to it. Russian wenches, by heaven, so they are! In
Yes, I dare say, that's the way they'll let you pass... Just look,
it. Fighting again... A woman with a baby, and not bad-looking either!
like a portable house.... That fellow's dropped his sack and doesn't see
Napoleon's own. See what horses! And the monograms with a crown! It's
shan't get away before evening. Look, look there.... Why, that must be
"That's right, hit him on the snout--on his snout! Like this, we

They're fighting."
chaises!... See that fellow there sitting on the trunks.... Heavens!
himself up, he can hardly walk! Good lord, they've even grabbed those
heaven!... Oh, the rascals!... See how that fellow has loaded
in the cart.... Why, those are settings taken from some icons, by
the blackguards have looted.... There! See what that one has behind
the cannon! Look there, those are furs!" they exclaimed. "Just see what
"What crowds! Just look at the crowds!... They've loaded goods even on

the half-burned house against which Pierre was leaning.
To get a better view, several officer prisoners climbed onto the wall of

which mingled in his imagination with the roll of the drums.
pressed against the wall of a charred house, listening to that noise
tramp of feet, and incessant shouts of anger and abuse. Pierre stood
sides, like the roar of the sea, were heard the rattle of wheels, the
close together had to stand for some hours at that crossway. From all
Transmoskva ward and the Kaluga road converge, and the prisoners jammed
hour to do so, and came out upon the square where the streets of the
that separated the bridge from the Kaluga road, taking more than an
crowded closer and closer together. They advanced the few hundred paces
forward, halted, and again moved on, and from all sides vehicles and men
When they had crossed the Crimean bridge the prisoners moved a few steps

Street.
the vanguard of Ney's army was already emerging from the Great Ordynka
train had not yet got out of Moscow and reached the Kaluga road when
But the baggage trains stretched out so that the last of Beauharnais'
Crimean bridge and some were already debouching into the Kaluga road.
Davout's troops, in whose charge were the prisoners, were crossing the

Stone Bridge, were Ney's troops and transport.
before any of the others. Behind, along the riverside and across the
the distance. These were troops of Beauharnais' corps which had started
near Neskuchny, endless rows of troops and carts stretched away into
trains before and behind them. To the right, where the Kaluga road turns
From the bridge they had a view of endless lines of moving baggage
At the bridge they all halted, waiting for those in front to get across.

private vehicles.
came among a huge and closely packed train of artillery mingled with
belonging to that escort, but when they reached the supply stores they
marched, followed only by their escort and the vehicles and wagons
Through the cross streets of the Khamovniki quarter the prisoners


CHAPTER XIV





the dead man.
drove away with their swords the crowd of prisoners who were gazing at
guards began cursing and the French soldiers, with fresh virulence,
"Go on! What the devil... Go on! Thirty thousand devils!..." the convoy

against the palings with its face smeared with soot.
than he did, he found that this was the body of a man, set upright
surrounding the church. From the words of his comrades who saw better
exclamations, and dimly made out something leaning against the palings
Pierre too drew near the church where the thing was that evoked these

smeared with something!"
"Ah, the villains! What heathens! Yes; dead, dead, so he is... And

side and exclamations of horror and disgust were heard.
quarters of Moscow) the whole mass of prisoners suddenly started to one
As they passed near a church in the Khamovniki (one of the few unburned

major.
"Well, you know it's burned, so what's the use of talking?" said the

is."
it left. Yes, I told you--the whole quarter beyond the river, and so it
river, and Zubova, and in the Kremlin.... Just look! There's not half of
were heard saying as they gazed on the charred ruins. "All beyond the
"Oh, oh, oh! What have they done?" the prisoners on one side and another

pushing him at all.
road wide enough?" said he, turning to a man behind him who was not
down, and there's an end of it.... What are you pushing for? Isn't the
matter whether it is St. Nicholas or St. Blasius? You see it's burned
"What are you disputing about?" said the major angrily. "What does it

mistaken in his identification of the different wards of Moscow.
was a Pole, disputed with the commissariat officer, arguing that he was
of the city was that they could see. A third officer, who by his accent
observations as to what had been burned down and what this or that part
side to side and gazed at the ruins of Moscow, loudly announcing his
official in felt boots and wearing a commissariat uniform ran round from
where they were now being taken and how far they would get that day. An
Another, a thin little officer, was speaking to everyone, conjecturing
all surprised at something when there was nothing to be surprised at.
they were all hurrying when they had nowhere to hurry to and were
growled at everybody because he thought he was being pushed and that
pipe firmly with the other. Panting and puffing, the major grumbled and
pouch, inside the bosom of his dressing gown and held the stem of his
his fellow prisoners. He kept one hand, in which he clasped his tobacco
gown tied round with a towel, and who evidently enjoyed the respect of
with a sallow, bloated, angry face, who was wearing a Kazan dressing
shoes mistrustfully, as at an alien. Not far from him walked a fat major
Pierre and much better dressed than he. They looked at him and at his
The officers, who had come from the other sheds, were all strangers to

about three hundred men.
in front. There were about thirty officers, with Pierre among them, and
The officer prisoners were separated from the soldiers and told to march

was now useless to say any more.
that this mysterious force completely controlled these men and that it
"Dram-da-da-dam, dam-dam..." rattled the drums, and Pierre understood

"Be so good..." shouted the captain, frowning angrily.

"But he is dying," Pierre again began.

on!" he continued without looking at Pierre.
"He'll manage to walk, devil take him!" said the captain. "Pass on, pass

Pierre told him about the sick man.

Pierre.
"What now?" the officer asked with a cold look as if not recognizing

Pierre went up to him, though he knew his attempt would be vain.

looking at the prisoners who thronged past him.
"Pass on, pass on!" the captain reiterated, frowning sternly, and

had recognized in the corporal's words and in the roll of the drums.
marching kit, and on his cold face appeared that same it which Pierre
assured him was ready to do anything for him. The captain was also in
his way forward and approached that very captain who as the corporal had
another like a flock of sheep, squeezed into the exit, Pierre pushed
When that door was opened and the prisoners, crowding against one

at him, but stood frowning by the door of the hut.
wait and endure. He did not again go to the sick man, nor turn to look
who served as its tools, was useless. Pierre knew this now. One had to
try to escape that force, to address entreaties or exhortations to those
effect of which he had witnessed during the executions. To fear or to
people against their will to kill their fellow men--that force the
drums, he recognized that mysterious, callous force which compelled
in the sound of his voice, in the stirring and deafening noise of the
involuntary shudder ran down his spine. In the corporal's changed face,
"There it is!... It again!..." said Pierre to himself, and an

the sick man's groans.
became semidark, and the sharp rattle of the drums on two sides drowned
words and, uttering some meaningless oaths, slammed the door. The shed
was suddenly heard from both sides. The corporal frowned at Pierre's
moment. Moreover, just as Pierre was speaking a sharp rattle of drums
he knew or a stranger, so unlike himself did the corporal seem at that
But even as he spoke he began to doubt whether this was the corporal

"Corporal, what will they do with the sick man?..." Pierre began.

had to be counted before being let out.
The corporal came, according to orders, to shut the door. The prisoners

straps, and these changed their familiar faces.
soldiers were in marching kit with knapsacks and shakos that had metal
pipe the day before came up to it with two soldiers. The corporal and
Just as Pierre reached the door, the corporal who had offered him a

the door of the shed.
"I'll go and ask them again directly," said Pierre, rising and going to

louder voice.
"O Lord! Oh, it will be the death of me! O Lord!" moaned the man in a

here. You may be better off than we others," said Pierre.
"You know, Sokolov, they are not all going away! They have a hospital

squatted down beside him.
and brought to have his boots mended with, went up to the sick man and
made for him from some leather a French soldier had torn off a tea chest
Pierre, girt with a rope round his waist and wearing shoes Karataev had

left alone.
caused him to moan (he had dysentery) as his fear and grief at being
regularly and quietly. It was evidently not so much his sufferings that
at his comrades who were paying no attention to him, and he moaned
His eyes, prominent from the emaciation of his face, gazed inquiringly
shadows round his eyes, alone sat in his place barefoot and not dressed.
the order to start. The sick soldier, Sokolov, pale and thin with dark
In the shed everyone was ready, dressed, belted, shod, and only awaited

along the lines.
of the sheds, and animated French talk mingled with curses sounded all
and carrying muskets, knapsacks, and enormous sacks, stood in front
At seven in the morning a French convoy in marching trim, wearing shakos

and baggage trains started.
of October: kitchens and sheds were dismantled, carts loaded, and troops
The French evacuation began on the night between the sixth and seventh


CHAPTER XIII





placed responsibilities upon him.
gave him almost the status of a hero. And Pierre felt that their opinion
life, his absent-mindedness and simplicity--here among these people
the world he had lived in--his strength, his disdain for the comforts of
qualities that had been a hindrance, if not actually harmful, to him in
he appeared to them a rather mysterious and superior being. The very
thinking without doing anything (which seemed to them incomprehensible),
gentleness to his companions, and his capacity for sitting still and
showed to the soldiers by pressing nails into the walls of the hut; his
of three rubles a week made to officers); with his strength, which he
readiness to give anything asked of him (he received the allowance
of languages, the respect shown him by the French, his simplicity, his
formed of him soon after his arrival at the shed. With his knowledge
further strengthened in him by the high opinion his fellow prisoners
That feeling of alertness and of readiness for anything was still

strength as the hardships of his position increased.
stayed with him during the whole of his imprisonment, but even grew in
strength in life such as he had never before known. And this not only
river, all began to sparkle in the glad light--Pierre felt a new joy and
cloud, and the cupolas and crosses, the hoarfrost, the distance and the
gleamed from the east and the sun's rim appeared solemnly from behind a
crows flying from Moscow across the field, and when afterwards light
when he felt the contact of the fresh air and heard the noise of the
wooded banks above the winding river vanishing in the purple distance,
at first, the hoarfrost on the dusty grass, the Sparrow Hills, and the
saw the cupolas and crosses of the New Convent of the Virgin still dark
When on the first day he got up early, went out of the shed at dawn, and

freedom which he experienced only during those weeks.
joyful sensations, and chiefly of the complete peace of mind and inner
enthusiasm of that month of captivity, of those irrecoverable, strong,
subsequently, and for the rest of his life, he thought and spoke with
All Pierre's daydreams now turned on the time when he would be free. Yet

occupation.
difficult and destroys the desire and possibility of having an
his own life--is just what makes the choice of occupation insolubly
his wealth, his education, and his social position had given him in
needs, while great freedom in the choice of occupation--such freedom as
superfluity of the comforts of life destroys all joy in satisfying one's
restricted--seemed to him such an easy matter that he forgot that a
of occupation, that is, of his way of life--now that that was so
seemed to Pierre to constitute perfect happiness; and the choice
food, cleanliness, and freedom--now that he was deprived of all this,
talk and to hear a human voice. The satisfaction of one's needs--good
warmth when he was cold, of talking to a fellow man when he wished to
drinking when he wanted to drink, sleeping when he wanted to sleep, of
he fully appreciated the enjoyment of eating when he wanted to eat,
be indubitably man's highest happiness. Here and now for the first time
one's occupation, that is, of one's way of life, now seemed to Pierre to
the satisfaction of one's needs and consequent freedom in the choice of
believed it without any mental reservation. The absence of suffering,
implanted in us merely to torment us and never be satisfied. But Pierre
as though he was really saying that all desire for positive happiness is
only be negative, but had said it with a shade of bitterness and irony
differently. Prince Andrew had thought and said that happiness could
agreed with him, though he understood Prince Andrew's thoughts somewhat
He now often remembered his conversation with Prince Andrew and quite

their prisoner's name was Count Bezukhov?
to anybody, and especially to him, whether or not they found out that
other that woman was leading the life she preferred? What did it matter
trivial but even amusing. What concern was it of his that somewhere or
and anxiety that his name should not be smirched now seemed not merely
seemed to him meaningless and even ridiculous. His anger with his wife
calculations of the cabalistic number of the beast of the Apocalypse now
strangely consoling. His intention of killing Napoleon and his
together," he thought, repeating words of Karataev's which he found
therefore could not do so. "Russia and summer weather are not bound
of his, and that he was not called on to judge concerning them and
Napoleon. It was plain to him that all these things were no business
not now occur to him to think of Russia, or the war, or politics, or
thoughts and feelings that had formerly seemed so important. It did
were forever washed away from his imagination and memory the agitating
Those dreadful moments he had lived through at the executions had as it

Karataev.
horror of death, through privation, and through what he recognized in
about it he had found that peace and inner harmony only through the
these quests and experiments had failed him. And now without thinking
and in romantic love for Natasha; he had sought it by reasoning--and all
dissipations of town life, in wine, in heroic feats of self-sacrifice,
of Borodino. He had sought it in philanthropy, in Freemasonry, in the
inner harmony which had so impressed him in the soldiers at the battle
He had long sought in different ways that tranquillity of mind, that
tranquillity and ease of mind he had formerly striven in vain to reach.
not only lightly but joyfully. And just at this time he obtained the
it was impossible to say when they began, he endured his position
thanks especially to the fact that the privations came so gradually that
strength and health, of which he had till then been unconscious, and
limits of privation a man can endure; but thanks to his physical
In burned and devastated Moscow Pierre experienced almost the extreme

he had stayed in the shed where he was first put.
the French had offered to move him from the men's to the officers' shed,
Four weeks had passed since Pierre had been taken prisoner and though


CHAPTER XII





into the shed.
"But they'll make grand leg bands, dear friend," he said, and went back

pieces.
Karataev smiled thoughtfully and was silent awhile looking at the

He's naked, but yet he's given it back."
folk used to say: 'A sweating hand's an open hand, a dry hand's close.'
they were not Christians, but they too have souls. It's what the old
"There, look at that," said Karataev, swaying his head. "People said

bits he turned and went out.
"Platoche! Eh, Platoche! Keep them yourself!" And handing back the odd

something, suddenly blushed and shouted in a squeaky voice:
looked inquiringly at Pierre and, as if Pierre's look had told him
away. The Frenchman looked at the linen, considered for a moment, then
Frenchman without looking at him. "Oh dear!" muttered Karataev and went
a small bundle of scraps from inside his shirt and gave it to the
And Karataev, with a suddenly changed and saddened expression, took

bands for us. Well, never mind."
"What does he want the bits for?" said Karataev. "They'd make fine leg

Pierre to translate what he said.
insisted on having the pieces returned that were left over and asked
Frenchman for the money and went on admiring his own work. The Frenchman
was saying, and he looked on without interfering. Karataev thanked the
Pierre saw that Platon did not want to understand what the Frenchman

gave it to Karataev. "But give me the pieces that are over."
Frenchman again and smiled. He took out an assignation ruble note and
"Thanks, thanks, old fellow.... But the bits left over?" said the

still admiring his handiwork. "You'll be nice and comfortable...."
"It will fit better still when it sets to your body," said Karataev,

there must be some linen left over.
"It's good, quite good, thank you," said the Frenchman, in French, "but

Platon with one of his round smiles, obviously pleased with his work.
tools; and, as they say, one needs a tool even to kill a louse," said
"You see, dear man, this is not a sewing shop, and I had no proper

his eyes, looked down at the shirt and examined the seams.
The Frenchman, having pushed his head and hands through, without raising

"See, it fits well!" Platon kept repeating, pulling the shirt straight.

of the prisoners said a word.
would laugh at him, and thrust his head into the shirt hurriedly. None
body, but no shirt. He was evidently afraid the prisoners looking on
a long, greasy, flowered silk waistcoat next to his sallow, thin bare
hesitation, rapidly threw off his uniform and put on the shirt. He had
The Frenchman glanced around uneasily and then, as if overcoming his

ready," said Platon, smiling and unfolding the shirt he had sewn.
"A promise is own brother to performance! I said Friday and here it is,

and his round face seemed rounder and pleasanter than ever.
hair was bound round, workman fashion, with a wisp of lime-tree bast,
was wearing only trousers and a tattered shirt as black as soot. His
Karataev, on account of the warm weather and for convenience at work,

folded shirt.
"Ready, ready, dear fellow!" said Karataev, coming out with a neatly

shirts for them.
which they had given out to the prisoners to make up into boots and
A week before the French had had boot leather and linen issued to them,

given a shirt to sew was in that shed.
of greeting, he asked Pierre whether the soldier Platoche to whom he had
the shed. Rapidly and timidly raising his fingers to his forehead by way
Moscow, a thin, sallow, tattered French soldier came up to the door of
While Pierre was repeating what he had been told about the army leaving
talking to the corporal immediately asked what the Frenchman had said.
pacifying his comrades.) Some of the prisoners who had heard Pierre
prisoners and the French soldiers, in which Pierre had succeeded in
he had alluded to had happened a few days before--a fight between the
And after chatting a while longer, the corporal went away. (The affair

that affair would have ended ill."
mention it, Monsieur Kiril. The other day if it had not been for you
see, one likes education and well-bred people.' It is for your sake I
anything and asks me, he won't get a refusal. When one has studied, you
had misfortunes, but he is a man. He knows what's what.... If he wants
a man of education, who speaks French. He is a Russian seigneur who has
"'You see, St. Thomas,' he said to me the other day. 'Monsieur Kiril is

and showed him all sorts of favors.)
(The captain of whom the corporal spoke often had long chats with Pierre

when he makes his round, he will do anything for you."
you know. He is a man who never forgets anything. Speak to the captain
"Besides, Monsieur Kiril, you have only to say a word to the captain,

that could happen had been foreseen by the authorities.
arrangements would be made for the sick, and that in general everything
worry about that as they had an ambulance and a permanent hospital and
should be done about him. The corporal replied that Pierre need not
shed with Pierre, was dying, and Pierre told the corporal that something
order about the prisoners that day. Sokolov, one of the soldiers in the
him that nearly all the troops were starting and there ought to be an
Pierre inquired what was being said about leaving, and the corporal told

"To be on the march in such weather..." he began.

though whenever he offered it Pierre always declined it.
And the corporal leaned against the door and offered Pierre his pipe,

spring!"
"What sunshine, Monsieur Kiril!" (Their name for Pierre.) "Eh? Just like

the shed and approached Pierre with a friendly wink.
his head, and a short pipe in his mouth, came from behind a corner of
A French corporal, with coat unbuttoned in a homely way, a skullcap on

clear, motionless brilliance.
dull weather was repulsively ugly--seemed quietly beautiful now, in the
beside the fence. And even that ruined and befouled house--which in
occupied by the French, with lilac bushes still showing dark green
Near by could be seen the familiar ruins of a half-burned mansion
transparent air in most delicate outline and with unnatural clearness.
and the corners of the white house in the distance, all stood out in the
the sand, the bricks and roofs of the houses, the green church spire,
with the village, the church, and the large white house. The bare trees,
at that time of autumn. The Sparrow Hills were visible in the distance,
On everything--far and near--lay the magic crystal glitter seen only

the air.
pleasant with the invigorating freshness of the morning frost still in
In the sunshine the air was warm, and that warmth was particularly

the mornings--what is called an "old wives' summer."
For some days the weather had been calm and clear with slight frosts in

during these weeks and this recollection was pleasant to him.
The sight of them reminded him of all he had experienced and learned
bare feet a smile of animated self-satisfaction flitted across his face.
positions, moving his dirty thick big toes. Every time he looked at his
and then at his bare feet which he placed with pleasure in various
at the dog who was pretending to be in earnest about biting him,
were passing that morning, then into the distance across the river, then
Pierre first looked down the field across which vehicles and horsemen

energetic readiness for action and resistance. His feet were bare.
slackness which had shown itself even in his eyes was now replaced by an
was resolute, calm, and animatedly alert, as never before. The former
with lice, curled round his head like a cap. The look of his eyes
covered the lower part of his face, and a tangle of hair, infested
solidity and strength hereditary in his family. A beard and mustache
time. He no longer seemed stout, though he still had the appearance of
a peasant coat and cap. Physically he had changed much during this
Karataev's advice he tied with string round the ankles for warmth, and
remnant of his former clothing), a pair of soldier's trousers which by
Pierre's attire by now consisted of a dirty torn shirt (the only

now frolic about playing with a chip of wood or a straw.
delight, now bask in the sun with a thoughtful air of importance, and
four. Everything pleased it. Now it would roll on its back, yelping with
very easily and quickly on three legs, as if disdaining to use all
served it so well that it would often gracefully lift a hind leg and run
least. Its furry tail stood up firm and round as a plume, its bandy legs
any definite color did not seem to trouble the blue-gray dog in the
sometimes Flabby. Its lack of a master, a name, or even of a breed or
told stories called it Femgalka; Karataev and others called it Gray, or
nobody and had no name. The French called it Azor; the soldier who
again. Probably it had never had an owner, and it still belonged to
night; it sometimes made excursions into the town but always returned
him. This little dog lived in their shed, sleeping beside Karataev at
blue-gray dog, with a long body and short bandy legs, that jumped about
shed, and on returning stopped by the door to play with a little
Early in the morning of the sixth of October Pierre went out of the


CHAPTER XI





couple of strings inside a carriage, thinks he is driving it.
seem to a savage to guide the vessel--acted like a child who, holding a
the leader of all these movements--as the figurehead of a ship may
During the whole of that period Napoleon, who seems to us to have been

was familiar.
along the most disadvantageous and dangerous path, where the old scent
reached him, turned back, and finally--like any wild beast--ran back
frightened the beast, and it rushed forward onto the hunter's gun,
whole army, did the same thing. The rustle of the battle of Tarutino
back again, and hastens its own end. Napoleon, under pressure from his
hearing a rustle, rushes straight at the hunter's gun, runs forward and
and shudders of a mortally wounded animal. Very often a wounded animal,
entered Moscow till it was destroyed is like studying the dying leaps
skillful tactics and aims of Napoleon and his army from the time it
feels it is perishing and does not know what it is doing. To study the
The plight of the whole army resembled that of a wounded animal which

sick, and the wounded.
good thing, as those vehicles could be used to carry provisions, the
carriages in which soldiers were riding and remarked that it was a very
certain marshal when approaching Moscow. He gazed at the caleches and
the superfluous vehicles to be burned, as he had done with those of a
horror-struck. And yet with his experience of war he did not order all
seeing the baggage trains that impeded the army, he was (Thiers says)
stolen. Napoleon, too, carried away his own personal tresor, but on
Fleeing from Moscow the soldiers took with them everything they had

army was demanding.
(Thiers says), and he issued the order for departure which the whole
by Napoleon at a review, evoked in him a desire to punish the Russians
Tarutino. The news of that battle of Tarutino, unexpectedly received
capture of transport trains on the Smolensk road, and by the battle of
It began to run away only when suddenly seized by a panic caused by the

go away.
perished with each additional day it remained in Moscow. But it did not
provender which might have saved it from starvation, disintegrated and
That army, like a herd of cattle run wild and trampling underfoot the

of the Emperor."
commit nuisances in all the courtyards and even under the very windows
bitterly that in spite of repeated orders, the soldiers continue to
"The Grand Marshal of the palace," wrote the governor, "complains

sentinels and officers, and have abused and beaten them."
supplies. Others have disgraced themselves to the extent of disobeying
such a point that they break into the cellars and stores containing army
person, who should set an example of discipline, carry disobedience to
Emperor sees with regret that the picked soldiers appointed to guard his
more violently than ever yesterday evening, last night, and today. The
to the Kremlin. Among the Old Guard disorder and pillage were renewed
stop pillage, parties of marauding Guards are continually seen returning
"The Emperor is extremely displeased that despite the strict orders to

district who ought to be arrested by a strong force--October 11."
"Robbery and pillaging continue. There is a band of thieves in our

pillaging--October 9."
"Nothing new, except that the soldiers are robbing and

witnessed."
the ferocity to wound them with their sabers, as I have repeatedly
inhabitants hiding in the cellars the little they have left, even have
the 3rd Corps who, not satisfied with taking from the unfortunate
"The neighborhood of my ward continues to be pillaged by soldiers of

goods."
lawful manner. The sutlers alone venture to trade, and they sell stolen
is not yet restored and not a single merchant is carrying on trade in a
"Looting continues in the city despite the decrees against it. Order

This is what the army authorities were reporting:

looting and re-establish discipline.
by the authorities at that time was Napoleon's attempt to stop the
But the most amazing example of the ineffectiveness of the orders given

unfortunate, but even silver lost its value in relation to gold.
paper money valueless which Napoleon so graciously distributed to the
French, collecting booty, cared only for gold. Not only was the
well as the false paper money which flooded Moscow lost its value. The
Even philanthropy did not have the desired effect. The genuine as

actors and actresses were robbed.
Kremlin and in Posnyakov's house were closed again at once because the
these did not meet with success either. The theaters set up in the
As to the theaters for the entertainment of the people and the troops,

with the proclamation and killed them.
the peasants caught the commissaries who ventured too far out of town
to peasants evoked no response. There were no industrious workmen, and
With reference to commerce, the proclamation to industrious workmen and

perpetrated."
open, the padlocks smashed, the books mutilated, and other disorders
and locked up the church. That night the doors were again broken
another that: "The priest whom I found and invited to say Mass cleaned
soldier while conducting service, and a French official reported of
Napoleon's wish, but one of them was slapped in the face by a French
Two or three priests who were found in Moscow did try to carry out
settled by Napoleon's visit to a mosque, no results were achieved.
With regard to religion, as to which in Egypt matters had so easily been

looted.
preserving order looted Moscow or saved their own property from being
people who formed part of that municipality and under pretext of
municipality did not stop the robberies and was only of use to certain
With regard to administrative matters, the establishment of a

incendiaries the rest of Moscow burned down.
With regard to legal matters, after the execution of the supposed

embassage.
Alexander did not receive these envoys and did not reply to their
concern was to obtain a greatcoat and a conveyance), proved useless;
magnanimity and justice, both to Tutolmin and to Yakovlev (whose chief
With reference to diplomacy, all Napoleon's arguments as to his

the skill--and apparently the genius--of Murat.
according to Thiers it was only eventually found, like a lost pin, by
generals lost touch with the Russian army of sixty thousand men, and
Napoleon was so concerned, produced an unheard-of result. The French
hurt himself to be beaten. The pursuit of the Russian army, about which
up when he left Moscow--as a child wants the floor on which he has
only helped toward fulfilling Napoleon's wish that it should be blown
razed to the ground, proved quite useless. The mining of the Kremlin
Napoleon termed the church of Basil the Beatified) was to have been
of the case. The fortifying of the Kremlin, for which la Mosquee (as
or could be executed, for it was quite out of touch with the facts
not to the fourth but to the fifteenth of October--that plan never was
polemic with M. Fain to prove that this work of genius must be referred
more profound, more skillful, or more admirable," and enters into a
genius of which Thiers remarks that, "His genius never devised anything
With reference to the military side--the plan of campaign--that work of

engaging the cogwheels.
from the mechanism, swung about in an arbitrary and aimless way without
affect the essence of the matter but, like the hands of a clock detached
not at all worse than others issued in similar circumstances--did not
But strange to say, all these measures, efforts, and plans--which were


CHAPTER X





and to suppress robbery.
to inflict severe punishment for the nonperformance of military duties
With reference to army discipline, orders were continually being issued

from outside, and had paper rubles distributed to them."
Napoleon preferred to supply them with money with which to purchase food
precious to be given to foreigners, who were for the most part enemies,
be distributed to those who had been burned out. But as food was too
by an act worthy of himself and of the French army, he let relief
Russian money which he had prepared: "Raising the use of these means
Thiers eloquently recounts, he ordered his soldiers to be paid in forged
to kiss his white hands, graciously conversed with Tutolmin. Then, as
visited the Foundling Hospital and, allowing the orphans saved by him
tender filial affection with the majestic benevolence of a monarch. He
Mere to be inscribed on the charitable institutions, thereby combining
Napoleon also did all in his power. He caused the words Maison de ma
In regard to philanthropy, the greatest virtue of crowned heads,

established by his order.
preoccupation with state affairs, himself visited the theaters that were
rode through the streets to comfort the inhabitants, and, despite his
reviews were constantly held and rewards distributed. The Emperor
With the object of raising the spirits of the troops and of the people,


confidence at his feet and do not delay to unite with us!
co-operate with him for the public welfare! Lay your respect and
paternal intentions of His Majesty the Emperor and King and to
to whatever nation you belong, you are called on to carry out the
Inhabitants of the city and villages, and you, workingmen and artisans,

to re-establish ordinary trading.
hindrance on their return journey. (5) Steps will immediately be taken
will be taken that peasants with their carts and horses may meet with no
distances from the town as to protect the carts. (4) Similar measures
will be stationed along the highroads on Tuesdays and Saturdays at such
as the chief market days and to that end a sufficient number of troops
under any pretense. (3) Sunday and Wednesday of each week are appointed
free to take his goods back to his village and no one may hinder him
agree on, and if a seller is unable to obtain a fair price he will be
supplies will be bought from them at such prices as seller and buyer may
the Mokhovaya Street and the other at the Provision Market. (2) Such
supplies of all kinds to two appointed markets, of which one is on
living in the neighborhood of Moscow may without any danger bring their
of sale for them: (1) From today, peasants, husbandmen, and those
the soil. The government has taken the following steps to ensure freedom
city where peasants can bring their surplus supplies and the products of
assurance that you will find protection! Markets are established in the
you are hiding in terror, return to your huts without fear, in full
for your work. And lastly you too, peasants, come from the forests where
where the protection of guards awaits you! You shall receive proper pay
and industrious artisans, return to your work, your houses, your shops,
abodes! You will soon find means of satisfying your needs. Craftsmen
and come to us without fear. Inhabitants, return with confidence to your
homes and families. Respond, therefore, to his benevolent intentions
his orders. He desires to end your misfortunes and restore you to your
them, and considers no one among you his enemy except those who disobey
property is promptly punished. His Majesty the Emperor and King protects
on finding that they are respected. Any violence to them or to their
it. Your fellow countrymen are emerging boldly from their hiding places
Tranquillity is returning to this capital and order is being restored in
the soil, still kept out in the fields by groundless fear, listen!
misfortune has driven from the city, and you scattered tillers of
You, peaceful inhabitants of Moscow, artisans and workmen whom

PROCLAMATION!


placarded everywhere:
With regard to commerce and to provisioning the army, the following was

and services to be again performed in the churches.
With regard to religion, Napoleon ordered the priests to be brought back


    * As looters.


for themselves, so that the army might have its future provided for.
troops in turn should enter Moscow a la maraude * to obtain provisions
With regard to supplies for the army, Napoleon decreed that all the


military and civil authorities, and your tears will soon cease to flow!
another, unite to defeat the intentions of the evil-minded, obey the
a state, live like brothers, render mutual aid and protection one to
may be, re-establish public confidence, the source of the welfare of
and most just of monarchs. Soldiers and citizens, of whatever nation you
that these will be safeguarded, since such is the will of the greatest
on what remains of your property, and finally that you should not doubt
ignominious death awaits those who make any attempt on your persons or
the hope of a less cruel fate, should be certain that inevitable and
possible, forget the misfortunes you have suffered, should entertain
aim it is necessary that you should add your efforts and should, if
re-establish order and relieve your condition. But to achieve this
their misfortunes. These are the measures the government has adopted to
given that they should find in them the help and protection due to
citizens are returning every day to their homes and orders have been
open, and divine service is performed in them unhindered. Your fellow
wear on the left arm. Several churches of different denominations are
wards of the city. You will recognize them by the white ribbon they will
commissaries or captains of wards have been appointed to the different
appointed two commissaries general, or chiefs of police, and twenty
already prevails in consequence of its activity. The government has
The city police is established on its former footing, and better order

ribbon round the left arm.
a white belt as well. But when not on duty they will only wear a red
ribbon worn across the shoulder, and the mayor of the city will wear
needs, and of your welfare. Its members will be distinguished by a red
municipality or city government. It will take care of you, of your
paternal administration, chosen from among yourselves, will form your
put an end to disorder and to re-establish public security. A
punishes disobedience and crime. Strict measures have been taken to
desires to arrest their course. Terrible examples have taught you how he
Your misfortunes are cruel, but His Majesty the Emperor and King

INHABITANTS OF MOSCOW!


announcement issued:
constitution. A municipality was established and the following
With regard to administrative matters, Moscow was granted a

punished by an order to burn down his houses.
to find and execute the incendiaries. And the scoundrel Rostopchin was
With regard to legal matters, immediately after the fires he gave orders

dispatched that old man also to Petersburg to negotiate.
Having similarly explained his views and his magnanimity to Tutolmin, he

Petersburg.
had managed affairs badly in Moscow, he dispatched Yakovlev to
considered it his duty to inform his Friend and Brother that Rostopchin
and having written a letter to the Emperor Alexander in which he
Moscow, minutely explained to him his whole policy and his magnanimity,
who had been robbed and was in rags and did not know how to get out of
With regard to diplomatic questions, Napoleon summoned Captain Yakovlev,

campaign over the whole map of Russia.
fortification of the Kremlin, and drew up a brilliant plan for a future
charged Murat to find Kutuzov. Then he gave careful directions about the
of the Russian army, sent army corps out along the different roads, and
Moscow gave General Sabastiani strict orders to observe the movements
With regard to military matters, Napoleon immediately on his entry into


CHAPTER IX





considerations concerning the terms of the anticipated peace.
of Russia, or of the direction of affairs in Paris, or of diplomatic
army or of the doings of the enemy, or of the welfare of the people
disconcert him. He did not lose sight either of the welfare of his
of citizens and of a deputation, and even the burning of Moscow, did not
from the time he entered Moscow till the time he left it. The absence
elsewhere. Order after order and plan after plan were issued by him
His activity in Moscow was as amazing and as full of genius as

matter plainly and simply, and we will not abandon that right.
in order to hide our shame. We have paid for the right to look at the
in Germany. But we, thank God, have no need to recognize his genius
to recognize his genius as the only explanation of the war carried on
without fighting and of fortresses without a siege must incline Germans
or German sources, and the incomprehensible surrender of whole corps
in Austria or Prussia, for we have to draw our information from French
are all told us by Frenchmen. We cannot accurately estimate his genius
centuries looked down upon his grandeur--for his great exploits there
know for certain in how far his genius was genuine in Egypt--where forty
than it was in Egypt, in Italy, in Austria, and in Prussia. We do not
subsequently in 1813. His activity at that time was no less astounding
could for himself and his army, as he had done previously and as he did
his actions. He employed all his ability and strength to do the best he
weakened in Moscow, and do so only because the results did not justify
The historians quite falsely represent Napoleon's faculties as having

guided the event.
personal activity of any soldier, merely coincided with the laws that
In both cases his personal activity, having no more force than the

wished to and because he was very clever and a genius.
unjust as to say that he had brought his troops to Moscow because he
army because he wished to, or because he was very stupid, would be as
Napoleon, the man of genius, did this! But to say that he destroyed his

independently of anything the Russian army might do.
of actions that would so completely have accomplished that purpose,
the most skillful strategist could hardly have devised any series
army, as the sequel showed. Had Napoleon's aim been to destroy his army,
stupid than that could have been devised, or more disastrous for the
instead to Mozhaysk along the devastated Smolensk road. Nothing more
attempting to break through and take the road Kutuzov took, but retiring
turned to the right and reached Malo-Yaroslavets, again without
him, he quitted Moscow, approached Kutuzov without joining battle,
plunder the city; then, hesitating whether to leave a garrison behind
actually did. He remained in Moscow till October, letting the troops
took), nothing more stupid or disastrous can be imagined than what he
northerly or more southerly route (say by the road Kutuzov afterwards
advancing on Petersburg or on Nizhni-Novgorod, or retiring by a more
to him. Of all that Napoleon might have done: wintering in Moscow,
power to select the most foolish and ruinous of all the courses open
He not merely did nothing of the kind, but on the contrary he used his

the army, took none of these steps.
that greatest of all geniuses, who the historians declare had control of
enough in Moscow to supply the whole army for six months. Yet Napoleon,
the provisions, of which (according to the French historians) there were
sufficient in Moscow for the whole army--and methodically to collect
the troops to loot, to prepare winter clothing--of which there was
For that, only very simple and easy steps were necessary: not to allow
required to retain the brilliant position the French held at that time.
Vilna; or remain in Moscow; in short, no special genius would seem to be
Petersburg, or even, in the case of a reverse, return to Smolensk or
an advantageous peace, or in case of a refusal make a menacing move on
on the Russian army with double its strength and destroy it; negotiate
a whole month. Napoleon's position is most brilliant. He can either fall
the strength of the French, does not make a single attempt to attack for
incalculable wealth, is in Napoleon's hands. The Russian army, only half
capital. Moscow, abounding in provisions, arms, munitions, and
hands of the French. The Russians retreat and abandon their ancient
can be no doubt about the victory for the battlefield remains in the
Napoleon enters Moscow after the brilliant victory de la Moskowa; there


CHAPTER VIII





Napoleon's army had only awaited to begin its flight.
the weakness of the French, and the administration of that shock which
were attained: the transition from retreat to advance, an exposure of
greatest confusion, the most important results of the whole campaign
battle. With a minimum of effort and insignificant losses, despite the
imagine any result more opportune than the actual outcome of this
stage of the campaign. It would be difficult and even impossible to
just because of its incongruities, was exactly what was wanted at that
and destroy their army--it is quite clear that the battle of Tarutino,
all the Russians of that day desired--to drive the French out of Russia
so on. But if the aim of the battle was what actually resulted and what
himself; nor that of the Cossack who wanted more booty than he got, and
the aim of the officer who wished to go into action to distinguish
the whole corps, which Bennigsen and others may have had in view; nor
view--to take Murat prisoner; nor the result of immediately destroying
dispositions; nor that which Count Orlov-Denisov may have had in
view--to lead the troops into action in the order prescribed by the
The battle of Tarutino obviously did not attain the aim Toll had in

are false.
formed plans, the only conclusion to be drawn is that those descriptions
find their wars and battles carried out in accordance with previously
If in the descriptions given by historians, especially French ones, we

the diagonal of a parallelogram of forces.
forces, but will always be a mean--what in mechanics is represented by
body, the direction of its motion cannot coincide with any one of those
If many simultaneously and variously directed forces act on a given

never coincides with the direction of any one force.
taken by the fight, and that course never can be known in advance and
a battle, where it is a question of life and death) influence the course
A countless number of free forces (for nowhere is man freer than during

essential condition.
Austerlitz--takes place as those who planned it anticipated. That is an
or deliberately deceive themselves. No battle--Tarutino, Borodino, or
people who talk like that either do not know what they are talking about
we ourselves should not have done so, just as people speak today. But
understood that some fool there is doing things all wrong but that
Russian officers and generals after the Tarutino battle, letting it be
"That's how everything is done with us, all topsy-turvy!" said the

and following the battle fresh changes were made in the staff.
received pleasant recognitions corresponding to their various grades,
and Bennigsen some diamonds and a hundred thousand rubles, others also
In consequence of this battle Kutuzov received a diamond decoration,

the rest of the army merely lost some hundreds of men uselessly.
The whole battle consisted in what Orlov-Denisov's Cossacks had done:

halted for three quarters of an hour.
were in retreat he ordered an advance, though at every hundred paces he
Kutuzov did not reply, but when they reported to him that Murat's troops

a little smoke."
you were to order an attack! If not, the Guards will not so much as see
"It is not too late yet, your Highness--the enemy has not gone away--if

Soon after this, Ermolov moved up to Kutuzov and respectfully remarked:

with his knee Raevski who was at his side.
"He's having a little fun at my expense," said Ermolov softly, nudging

would content himself with that hint.
He understood that for him the storm had blown over, and that Kutuzov
Ermolov screwed up his eyes and smiled faintly on hearing these words.

forewarned, takes measures accordingly."
but as soon as one gets to business nothing is ready, and the enemy,
"You see! They are asking to attack and making plans of all kinds,

was behind him and to whom he had not spoken since the previous day.
now two battalions of Poles, he gave a sidelong glance at Ermolov who
the reports of the Cossacks there had previously been nobody--there were
When Kutuzov was informed that at the French rear--where according to

time, and nothing can be done now!" he replied to someone else.
"We couldn't take Murat prisoner this morning or get to the place in

asked permission to advance.
unable to execute complicated maneuvers," said he to Miloradovich who
"The word attack is always on your tongue, but you don't see that we are

suggestions that they should attack.
He rode silently on his small gray horse, indolently answering

far as was in his power held the troops back. He did not advance.
confusion would come of this battle undertaken against his will, and as
but Kutuzov accompanied that column. He well knew that nothing but
Meanwhile another column was to have attacked the French from the front,


CHAPTER VII





some time quite uselessly.
bullets killed many of his men. And his division remained under fire for
needed in his angry mood. One of the first bullets killed him, and other
be of any use or no. Danger, cannon balls, and bullets were just what he
agitation whether going into action now, with a single division, would
straight ahead, leading his men under fire, without considering in his
Coming out onto a field under the enemy's fire, this brave general went

well as anybody," he said, and advanced with a single division.
"I prefer not to take lessons from anyone, but I can die with my men as

to Toll.
and quite contrary to his usual character and said disagreeable things
confusion, and cross-purposes, fell into a rage to everybody's surprise
old soldier of placid temperament, being also upset by all the delay,
severely, saying that he ought to be shot. General Bagovut, a fighting
galloped up to the commander of the corps and began upbraiding him
failure and supposing that someone must be responsible for it, Toll
should long before have joined Orlov-Denisov. Excited and vexed by the
corps in a wood when it was already broad daylight, though the corps
finding everything upside down everywhere. Thus he stumbled on Bagovut's
Weyrother at Austerlitz, galloped assiduously from place to place,
in time to be fired at. Toll, who in this battle played the part of
even got to their right place, but too late to be of any use and only
indeed get somewhere, though not to their right places; a few eventually
simply to get somewhere. "We shall get somewhere or other!" And they did
vent to a little abuse, and at last gave it all up and went forward,
angry, quarreled, said they had come quite wrong and were late, gave
backward movement. Adjutants and generals galloped about, shouted, grew
murmurs were heard, there was a sense of confusion, and finally a
places. As always happens the men, starting cheerfully, began to halt;
and, as always happens, had got somewhere, but not to their appointed
commanded by Bennigsen and directed by Toll, had started in due order
Column will march" and so on, the infantry of the belated columns,
Meantime, according to the dispositions which said that "the First

for the other columns to arrive, advanced no further.
formed into detachments and began firing. Orlov-Denisov, still waiting
The French, not being farther pursued, began to recover themselves: they

it was on this that the Cossacks all busied themselves.
without some shouting and even a little fighting among themselves--and
to be dealt with, the prisoners and guns secured, the booty divided--not
the Cossacks) horses, saddles, horsecloths, and the like. All this had
taken on the spot, besides standards and (what seemed most important to
listened to orders. Fifteen hundred prisoners and thirty-eight guns were
Cossacks budge when once they had got booty and prisoners. None of them
That was what the officers desired. But it was impossible to make the
around them, they would have captured Murat and everything there.
Had the Cossacks pursued the French, without heeding what was behind and

up, ran off in all directions, abandoning cannons, muskets, and horses.
Cossacks, and all who were in the camp, undressed and only just waking
One desperate, frightened yell from the first French soldier who saw the

of a sack, dashed gaily across the brook toward the camp.
trailing their lances and advancing one after another as if poured out
"Hurrah-ah-ah!" reverberated in the forest, and the Cossack companies,

crossed themselves.... "Forward, with God's aid!"
"Mount!" he commanded in a whisper. The men took their places and

felt the same excitement.
well as by the proximity of the enemy, resolved to advance. All his men
by vainly awaiting the infantry columns that still did not appear, as
returned, Count Orlov-Denisov, excited both by the abandoned attempt and
And the adjutant galloped through the forest after Grekov. When Grekov

light."
determination, looking at his watch. "It will be too late. It is quite
"Fetch them back, fetch them back!" said Count Orlov with sudden

"Will you have them fetched back?"

"Eh? Really... what do you think? Should we let them go on or not?"

camp.
Orlov felt distrustful of the adventure when he looked at the enemy's
"They can still be called back," said one of his suite, who like Count

"I am sure that rascal was lying," said the count.

commander in chief from among such a mass of troops!
he would lead away heaven only knew where. How could one capture a
attack would be ruined by the absence of those two regiments, which
sergeant was an impostor, that he had lied, and that the whole Russian
our eyes, it suddenly seemed quite clear and obvious to him that the
As often happens when someone we have trusted is no longer before

"Oh, it is really too late," said Count Orlov, looking at the camp.

camp, and his keen-sighted adjutant confirmed this.
It seemed to the count that things were beginning to stir in the French
columns would have been visible quite far off, they were not to be seen.
declivity to his right. He looked in that direction, but though the
campfires. Our columns ought to have begun to appear on an open
camp, now just visible in the deceptive light of dawn and the dying
had undertaken on his own responsibility, and began looking at the enemy
shivering from the freshness of the early dawn and excited by what he
the forest, and Count Orlov-Denisov, having seen Grekov off, returned,
away with Grekov whose men had quickly assembled. They disappeared into
Without replying, the sergeant, with a resolute air, mounted and rode

true you shall have a hundred gold pieces!"
"if you have been lying I'll have you hanged like a dog; but if it's
"Now, remember," said Count Orlov-Denisov to the sergeant at parting,

Polish sergeant.
Major-General Grekov with two Cossack regiments decided to go with the
everybody advised making the attempt. After much disputing and arguing,
The offer was too tempting to be refused. Everyone volunteered to go and

capture him alive. Count Orlov-Denisov consulted his fellow officers.
and that if they would let him have a convoy of a hundred men he would
Murat was spending the night less than a mile from where they were,
them, and so he had left them and wished to pay them out. He said that
long ago to have been made an officer, that he was braver than any of
come over because he had been slighted in the service: that he ought
sergeant of Poniatowski's corps, who explained in Polish that he had
deserter from the French army being brought to him. This was a Polish
Toward dawn, Count Orlov-Denisov, who had dozed off, was awakened by a

the village of Stromilova to Dmitrovsk.
detachment halted at the outskirts of a forest, on the path leading from
detachment of all) got to his appointed place at the right time. This
Only Count Orlov-Denisov with his Cossacks (the least important

evidently should not have been.
but the majority marched all night and arrived at places where they
destination, halted, piled arms, and settled down on the cold ground,
and they marched gaily. Some columns, supposing they had reached their
horses neighing. The secrecy of the undertaking heightened its charm
smoke their pipes, or to strike a light, and they tried to prevent their
could be faintly heard. The men were forbidden to talk out loud, to
advanced noiselessly, only occasionally a jingling of the artillery
clouds, but no rain. The ground was damp but not muddy, and the troops
and advanced during the night. It was an autumn night with dark purple
Next day the troops assembled in their appointed places in the evening


CHAPTER VI





day. And once more Kutuzov had to consent.
and Toll that the movement that had miscarried should be executed next
him till the next day) and to the insistence of Bennigsen, Konovnitsyn,
listened to excuses and self-justifications (Ermolov did not come to see
His wrath, once expended, did not return, and blinking feebly he

into his caleche and drove back in silence.
about him, conscious of having said much that was amiss, he again got
anger and distress. But his strength soon began to fail him, and looking
from corporal punishment, and could not avoid expressing it by cries of
mock me so... and now!" He was in a state of physical suffering as if
himself. "When I was a chit of an officer no one would have dared to
or have kept awake thinking everything over all night," thought he to
whole army! "I needn't have been in such a hurry to pray about today,
in Russia, to be placed in this position--made the laughingstock of the
Highness who everybody said possessed powers such as no man had ever had
He was suffering physically. He, the commander in chief, a Serene

reeling.
Scoundrels!" yelled Kutuzov in a hoarse voice, waving his arms and
"What sort of another blackguard are you? I'll have you shot!

same fate.
who happened to turn up and who was not at all to blame, suffered the
shouting and loading him with gross abuse. Another man, Captain Brozin,
ground, and he fell upon Eykhen, threatening him with his hands,
into that state of fury in which he sometimes used to roll on the
for him to vent his wrath on. Trembling and panting the old man fell
for the mistake, but because he was an object of sufficient importance
Kutuzov went purple in the face, not because that officer was to blame
Eykhen, the officer of the general staff whom he had summoned, appeared,
drooping head and breathing heavily, pacing silently up and down. When
sent for a senior officer. Getting out of his caleche, he waited with
"How! Not rec..." Kutuzov began, but checked himself immediately and

officer reported that no order to advance had been received.
eating their rye porridge and carrying fuel. He sent for an officer. The
regiments with their arms piled and the soldiers, only partly dressed,
the old commander in chief. But a little further on he saw infantry
front and in ambush long before then. "It may be a mistake," thought
belonged to. They belonged to a column that should have been far in
them searchingly, stopped his carriage, and inquired what regiment they
water across the road along which he was driving. Kutuzov looked at
approaching Tarutino Kutuzov noticed cavalrymen leading their horses to
But all was still quiet. A damp dull autumn morning was just dawning. On
sound of firing on the right as an indication that the action had begun.
in the caleche, dozing and waking up by turns, and listening for any
Tarutino) to the place where the attacking columns were to meet. He sat
and drove from Letashovka (a village three and a half miles from
having to direct a battle he did not approve of, got into his caleche
said his prayers, dressed, and, with an unpleasant consciousness of
Next day the decrepit Kutuzov, having given orders to be called early,


CHAPTER V





trouble. You'll see what a mess there'll be tomorrow."
Ermolov. "It was a trick. It was done on purpose to get Konovnitsyn into
staff that evening, to the officer of the Horse Guards, referring to
"You think he went off just by chance?" said a comrade, who was on the


officer had to say, took the papers from him without a word.
Ermolov came forward with a frown on his face and, hearing what the

Ermolov.
the generals espied him and, hearing what he had come about, informed
he was doubly to blame, and he would have preferred to wait; but one of
The officer felt that by arriving with important orders at such a moment

"Ha, ha, ha! Bravo, Nicholas Ivanych! Ha, ha, ha!"

a red face was dancing the trepak with much spirit and agility.
laughing loudly. In the middle of the room a short handsome general with
and were standing in a semicircle with flushed and animated faces,
them Ermolov's big imposing figure. They all had their coats unbuttoned
immediately saw all the chief generals of the army together, and among
of singers stood outside the windows. The officer was admitted and
and the hall, footmen were bustling about with wine and viands. Groups
intact between the Russian and French forces. In the refreshment room
and went up into the porch of a large country house which had remained
entrusted to him. It was already past eight o'clock. He dismounted
he would be blamed for not having executed sooner the important order
sounds made his spirits rise, but at the same time he was afraid that
and the sound of a torban, drowned every now and then by shouts. These
"In the meadows... in the meadows!" he heard, accompanied by whistling

proceeding from the house.
distance he heard as he rode the merry sounds of a soldier's dance song
The officer rode out beyond our lines to Echkino. While still at a

there, it's awful! Two bands and three sets of singers!"
"They've put two regiments as outposts, and they're having such a spree

"What, outside our line?"

country house in the far distance.
"Why, there, over at Echkino," said a Cossack officer, pointing to a

"But where is it?"

ball at General Kikin's and that Ermolov was probably there too.
Miloradovich too was away, but here he was told that he had gone to a
a comrade's, and rode again to the vanguard to find Miloradovich.
and no one knew where he was. The officer snatched a little food at
evening without even stopping to eat. Ermolov was nowhere to be found
he must have returned home. The officer searched till six o'clock in the
said he had seen Ermolov ride past with some other generals, others said
it is!" thought the officer, and he rode round the whole camp. One man
"If only they don't make me responsible for this delay! What a nuisance

"No, he's gone out."

The officer, mounting his horse, rode off to someone else.

"No, and the general's out too."

often to be found.
The officer of the Horse Guards went to a general with whom Ermolov was

"Gone away," said Ermolov's orderly.

Ermolov's quarters.
pleased at the importance of the mission entrusted to him, went to
to deal with. A young officer of the Horse Guards, Kutuzov's orderly,
prepared, an officer was summoned and sent to deliver them to Ermolov
When the necessary number of copies of the dispositions had been

appointed time.
and as is always the case, not a single column reached its place at the
Everything had been admirably thought out as is usual in dispositions,
arrived at their places at the appointed time and destroyed the enemy.
march there and there," and so on; and on paper, all these columns
"The First Column will march here and here," "the Second Column will

dispositions, it was written--though not in German this time:
The dispositions drawn up by Toll were very good. As in the Austerlitz

left the hut.
"All right--all right. I haven't time just now," replied Ermolov, and

arrangements.
Toll read them to Ermolov, asking him to attend to the further
On the morning of the fourth of October Kutuzov signed the dispositions.

necessary to order an attack, and it was fixed for the fifth of October.
of the French was unguarded were merely final indications that it was
Bennigsen's note and the Cossack's information that the left flank


CHAPTER IV





his approval, that is, to the accomplished fact.
and gave the order to do what he regarded as useless and harmful--gave
expressed the same wish--could no longer check the inevitable movement,
he supposed the Emperor to hold, and the fact that all the generals
note from Bennigsen who sent personal reports to the Emperor, the wishes
men, Kutuzov--having taken into consideration the Cossack's report, a
his supposed power, his intellect, his experience, and his knowledge of
released, the clock began to whirr and the chimes to play. Despite all
the final proof that events had matured. The tightly coiled spring was
The Cossack's report, confirmed by horse patrols who were sent out, was

the opposite," replied Bennigsen.
asking for. I need only advise anything and his Highness is sure to do
"If I did not know you I should think you did not want what you are

offensive.
his influence with the commander in chief to induce him to take the
see Bennigsen a few days previously and had entreated him to use
the staff had of late been exceedingly strained. Ermolov had been to
reported the incident to a general on the staff. The state of things on
the superior officers, who was acquainted with the higher authorities,
to take advantage of this chance to capture some horses, but one of
The Cossack was sent for and questioned. The Cossack officers wished

A cornet, hearing the story, informed his commander.
told his comrades how he had almost fallen into the hands of the French.
army, encamped there without any precautions. The Cossack laughingly
his way far into the forest and came upon the left flank of Murat's
killed one hare and wounded another. Following the wounded hare he made
On the second of October a Cossack, Shapovalov, who was out scouting,

commanded from attacking and a battle had taken place.
Kutuzov had found himself unable any longer to restrain the army he
the forces had already made itself felt in Petersburg, was dispatched,
But by the time this letter, which proved that the real relation of


courage of the troops you command justify us in expecting.
firmness, and success which your intellect, military talent, and the
in me, but I and Russia have a right to expect from you all the zeal,
experienced my readiness to reward you. That readiness will not weaken
to answer to our offended country for the loss of Moscow. You have
ample means to avert this fresh calamity. Remember that you have still
army entrusted to you, and acting with resolution and energy, you have
in which it has not been possible to retain many troops; for with the
direct a force of any size against Petersburg to threaten this capital
towns in the interior. You will be responsible if the enemy is able to
occupied by the enemy, and thereby averting danger from Tula and other
retreat, retaining in our hands an important part of the provinces now
attack a weaker one and annihilate him, or at least oblige him to
that, availing yourself of these circumstances, you might advantageously
an army corps much weaker than the army entrusted to you. It would seem
contrary, he is probably pursuing you with detachments, or at most with
are so considerable as not to allow of your taking the offensive? On the
Guards in Moscow, is it possible that the enemy's forces confronting you
scattered his forces in large detachments, and with Napoleon and his
the twenty-fifth. In view of all this information, when the enemy has
between Ruza and Mozhaysk. Napoleon himself was in Moscow as late as
Vladimir road, and a fourth, rather considerable detachment is stationed
thousand men is moving on Dmitrov. A third has advanced along the
thousand men is moving on the Petersburg road. Another corps of several
From General Wintzingerode's reports, I see that an enemy corps of ten
with its famous arsenal so indispensable to the army, is in danger.
farther. Serpukhov is already occupied by an enemy detachment and Tula
capital, but according to your last report you have even retreated
no action been taken against the enemy or for the relief of the ancient
were written on the twentieth, and during all this time not only has
September 2 Moscow has been in the hands of the enemy. Your last reports
in a letter that reached Kutuzov after the battle at Tarutino) Since
Prince Michael Ilarionovich! (wrote the Emperor on the second of October


reflection of what had to happen.
all these schemes, crossings, and interminglings appear to be a true
essential attitude of the masses. Only in the highest spheres did
that is, never in the way people devised, but flowing always from the
affair of the war went on independently of them, as it had to go:
of the war, which all these men believed they were directing; but this
In all these plottings the subject of intrigue was generally the conduct
undermining C, and so on in all possible combinations and permutations.
was going on among the staff of the army. A was undermining B, D was
these transfers, a more than usually complicated play of parties
Staff, the presence of confidential representatives of the Emperor, and
As a result of the hostility between Kutuzov and Bennigsen, his Chief of

depended on this.
place, and so on--as if anything more than A's or B's satisfaction
put A in B's place and B in D's, or on the contrary to put D in A's
consideration was given to the question whether it would be better to
Barclay, who had gone away in dudgeon, had to be filled. Very serious
The posts left vacant by Bagration, who had been killed, and by
Besides this, the whole staff of the Russian army was now reorganized.

were to watch Kutuzov's actions and report upon them.
of difficulties that might be encountered, as well as fresh people who
difficult to execute. So fresh instructions were sent for the solution
Kutuzov only replied that movements arranged from a distance were always
it was approved by the staff and accepted as a basis for action.
had been drawn up on the supposition that Moscow was still in our hands,
had been drawn up and sent to Kutuzov for his guidance. Though this plan
had been received in Petersburg, a detailed plan of the whole campaign
Emperor from Petersburg. Before the news of the abandonment of Moscow
The Russian army was commanded by Kutuzov and his staff, and also by the


CHAPTER III





activity, whirring, and chiming in the higher spheres.
has completed a full circle, this change was shown by an increased
once, as a clock begins to strike and chime as soon as the minute hand
in the relative strength, and an advance had become inevitable. And at
that the advantage was now on our side. There was a substantial change
soldier's mind that the relative strength of the armies had changed and
the French were in Moscow, and (above all) a dim consciousness in every
the desire for revenge that lay in the heart of every Russian as long as
peasants and guerrilla troops over the French, the envy aroused by this;
the French stationed at Tarutino; the news of easy successes gained by
was doing; the boldness with which our outposts now scouted close up to
resting; curiosity as to what the French army, so long lost sight of,
assembled for, which usually shows itself in an army that has been
soldiers had enjoyed, and the impatience to do what they had been
recruits to our regiments; the fine weather; the long rest the Russian
from all sides of the inactivity and disorder of the French; the flow of
mission; the abundance of provisions at Tarutino; the reports coming in
at once showed itself by countless signs. These signs were: Lauriston's
to the Russians, as soon as that change occurred the need of attacking
side. Though the condition and numbers of the French army were unknown
number--as a result of which the superiority had passed to the Russian
place in the relative strength of the two armies--both in spirit and in
the Russian troops were quietly encamped at Tarutino, a change had taken
During the month that the French troops were pillaging in Moscow and

troops from attacking.
of my nation." But he continued to exert all his powers to restrain his
the initiator of a settlement of any sort. Such is the present spirit
Kutuzov replied: "I should be cursed by posterity were I looked on as


MOSCOW, OCTOBER 30, 1812

NAPOLEON

Prince Koutouzov, to keep you in His holy and gracious protection!
person. This letter having no other object, I pray God, monsieur le
sentiment of esteem and special regard I have long entertained for your
to credit what he says to you, especially when he expresses the
to discuss several interesting questions with you. I beg your Highness
MONSIEUR LE PRINCE KOUTOUZOV: I am sending one of my adjutants-general


they were meaningless.
right, wrote to Kutuzov the first words that occurred to him, though
Napoleon, with his usual assurance that whatever entered his head was

overtures for peace.
calamitous condition was the sending of Lauriston to Kutuzov's camp with
The moan of that wounded beast (the French army) which betrayed its

to moan.
merely lying low, the hunter did not know. Suddenly the beast was heard
left him; but whether he was still alive, whether he was strong and
The beast wounded at Borodino was lying where the fleeing hunter had

restrain the Russian army from useless engagements.
have been expected to be eager to attack--employed his whole strength to
Borodino had been a victory, he alone--who as commander in chief might
army's inactivity, he alone continued to assert that the battle of
what had happened. He alone then understood the meaning of the French
called, but in the fact that he alone understood the significance of
Kutuzov's merit lay, not in any strategic maneuver of genius, as it is

received--assumed the position natural to it.
the strength of that impetus was exhausted and no fresh push was
whole campaign and by the battle of Borodino, the Russian army--when
Having rolled like a ball in the direction of the impetus given by the

occupied near Kaluga.
Emperor's letter indicated to him the very position he had already
the Emperor for having moved his army along the Ryazan road, and the
way. At Tarutino Kutuzov received what was almost a reprimand from
demands were sent from Petersburg for Kutuzov to take his army that
so natural that even the Russian marauders moved in that direction, and
That movement from the Nizhni to the Ryazan, Tula, and Kaluga roads was

the country was richest.
an arc in the direction where most provisions were to be found and where
have done anything but make a return movement toward Moscow, describing
Russian army, we picture that army without any leaders, it could not
If instead of imagining to ourselves commanders of genius leading the

district where supplies were abundant.
course and, not finding itself pursued, was naturally drawn toward the
retreating straight back from the invaders, deviated from that direct
of the French had ceased, the Russian army, which had been continually
The famous flank movement merely consisted in this: after the advance


CHAPTER II





movement and long ago foreseen its result.
forces, did people begin to assure themselves that they had desired this
when the army had got there, as the result of innumerable and varying
precisely when, or by whom, it was decided to move to Tarutino. Only
say when it was decided to abandon Moscow, so it is impossible to say
the roads along which those supplies lay. Just as it is impossible to
from the Tula to the Kaluga road and go to Tarutino, which was between
province, obliged our army to turn still more to the south and to cross
of giving battle, and above all the abundance of provisions in Kaluga
troops who had for a time lost touch with the Russians, and projects
position; but innumerable circumstances and the reappearance of French
intended to remain at Podolsk and had no thought of the Tarutino
march, to the Tula road beyond the Pakhra, the Russian commanders
still further south to the Tula road. Having crossed over, by a forced
advantages of drawing nearer to its supplies caused the army to turn
concern for the safety of the arsenal at Tula, and especially the
inactivity of the French (who even lost sight of the Russian army),
along the Ryazan road and nearer to its supplies. Subsequently the
direct retreat on Nizhni-Novgorod. The army turned more to the south,
of deviating from what had previously seemed the most natural course--a
crossed early in winter. This was the first indication of the necessity
be separated from its supplies by the broad river Oka, which cannot be
Ryazan provinces, and that if they retreated on Nizhni the army would
supplies were for the most part stored along the Oka in the Tula and
department. Lanskoy informed the commander in chief that the army
commander in chief and Lanskoy, who was in charge of the commissariat
all there is the well-known conversation after the council, between the
that the majority of the council voted for such a retreat, and above
direct retreat by the Nizhni road. In proof of this there is the fact
Russian commanders was the one naturally suggesting itself, namely, a
At the council at Fili the prevailing thought in the minds of the

past.
seen in its entirety when it had been accomplished and belonged to the
event--from an endless number of most diverse circumstances and was only
in its entirety, but resulted--moment by moment, step by step, event by
reality, like the retreat from Fili, it did not suggest itself to anyone
attributed to any one man, that no one ever foresaw it, and that in
history deliberately avoid seeing that this flank march cannot be
The third and most incomprehensible thing is that people studying

brought salvation might have proved disastrous.
on Petersburg?... In any of these eventualities the flank march that
attacked them at Smolensk? What would have happened had the French moved
the Russians with but a tenth of the energy he had shown when he
would have happened if on approaching Tarutino, Napoleon had attacked
attacked the Russians while they were marching beyond the Pakhra? What
Bennigsen and Barclay advised? What would have happened had the French
inactive? If the Russian army at Krasnaya Pakhra had given battle as
Murat had not lost sight of the Russians? If Napoleon had not remained
destruction. What would have happened had Moscow not burned down? If
the Russian army, but might in other circumstances have led to its
That flank march might not only have failed to give any advantage to

all follow that the march was the cause of it.
army really began to improve from the time of that march, it does not at
Russians and salutary for the French. If the position of the Russian
or followed by other circumstances, might have proved ruinous to the
the French; for this flank march, had it been preceded, accompanied,
they think that this maneuver was calculated to save Russia and destroy
was a profound one. And it is even more difficult to understand just why
what reasoning the historians reach the conclusion that this maneuver
in 1812 was on the Kaluga road. So it is impossible to understand by
guessed that the best position for an army after its retreat from Moscow
there are most provisions; and even a dull boy of thirteen could have
the best position for an army when it is not being attacked is where
of this movement lay, for not much mental effort was needed to see that
the first place it is hard to understand where the profundity and genius
conception of some one man who saved Russia and destroyed Napoleon. In
and following them others, consider this flank march to be the profound
that flank march. But it is hard to understand why military writers,
acknowledge the genius of the Russian commanders when they speak of
whom the honor is due. Even foreign historians, including the French,
glory of that achievement of genius to different men and dispute as to
so-called flank march across the Krasnaya Pakhra River. They ascribe the
army from the Ryazana to the Kaluga road and to the Tarutino camp--the
important episode of the war of 1812 was the movement of the Russian
occupation of Moscow by the enemy and its destruction by fire, the most
The historians consider that, next to the battle of Borodino and the

earth.
possible only when men abandoned the conception of the fixity of the
just as the discovery of the laws of the motion of the planets was
abandoned the attempt to find the cause in the will of some one man,
The discovery of these laws is only possible when we have quite
are known to us while we are conscious of others we cannot comprehend.
all causes. But there are laws directing events, and some of these laws
is, and can be, no cause of an historical event except the one cause of
were laws directing its movement and that of the other planets. There
admitted that they did not know what upheld the earth, but knew there
earth was stationary and that the planets moved round it and those who
it had to happen, as there is between those who declared that the
because Napoleon wished it and a man who says that this happened because
between a man who says that the people of the West moved on the East
historical events this way or that; yet there is the same difference
to be a matter of indifference whether we understand the meaning of
actions of the mass but is itself continually controlled. It may seem
be convinced that the will of the historic hero does not control the
lies in the activity of the general mass of men who take part in it--to
But we need only penetrate to the essence of any historic event--which
those who stood in the most prominent position--the heroes of history.
to present itself was the will of the gods and, after that, the will of
the subject of observation) the first and most primitive approximation
"This is the cause!" In historical events (where the actions of men are
first approximation to a cause that seems to him intelligible and says:
of which taken separately may seem to be the cause, he snatches at the
considering the multiplicity and complexity of the conditions any one
the desire to find those causes is implanted in man's soul. And without
Man's mind cannot grasp the causes of events in their completeness, but


CHAPTER I





BOOK THIRTEEN: 1812





presence.
simple and solemn mystery of death that had been accomplished in their
had taken possession of their souls at the consciousness of the
personal grief; they wept with a reverent and softening emotion which
Natasha and Princess Mary also wept now, but not because of their own

must take the same terrible step.
no more. The old count cried because he felt that before long, he, too,
The countess and Sonya cried from pity for Natasha and because he was
Little Nicholas cried because his heart was rent by painful perplexity.

everyone came to take leave of him and they all wept.
When the body, washed and dressed, lay in the coffin on a table,

"Where has he gone? Where is he now?..."

body.
kiss them, but clung to that which reminded her most nearly of him--his
the dead eyes, and hastened to close them. She closed them but did not
lain motionless, growing cold before them. Natasha went up, looked at
"Is it over?" said Princess Mary when his body had for a few minutes

occurred, Princess Mary and Natasha were present.
When the last convulsions of the body, which the spirit was leaving,

anything else he should do.
what was demanded and looked round as if asking whether there was
was required of him, but when they told him to bless the boy, he did
Natasha understood that) but simply because he thought it was all that
and turned away, not because he felt it hard and sad (Princess Mary and
him. When they brought his son to him, he pressed his lips to the boy's
He confessed, and received communion: everyone came to take leave of

was right.
away from them, and they both knew that this had to be so and that it
They both saw that he was sinking slowly and quietly, deeper and deeper,

words what they understood.
talk to one another about him. They felt that they could not express in
Neither in his presence nor out of it did they weep, nor did they ever
affect them and they did not feel it necessary to foment their grief.
this so strongly that the outward and terrible side of death did not
them) but on what reminded them most closely of him--his body. Both felt
that they were not attending on him (he was no longer there, he had left
not weep or shudder and during these last days they themselves felt
Princess Mary and Natasha, who did not leave him, felt this. They did
His last days and hours passed in an ordinary and simple way. Both

awakening.
There was nothing terrible or violent in this comparatively slow

duration of a dream.
not seem to him slower than an awakening from sleep compared to the
his awakening from sleep. And compared to the duration of life it did
From that day an awakening from life came to Prince Andrew together with

convincing.
Natasha, she saw the terrible moral symptoms which to her were more
assumed a malignant character, but what the doctor said did not interest
arrival. From that day, as the doctor expressed it, the wasting fever
That was what had happened to him two days before Princess Mary's

her strangely, not understanding.
up and asked him what was the matter. He did not answer and looked at
When, waking in a cold perspiration, he moved on the divan, Natasha went

strange lightness did not again leave him.
as if powers till then confined within him had been liberated, and that
then concealed the unknown was lifted from his spiritual vision. He felt
And all at once it grew light in his soul and the veil that had till
"Yes, it was death! I died--and woke up. Yes, death is an awakening!"

and at the very instant he died, having made an effort, he awoke.
But at the instant he died, Prince Andrew remembered that he was asleep,

death, and Prince Andrew died.
and both halves of the door noiselessly opened. It entered, and it was
Once again it pushed from outside. His last superhuman efforts were vain

behind by that terror, opened and closed again.
possible--but his efforts were weak and clumsy and the door, pushed from
door, making a final effort to hold it back--to lock it was no longer
breaking in through that door, and had to be kept out. He seized the
against it and forcing its way in. Something not human--death--was
the door, that dreadful something on the other side was already pressing
stood behind the door. But just when he was clumsily creeping toward
was seized by an agonizing fear. And that fear was the fear of death. It
in time to lock the door though he painfully strained all his powers. He
tried to hurry, but his legs refused to move and he knew he would not be
depended on whether he was, or was not, in time to lock it. He went, and
all else. He rose and went to the door to bolt and lock it. Everything
disappear and a single question, that of the closed door, superseded
empty witticisms. Gradually, unnoticed, all these persons began to
more important cares, but he continued to speak, surprising them by
Prince Andrew dimly realized that all this was trivial and that he had
discussed something trivial. They were preparing to go away somewhere.
insignificant people appeared before him. He talked to them and
he was quite well and unwounded. Many various, indifferent, and
He dreamed that he was lying in the room he really was in, but that

agitation and obscurity. He fell asleep.
were too one-sidedly personal and brain-spun. And there was the former
only thoughts. Something was lacking in them, they were not clear, they
eternal source." These thoughts seemed to him comforting. But they were
die means that I, a particle of love, shall return to the general and
because I love. Everything is united by it alone. Love is God, and to
understand only because I love. Everything is, everything exists, only
"Love hinders death. Love is life. All, everything that I understand, I

"Love? What is love?" he thought.

He felt himself nearer to it.
always occupied his mind--about life and death, and chiefly about death.
As he fell asleep he had still been thinking of the subject that now

suddenly awoke with a start and in a cold perspiration.
Soon he really shut his eyes and fell asleep. He did not sleep long and

stocking and resolved not to turn round till it was finished.
him, and her eyes met his beaming at her. She set herself a task on her
sat down again in her former position. Twice she turned and looked at
He pressed her hand and released it, and she went back to the candle and

please!"
"But you have not slept," she said, repressing her joy. "Try to sleep...

not do and that he had to be quiet.
Natasha felt happy and agitated, but at once remembered that this would

"How good it would be!" and taking her hand he kissed it.

He remained silent awhile.

hands with a passionate movement.
"I am sure of it, sure!" Natasha almost shouted, taking hold of both his

whole soul--shall I live? What do you think?"
"Why too much?... Well, what do you, what do you feel in your soul, your

"And I!"--She turned away for an instant. "Why too much?" she asked.

"Natasha, I love you too much! More than anything in the world."

Natasha drew closer to him. Her face shone with rapturous joy.

I want to weep for joy."
else gives me that sense of soft tranquillity that you do... that light.
"No, I have been looking at you a long time. I felt you come in. No one

"You are not asleep?"

and bent over him.
him, and suddenly, noticing his shining eyes, stepped lightly up to him
On hearing that sound Natasha put down the stocking, leaned nearer to

from a habit acquired during his sufferings.
am I to do if I love her?" he thought, and he involuntarily groaned,
my life in falsity? I love her more than anything in the world! But what
truth of life has been revealed to me only to show me that I have spent
me to her so strangely only for me to die?... Is it possible that the
listened to the light click of the steel needles. "Can fate have brought
"Can it or can it not be?" he now thought as he looked at her and

future.
brought them together again, but after that they never spoke of the
her that if he lived he would always thank God for his wound which had
At the Troitsa monastery they had spoken of the past, and he had told

cautiously.
deep breath after stooping, but refrained from doing so and breathed
He looked at her without moving and saw that she wanted to draw a

and regained her former position.
stooped carefully with a supple and exact movement, picked up the ball,
started, glanced round at him, and screening the candle with her hand
of her drooping face. She moved, and the ball rolled off her knees. She
rapidly moving hands, and he could clearly see the thoughtful profile
the knitting of stockings. The needles clicked lightly in her slender,
nurses who knit stockings, and that there is something soothing in
Andrew had casually mentioned that no one nursed the sick so well as old
knitting a stocking. She had learned to knit stockings since Prince
placed sideways, screening the light of the candle from him, and was
physical consciousness of her nearness. She was sitting in an armchair
Since she had begun looking after him, he had always experienced this

noiselessly.
And so it was: in Sonya's place sat Natasha who had just come in

"Ah, she has come!" thought he.

began to doze. Suddenly a feeling of happiness seized him.
thoughts were preternaturally clear. Sonya was sitting by the table. He
It was evening. As usual after dinner he was slightly feverish, and his

ultimately vanquished, attack of terror before the unknown.
presented to him in the form of his love for Natasha, and a last, though
the unexpected realization of the fact that he still valued life as
between life and death, in which death gained the victory. It was
days before Princess Mary arrived. It was the last spiritual struggle
referred to when she said: "This suddenly happened," had occurred two
His illness pursued its normal physical course, but what Natasha

whether Kuragin was alive. And he dared not inquire.
now regain the feeling he then had, but was tormented by the question
moment at the ambulance station when he had seen Kuragin, he could not
joyful and agitating thoughts began to occupy his mind. Recalling the
crept unobserved into his heart and once more bound him to life. And
lips, had shed gentle, happy tears, love for a particular woman again
for whom he longed appear before him and, having pressed her hand to his
But after the night in Mytishchi when, half delirious, he had seen her

it? So much the better!"
remembered that he would have to die, he said to himself: "Well, what of
love--stands between life and death. When during those first days he
he destroyed that dreadful barrier which--in the absence of such
principle of love, the more he renounced life and the more completely
to live this earthly life. And the more imbued he became with that
always to sacrifice oneself for love meant not to love anyone, not
detached himself from earthly life. To love everything and everybody and
principle of eternal love revealed to him, the more he unconsciously
spent after he was wounded, the more deeply he penetrated into the new
During the hours of solitude, suffering, and partial delirium he

think about it.
life that had restrained it, he no longer feared death and ceased to
instantly unfolded itself in his soul as if freed from the bondage of
after being wounded and the flower of eternal, unfettered love had
and knew that he was face to face with death. When he came to himself
before him, and he looked at the fallow field, the bushes, and the sky,
 He had felt it for the first time when the shell spun like a top

fear.
tormenting fear of death--the end--but now he no longer understood that
Formerly he had feared the end. He had twice experienced that terribly


lightness he experienced, almost comprehensible and palpable...
continually all his life--was now near to him and, by the strange
eternal, distant, and unknown the presence of which he had felt
Without haste or agitation he awaited what was coming. That inexorable,
everything earthly and a strange and joyous lightness of existence.
dying and was already half dead. He was conscious of an aloofness from
Not only did Prince Andrew know he would die, but he felt that he was


CHAPTER XVI





evident.
Eternal and Unfathomable, whose presence above the dying man was now so
did not cry any more, but prayed continually, turning in soul to that
hopes of saving his life. She took turns with her beside his sofa, and
Natasha's face had told her. She did not speak any more to Natasha of
When Princess Mary had left Prince Andrew she fully understood what

shyly.
he seemed even fonder than of his aunt, and clung to them quietly and
either sat alone or came timidly to Princess Mary, or to Natasha of whom
After that he avoided Dessalles and the countess who caressed him and

and leaning his head against her he began to cry.
beautiful, thoughtful eyes, then his uplifted, rosy upper lip trembled
to Natasha who had come out with him and looked shyly at her with his
completely, and, leaving the room without crying, went silently up
his father, Mary, and Natasha, than he had then. He understood it
understanding of the meaning of the scene he had witnessed between
afterwards acquired, he could not have had a better or more profound
observation, and experience, but had he possessed all the faculties he
nothing. After that day he lived through many things, gaining knowledge,
Prince Andrew's little son was seven. He could scarcely read, and knew


We cannot understand one another," and he remained silent.
feelings, all those ideas that seem so important to us, are unnecessary.
They can't understand that all those feelings they prize so--all our
"but no, they will take it their own way, they won't understand!
feedeth them," he said to himself and wished to say to Princess Mary;
"The fowls of the air sow not, neither do they reap, yet your Father

"Yes, to them it must seem sad!" he thought. "But how simple it is.

point of view.
a great effort he tried to return to life and to see things from their
the thought that little Nicholas would be left without a father. With
When Princess Mary began to cry, he understood that she was crying at


cold expression.
"Nothing. You mustn't cry here," he said, looking at her with the same

"What did you say?"

"Mary, you know the Gosp..." but he broke off.

Princess Mary nodded her head, weeping.

"Is it about Nicholas?" he asked.

He looked at her attentively.

to cry.
brother, kissed him, and unable to restrain her tears any longer began
When Nicholas had been led away, Princess Mary again went up to her

say to him.
was crying. Prince Andrew kissed him and evidently did not know what to
his father with frightened eyes, but did not cry, because no one else
When little Nicholas was brought into Prince Andrew's room he looked at

"Yes, I shall be very glad to see him. Is he quite well?"

means of arousing him.
irony because he thought she was trying what she believed to be the last
not smile with pleasure or affection for his son, but with quiet, gentle
Princess Mary, who knew his face so well, saw with horror that he did
Prince Andrew smiled just perceptibly and for the first time, but

about you!"
voice, "would you like to see little Nicholas? He is always talking
"Andrew, would you like..." Princess Mary suddenly said in a trembling

silent.
Natasha, who felt her glance, did not look at her. All three were again

"Why talk of me?" she said quietly and glanced at Natasha.

a proof of how far away he now was from everything living.
Princess Mary heard his words but they had no meaning for her, except as

found words he had long been seeking.
to get married," he added rather more quickly, as if pleased at having
living people. "If you liked him too, it would be a good thing for you
unable to understand all the complex significance his words had for
took a great liking to you," he went on simply and calmly, evidently
evidently wishing to speak pleasantly to them. "He wrote here that he
"And so you have met Count Nicholas, Mary?" Prince Andrew suddenly said,

straight before him, absently stroking his mustache with his fingers.
"Yes, they say it's burned," he said. "It's a great pity," and he gazed

making an effort to listen, but could not do so.
Natasha stopped. It was impossible to talk. It was plain that he was

"They told her that all Moscow has been burned down, and that..."

"Really?" he asked.

after calling her so in his presence did Natasha notice it herself.
Prince Andrew did not notice that she called his sister Mary, and only

"Mary came by way of Ryazan," said Natasha.

The conversation was cold and disconnected and continually broke off.

had been revealed to him.
that he was indifferent, because something else, much more important,
how could he speak like that in her presence? The only explanation was
not known that he was dying, how could he have failed to pity her and
could not have said those words in that offensively cold tone. If he had
before her whom he loved and who loved him? Had he expected to live he
thing. He, the sensitive, tender Prince Andrew, how could he say that,
Princess Mary heard him and did not understand how he could say such a

the time."
breaking the silence and pointing to Natasha. "She looks after me all
"There, you see how strangely fate has brought us together," said he,

wholly occupied his mind.
else--something the living did not and could not understand--and which
because he lacked the power to do so but because he understood something
anything living; but it was obvious that he failed to understand, not
in one who is alive. Evidently only with an effort did he understand
felt an estrangement from everything belonging to this world, terrible
tone, and especially in that calm, almost antagonistic look could be
understood what had happened to him two days before. In his words, his
perceptibly. He was silent, and she did not know what to say. She now
Princess Mary pressed his hand. The pressure made him wince just


    * "Thank you for coming, my dear."


"Merci, chere amie, d'etre venue." *

words clearly did not correspond to his thoughts):
an evident effort to be affectionate, he said with his lips only (his
"That, my dear, you must ask the doctor," he replied, and again making

saying.
"How are you now?" said Princess Mary, herself surprised at what she was

manner and with an obvious effort to remember.
"And have you brought little Nicholas?" he asked in the same slow, quiet

into Princess Mary's heart as the tone of his voice.
Had he screamed in agony, that scream would not have struck such horror

as calm and aloof as his look.
"How are you, Mary? How did you manage to get here?" said he in a voice

He kissed his sister, holding her hand in his as was their wont.

Natasha.
was an almost hostile expression as he slowly regarded his sister and
In the deep gaze that seemed to look not outwards but inwards there

replied: "Because you are alive and thinking of the living, while I..."
"But in what am I to blame?" she asked herself. And his cold, stern look

eyes.
felt guilty and grew timid on catching the expression of his face and
slackened, she felt her tears dry up and her sobs ceased. She suddenly
On seeing his face and meeting his eyes Princess Mary's pace suddenly

as they entered.
mustache he had grown, moving his fingers slowly. His eyes gazed at them
he held a handkerchief, while with the other he stroked the delicate
pillows. He was thin and pale. In one thin, translucently white hand
He was lying in a squirrel-fur dressing gown on a divan, surrounded by

features, and then she saw his face and met his gaze.
distinguished his form and her shortsighted eyes tried to make out his
rose higher and higher in her throat as she more and more clearly
presence. Yet sooner or later it had to be, and she went in. The sobs
that she would not be able to bear it and would burst into sobs in his
words to her such as her father had uttered before his death, and
affected her very strongly. She was sure he would speak soft, tender
mild, sympathetic face which he had rarely shown, and which therefore
imagination Andrew's face as she remembered it in childhood, a gentle,
of approaching death. As she stepped to the door she already saw in
had suddenly softened and that this softening and gentleness were signs
ago this suddenly happened." She understood those words to mean that he
The princess understood what Natasha had meant by the words: "two days

him without tears.
tried to remain tranquil, she knew that she would be unable to look at
sobs in her throat. Hard as she had tried to prepare herself, and now
let Princess Mary pass into the room before her, the princess felt the
When Natasha opened Prince Andrew's door with a familiar movement and


CHAPTER XV





cannot, cannot live, because..."
"No, it's not that, but worse. You will see. O, Mary, he is too good, he

"Is he weaker? Thinner?" asked the princess.

her sobs. "I don't know why, but you will see what he is like."
"But two days ago this suddenly happened," said Natasha, struggling with

but the doctor had said the fever was not very serious.
said that the festering might take a normal course. Then fever set in,
(Natasha knew all about such things as festering) and the doctor had
passed. When they reached Yaroslavl the wound had begun to fester
and the doctor had only been afraid of gangrene. That danger had also
condition and the pain he suffered, but at Troitsa that had passed
Natasha told her that at first there had been danger from his feverish

did this happen?" Princess Mary inquired.
"How has his whole illness gone? Is it long since he grew worse? When

crying and were able to go to him with calm faces.
They sat a little while downstairs near his room till they had left off

"You, you... will see," was all Natasha could say.

"But how is his wound? What is his general condition?"

But she still hoped, and asked, in words she herself did not trust:

Princess Mary understood.

with her hands she burst into sobs.
twitched, ugly wrinkles gathered round her mouth, and covering her face
not to tell the whole truth which she saw. And suddenly, Natasha's lips
which penetrated into the very depths of her heart, it was impossible
all she knew or not; she seemed to feel that before those luminous eyes
Natasha was gazing at her, but seemed afraid and in doubt whether to say

profoundly.
Natasha's face and eyes would have to tell her all more clearly and
She felt that it was impossible to ask, or to answer, in words.

"How..." she began her question but stopped short.

everything.
She felt that from her she would be able to understand and learn
Princess Mary raised her head, dried her eyes, and turned to Natasha.

room.
"Come, come to him, Mary," said Natasha, leading her into the other

pleasure.
first glance at Natasha's face, and wept on her shoulder with sorrowful
Princess Mary, with her acute sensibility, understood all this at the

herself or of her own relations with Prince Andrew.
plain that at that moment there was in Natasha's heart no thought of
and passionate desire to give herself entirely to helping them. It was
that was near to the man she loved; and of pity, suffering for others,
drawing room--that of love--boundless love for him, for her, and for all
There was only one expression on her agitated face when she ran into the

with those swift steps that had sounded buoyant to Princess Mary.
of Princess Mary's arrival, she softly left his room and hastened to her
As soon as Natasha, sitting at the head of Prince Andrew's bed, heard

She ran to meet her, embraced her, and began to cry on her shoulder.
that here was a real comrade in her grief, and consequently a friend.
But hardly had the princess looked at Natasha's face before she realized

Moscow long since.
running--that Natasha whom she had liked so little at their meeting in
door. The princess looked round and saw Natasha coming in, almost
light, impetuous, and seemingly buoyant steps were heard at the
away and was about to ask the countess again how to go to him, when
Tears of vexation showed themselves in Princess Mary's eyes. She turned

have sent to ask. I think you must be tired, Princess."
"He is downstairs. Natasha is with him," answered Sonya, flushing. "We

"Where is he?" she asked again, addressing them all.

from what was in her own heart.
oppressed by the fact that the mood of everyone around her was so far
feeling that arose in her toward the girl, she kissed her. But she felt
Princess Mary turned to Sonya and, trying to stifle the hostile

her, Princess?"
"This is my niece," said the count, introducing Sonya--"You don't know

her she was not vexed with these people.
she had entered. She knew it to be necessary, and though it was hard for
necessity of submitting, for a time, to this new order of things which
the princess noticed all that was going on around her and felt the
should be trying to entertain her and pretending to admire her nephew,
her vexation that at the moment when all she wanted was to see him they
In spite of her one desire to see her brother as soon as possible, and

feel that there was no longer a place for him in life.
groove he seemed to have lost the sense of his own significance and to
destruction of Moscow and of his property, thrown out of his accustomed
if asking everyone whether he was doing the right thing. After the
person. While talking to Princess Mary he continually looked round as
cheerful, self-assured old man; now he seemed a pitiful, bewildered
much since Princess Mary had last seen him. Then he had been a brisk,
the old count came in and welcomed the princess. He had changed very
talking to Mademoiselle Bourienne. The countess caressed the boy, and
The countess took Princess Mary into the drawing room, where Sonya was

lovely boy!"
"There will be room for everybody, this is a big house. Oh, what a
countess, turning to little Nicholas who was coming in with Dessalles.
"One moment, Princess, one moment, my dear! Is this his son?" said the

"Where is he? Can I see him--can I?" asked the princess.

contradiction of her words.
she spoke she raised her eyes with a sigh, and her gesture conveyed a
"The doctor says that he is not in danger," said the countess, but as

asked: "How is he?"
French in the same tone as those that had been addressed to her, and
knowing how she did it, she contrived to utter a few polite phrases in
countess and that it was necessary to say something to her. Hardly
 Despite her excitement, Princess Mary realized that this was the


    * "My child! I love you and have known you a long time."


longtemps." *
"Mon enfant!" she muttered, "je vous aime et vous connais depuis

Princess Mary and kissed her.
meet her with a look of emotion. This was the countess. She embraced
the hall facing an elderly woman of Oriental type, who came rapidly to
girl, with the same artificial smile, and the princess found herself in
Sonya.) Princess Mary ran up the steps. "This way, this way!" said the
it seemed to Princess Mary in an unpleasantly affected way. (This was
servants, and a rosy girl with a large plait of black hair, smiling as
river--and on the right a porch. There were people at the entrance:
The carriage door was opened. On the left there was water--a great

down.
swaying, came to a stop. The carriage steps clattered as they were let
and did not raise it again till the heavy coach, rumbling, shaking and
front of her looking with pleasure at the town, she bowed her head
unnoticed glance at little seven-year-old Nicholas, who was sitting in
What "still the same" might mean Princess Mary did not ask, but with an

"The servants say he is still the same."

"How is he?"
"Then he is alive," thought Princess Mary, and asked in a low voice:

"His excellency is staying in the same house with them."

"How is the prince?" she asked.

brother? Mademoiselle Bourienne put that question for her.
why he did not reply to what she chiefly wanted to know: how was her
Princess Mary looked at him with frightened inquiry, not understanding

right above the Volga," said the courier.
at the merchant Bronnikov's house, in the Square not far from here,
"I have found out everything, your excellency: the Rostovs are staying

the window.
by the terrible pallor of the princess' face that looked out at him from
was, when he met the big coach just entering the town gates was appalled
Rostovs were staying in Yaroslavl, and in what condition Prince Andrew
The courier who had been sent on in advance to find out where the

to its utmost limit.
very evening--again presented itself to her and her agitation increased
the thought of what might await her there--not after many days, but that
journey itself, forgetting its object. But as she approached Yaroslavl
As always happens when traveling, Princess Mary thought only of the

her grief and gave her strength.
journey, which she took so actively in hand, saved her for a while from
ill on the journey. But the very difficulties and preoccupations of the
they looked at her careworn, despairing face, felt sure she would fall
strong at the moment of leaving Voronezh that those who saw her off, as
to give full play to her feeling for her brother. That feeling was so
spiritual tranquility on the one side made it the more possible for her
her feeling grief for her brother with full force; on the contrary, that
But this happiness on one side of her spiritual nature did not prevent

beloved, and was happy in regard to it.
loved for the first and only time in her life and felt that she was
allowed him to express his friendship more freely. She knew that she
Mary that he was even glad that the family connection between them
loving--not only remained unchanged, but it sometimes seemed to Princess
Yet in spite of that, his relation to her--considerate, delicate, and

this.
renewed, but Princess Mary saw by his face that he knew and thought of
Prince Andrew's relations with Natasha might, if he recovered, be
Rostovs. Not by a single word had Nicholas alluded to the fact that
Nicholas, when he had come to tell her that her brother was with the
in words. She had become convinced of it at her last interview with
and was beloved, though she never said this definitely to herself
struggled against it. Latterly she had become convinced that she loved
whole soul, had become an integral part of herself, and she no longer
Her love for Rostov no longer tormented or agitated her. It filled her
The last days of her stay in Voronezh had been the happiest of her life.

the second week.
infected her fellow travelers, they approached Yaroslavl by the end of
no difficulties daunted her. Thanks to her activity and energy, which
spirit. She went to bed later and rose earlier than any of them, and
Princess Mary's servants were astonished at her energy and firmness of
During this difficult journey Mademoiselle Bourienne, Dessalles, and

were said to have shown themselves was even dangerous.
everywhere obtainable, very difficult, and near Ryazan where the French
Ryazan, Vladimir, and Shuya was very long and, as post horses were not
roundabout way Princess Mary was obliged to take through Lipetsk,
The usual route through Moscow could not be thought of, and the

young footman and courier her aunt had sent to accompany her.
little Nicholas and his tutor, her old nurse, three maids, Tikhon, and a
trap, and a baggage cart. With her traveled Mademoiselle Bourienne,
huge family coach in which she had traveled to Voronezh, a semiopen
In a few days Princess Mary was ready to start. Her equipages were the

journey too hard and too dangerous for her and his son.
attributed to his being too weak to write or to his considering the long
off. That she had not heard from Prince Andrew himself, Princess Mary
everything possible to take his son to him, and so she prepared to set
not only herself to be near her brother who was perhaps dying, but to do
or impossible, she did not ask and did not want to know: it was her duty
take her nephew with her. Whether it were difficult or easy, possible
aunt's efforts to dissuade her--and not merely to go herself but to
Rostovs at Yaroslavl she at once prepared to go there, in spite of her
When Princess Mary heard from Nicholas that her brother was with the


CHAPTER XIV





of any word or deed taken separately.
exhales from a flower. He could not understand the value or significance
flowed from him as evenly, inevitably, and spontaneously as fragrance
part of a whole of which he was always conscious. His words and actions
regarded it, had no meaning as a separate thing. It had meaning only as
an activity unknown to him, which was his life. But his life, as he
their context. Every word and action of his was the manifestation of
did not, and could not, understand the meaning of words apart from
it, but when spoken and not sung, no meaning could be got out of it. He
favorite song: native and birch tree and my heart is sick occurred in
before, just as he never could repeat to Pierre the words of his
repeat them, but Platon could never recall what he had said a moment
Sometimes Pierre, struck by the meaning of his words, would ask him to

to speak he seemed not to know how he would conclude.
Platon Karataev knew nothing by heart except his prayers. When he began

eternal personification of the spirit of simplicity and truth.
remained what he had seemed that first night: an unfathomable, rounded,
good-naturedly, and sent him on errands. But to Pierre he always
soldier. They called him "little falcon" or "Platosha," chaffed him
To all the other prisoners Platon Karataev seemed a most ordinary

the same way toward Karataev.
grieved for a moment at parting from him. And Pierre began to feel in
he unconsciously gave Pierre's spiritual life its due) he would not have
that in spite of Karataev's affectionate tenderness for him (by which
comrades, the French, and Pierre who was his neighbor, but Pierre felt
man, but those with whom he happened to be. He loved his dog, his
brought him in contact with, particularly with man--not any particular
understood them, but loved and lived affectionately with everything life
to himself. Karataev had no attachments, friendships, or love, as Pierre
or asking a question to make the moral beauty of what he was told clear
joyfully when listening to such stories, now and then putting in a word
most of all he liked to hear stories of real life. He would smile
soldiers used to tell of an evening (they were always the same), but
character of solemn fitness. He liked to hear the folk tales one of the
had witnessed without taking notice of them--assumed in Karataev's a
in the fact that the commonest events--sometimes just such as Pierre
Pierre thought he invented himself, but the chief charm of his talk lay
adorning his speech with terms of endearment and with folk sayings which
occasion, yet both would be right. He liked to talk and he talked well,
He would often say the exact opposite of what he had said on a previous

of profound wisdom.
insignificant, but when used appositely suddenly acquire a significance
employ, but those folk sayings which taken without a context seem so
were for the most part not the coarse and indecent saws soldiers
called his peasant existence. The proverbs, of which his talk was full,
some old and evidently precious memory of his "Christian" life, as he
the whole of his army service. When he related anything it was generally
complain, and often mentioned that he had not been flogged once during
He did not like talking about his life as a soldier, though he did not

"A soldier on leave--a shirt outside breeches," he would say.

and alien to himself--and had returned to his former peasant habits.
have thrown off all that had been forced upon him--everything military
Having been taken prisoner and allowed his beard to grow, he seemed to

face at such times was very serious.
always high-pitched, mournful, delicate, and almost feminine, and his
oneself or walks about to get rid of stiffness, and the sounds were
evidently giving vent to the sounds in the same way that one stretches
like a trained singer who knows he is listened to, but like the birds,
himself conversation--of which he was fond--and songs. He did not sing
planed, and mended boots. He was always busy, and only at night allowed
do everything, not very well but not badly. He baked, cooked, sewed,
work, just as children are ready to play directly they awake. He could
only had to shake himself, to be ready without a moment's delay for some
indeed he only had to lie down, to fall asleep like a stone, and he
up, he said: "I lay down and curled up, I get up and shake myself." And
down as a stone and raise me up as a loaf!" and every morning on getting
sickness meant. Every night before lying down, he said: "Lord, lay me
imprisonment were such that he seemed not to know what fatigue and
His physical strength and agility during the first days of his

irresistible persuasiveness.
and consequently the rapidity and justice of his intonation had an
evident that he never considered what he had said or was going to say,
peculiarity of his speech was its directness and appositeness. It was
innocence and youth, his voice was pleasant and musical. But the chief
His face, despite its fine, rounded wrinkles, had an expression of

of suppleness and especially of firmness and endurance.
hair in his beard or on his head, and his whole body gave an impression
laughed--as he often did--were all sound and good, there was not a gray
white, strong teeth which showed in two unbroken semicircles when he
know his age and was quite unable to determine it. But his brilliantly
campaigns he had been in, told as by an old soldier. He did not himself
Platon Karataev must have been fifty, judging by his stories of

large, gentle brown eyes were also round.
ready to embrace something, were rounded, his pleasant smile and his
his back, chest, shoulders, and even his arms, which he held as if ever
soldier's cap, and bast shoes--was round. His head was quite round,
Platon's whole figure--in a French overcoat girdled with a cord, a
the first impression of him, as of something round, was fully confirmed:
kindly, and round. When Pierre saw his neighbor next morning at dawn
vivid and precious memory and the personification of everything Russian,
him except Platon Karataev, who always remained in his mind a most
When Pierre remembered them afterwards they all seemed misty figures to

four weeks.
in the shed in which Pierre had been placed and where he remained for
Twenty-three soldiers, three officers, and two officials were confined


CHAPTER XIII





new and unshakable foundations.
shattered was once more stirring in his soul with a new beauty and on
of Platon who lay beside him, and he felt that the world that had been
lay with eyes open in the darkness, listening to the regular snoring
inside it was quiet and dark. For a long time Pierre did not sleep, but
outside, and flames were visible through the cracks of the shed, but
Sounds of crying and screaming came from somewhere in the distance

his feet, and again turning over he fell asleep immediately.
you daughter of a bitch!" said Karataev, touching the dog that lay at
pity the animals too. Eh, the rascal! Now you've curled up and got warm,
"Well, of course," replied Platon quickly, "the horses' saints. One must

"Yes, I do," said Pierre. "But what was that you said: Frola and Lavra?"

I was praying. Don't you pray?"
"Eh?" murmured Platon, who had almost fallen asleep. "What was I saying?

"What prayer was that you were saying?" asked Pierre.

muttered as he lay down, pulling his coat over him.
Lay me down like a stone, O God, and raise me up like a loaf," he
up, sighed, and sat down again on his heap of straw. "That's the way.
mercy on us and save us!" he concluded, then bowed to the ground, got
Christ, holy Saint Nicholas, Frola and Lavra! Lord Jesus Christ, have
"Lord Jesus Christ, holy Saint Nicholas, Frola and Lavra! Lord Jesus

himself and repeating:
"Well, I think you must be sleepy," said he, and began rapidly crossing

After a short silence he rose.

And Platon shifted his seat on the straw.

bulges, but when you've drawn it out it's empty! That's how it is."
not right!' Our luck is like water in a dragnet: you pull at it and it
looks for a head. But we are always judging, 'that's not well--that's
him! Do you understand?' he says. That's how it is, dear fellow. Fate
woman, you bow down too; and you, grandchildren, also bow down before
'Michael,' he says, 'come here and bow down to his feet; and you, young
all to him and, will you believe it, placed us in front of the icons.
been shaved for a soldier, Michael would have had to go.' called us
me: it hurts the same whichever finger gets bitten. But if Platon hadn't
youngest, at home. Father, he says, 'All my children are the same to
the women at home, two brothers away earning wages, and only Michael the
see that they are living better than before. The yard full of cattle,
soldier. I come home on leave and I'll tell you how it was, I look and
behind. We had a little girl, but God took her before I went as a
brother, had five little ones, while I, you see, only left a wife
my sin, my brother would have had to go as a soldier. But he, my younger
was a misfortune but it turned out a blessing! If it had not been for
"Well, lad," and a smile changed the tone of his voice "we thought it

tried, flogged, and sent to serve as a soldier.
copse to take wood, how he had been caught by the keeper, had been
And Platon Karataev told a long story of how he had gone into someone's

happened..."
there were seven of us. We lived well. We were real peasants. It so
house was one to thank God for. When Father and we went out mowing
a well-to-do homestead, plenty of land, we peasants lived well and our
"Well, my dear fellow, I was still living at home," he began. "We had

tell a long story.
He seated himself more comfortably and coughed, evidently preparing to

beggar's sack!"
"Ah, my dear fellow!" rejoined Karataev, "never decline a prison or a

"But it's all the same now," Pierre could not help saying.

The great thing is to live in harmony...."
"Never mind! You're young folks yet, and please God may still have some.

to add:
Again Pierre's negative answer seemed to distress him, and he hastened

went on asking.
dear as one's own mother!" said he. "Well, and have you little ones?" he
"A wife for counsel, a mother-in-law for welcome, but there's none as

he had no mother.
questions. He seemed grieved that Pierre had no parents, especially that
smile of kindliness puckered the soldier's lips as he put these
And though it was too dark for Pierre to see, he felt that a suppressed

living?" he asked.
abundance, then? And a housewife? And your old parents, are they still
"Well, and you, have you a family estate, sir? And a house? So you have

before, and immediately continued:
judges," he replied, thinking that he was repeating what he had said
"Who? I?" said Karataev. "I say things happen not as we plan but as God

"What? What did you say?" asked Pierre.

first'; that's what the old folks used to tell us," he added rapidly.
all this and not feel sad? But 'the maggot gnaws the cabbage, yet dies
to help feeling sad? Moscow--she's the mother of cities. How can one see
address him. "They call me 'little falcon' in the regiment. How is one
Karataev," he added, evidently wishing to make it easier for Pierre to
"How can one help it, lad? My name is Platon, and the surname is

"And do you feel sad here?" Pierre inquired.

no idea, never guessed at all."
weren't told anything. There were some twenty of us lying there. We had
"Yes, we are soldiers of the Apsheron regiment. I was dying of fever. We

"Why, are you a soldier then?"

"I? It was last Sunday they took me, out of a hospital in Moscow."

the potato.
"And have you been here long?" Pierre asked as he munched the last of

"Where there's law there's injustice," put in the little man.

me as an incendiary."
"No, I went to look at the fire, and they arrested me there, and tried

"And how did they arrest you, dear lad? At your house?"

Pierre.
"I didn't think they would come so soon. I stayed accidentally," replied

stayed in Moscow?"
mouth and flew out involuntarily he went on: "How was it, sir, that you
added quickly, and as if his words were always waiting ready in his
"Tss, tt...!" said the little man. "Ah, what a sin... what a sin!" he

fellows? The last one was hardly twenty."
"Oh, I'm all right," said he, "but why did they shoot those poor

Pierre thought he had never eaten anything that tasted better.

"The potatoes are grand!" he said once more. "Eat some like that!"

rag, and handed it to Pierre.
equal halves on the palm of his hand, sprinkled some salt on it from the
He took a potato, drew out his clasp knife, cut the potato into two

do like this."
"Well, are they all right?" said the soldier with a smile. "You should

extremely pleasant to him. He thanked the soldier and began to eat.
Pierre had not eaten all day and the smell of the potatoes seemed

dinner and the potatoes are grand!"
he unwrapped and offered Pierre some baked potatoes. "We had soup for
"Here, eat a bit, sir," said he, resuming his former respectful tone as

wrapped in a rag.
him, returned to his place and sat down. In his hands he had something
And the soldier, pushing away a little dog that was jumping up at

that'll do!"
end of the shed. "So you've come, you rascal? She remembers... Now, now,
"Eh, you rascal!" Pierre heard the same kind voice saying at the other

the shed.
with a supple movement, got up, coughed, and went off to another part of
men as well as bad," said he, and still speaking, he turned on his knees
thank heaven, without offense. Among these folk, too, there are good
live for an age!' that's how it is, my dear fellow. And here we live,
old Russian peasant women employ. "Don't fret, friend--'suffer an hour,
"Eh, lad, don't fret!" said he, in the tender singsong caressing voice

his confusion, instantly continued in the same pleasant tones:
rising to his eyes. The little fellow, giving Pierre no time to betray
that Pierre tried to reply, but his jaw trembled and he felt tears
And there was so much kindliness and simplicity in his singsong voice

"You've seen a lot of trouble, sir, eh?" the little man suddenly said.

the man without taking his eyes from him.
arrangements in his corner, and even in his very smell, and he looked at
and well rounded in these deft movements, in the man's well-ordered
on Pierre. The latter was conscious of something pleasant, comforting,
comfortably, clasped his arms round his lifted knees and fixed his eyes
the knife, placed it under the head of his bed, and, seating himself
fixed above his head. Then he took out a knife, cut something, closed
one another uninterruptedly, the man hung the leg bands up on some pegs
removed the leg bands by deft circular motions of his arm following
unwinding the band on the second leg. In this way, having carefully
at Pierre. While one hand hung up the first string the other was already
coiled it up and immediately set to work on the other leg, glancing up
Having unwound the string that tied the band on one leg, he carefully

Pierre's interest.
that the man was taking off his leg bands, and the way he did it aroused
continually glanced at him. On growing used to the darkness Pierre saw
darkness, and though Pierre could not see his face he felt that the man
him every time he moved. This man was doing something to his legs in the
was first made aware by a strong smell of perspiration which came from
Beside him in a stooping position sat a small man of whose presence he

his eyes again and stared vacantly into the darkness around him.
murderers, even more dreadful because of their disquiet. And he opened
lad--especially dreadful because of its simplicity--and the faces of the
he closed them he saw before him the dreadful face of the factory
Pierre sometimes opened and sometimes closed his eyes. But as soon as
Sitting silent and motionless on a heap of straw against the wall,

end of the shed was saying, with a strong emphasis on the word who.
"Well, then, mates... that very prince who..." some voice at the other

talking on all sides.
found himself in a corner of the shed among men who were laughing and
asking him something. Then they led him away somewhere, and at last he
about him interested them greatly. They were telling him something and
Around him in the darkness men were standing and evidently something

in his power to regain faith in the meaning of life.
remained, and this not by any fault of his own. He felt that it was not
the universe had crumbled before his eyes and only meaningless ruins
those doubts was to be found within himself. But now he felt that
bottom of his heart he had felt that relief from his despair and from
him before, they had been the result of his own wrongdoing, and at the
before, but never so strongly as now. When similar doubts had assailed
in his own soul, and in God, had been destroyed. He had experienced this
himself, his faith in the right ordering of the universe, in humanity,
into a heap of meaningless rubbish. Though he did not acknowledge it to
alive, had suddenly been wrenched out and everything had collapsed
his life, on which everything depended and which made everything appear
men who did not wish to commit them, it was as if the mainspring of
From the moment Pierre had witnessed those terrible murders committed by

and figures, but they all seemed to him equally meaningless.
replies, nor how they would understand them. He looked at their faces
questions they put to him, but did not consider who was listening to his
made no kind of deduction from or application of them. He replied to
what they said, but did not understand the meaning of the words and
who they were, why they were there, or what they wanted of him. He heard
different men surrounded Pierre. He looked at them without understanding
and battens, and led him into one of them. In the darkness some twenty
field, where there were some sheds built of charred planks, beams,
got up and went with the soldiers. They took him to the upper end of the
the prisoners of war. Without understanding what was said to him, Pierre
told him that he had been pardoned and would now go to the barracks for
Toward evening a noncommissioned officer entered with two soldiers and

and placed alone in a small, ruined, and befouled church.
After the execution Pierre was separated from the rest of the prisoners


CHAPTER XII





hopeless movement with his arm and went away.
able to do so. Without finishing what he had begun to say he made a
was trying to find some relief after what had been done, but was not
Pierre glanced round at the speaker and saw that it was a soldier who

"That will teach them to start fires," said one of the Frenchmen.

all went away silently and with drooping heads.
his company. The crowd of Russians and Frenchmen began to disperse. They
officer ran out of the ranks and taking him by the elbow dragged him to
forward and back to save himself from falling. An old, noncommissioned
from which he had fired. He swayed like a drunken man, taking some steps
his musket resting on the ground, still stood near the pit at the spot
one, a young soldier, his face deadly pale, his shako pushed back, and
couples out of the circle. All but one rejoined their companies. This
Pierre gazed now with dazed eyes at these sharpshooters who ran in

circle, ran back to their places as the companies passed by.
sharpshooters with discharged muskets, standing in the center of the
made a half turn and went past it at a measured pace. The twenty-four
back to his place, and the rows of troops on both sides of the post
When the pit had been filled up a command was given. Pierre was taken

and no one drove him away.
go back. But Pierre did not understand him and remained near the post,
soldiers, evidently suffering, shouted gruffly and angrily at Pierre to
of earth were already being thrown over the whole body. One of the
That shoulder rose and fell rhythmically and convulsively, but spadefuls
his knees close up to his head and one shoulder higher than the other.
Pierre glanced into the pit and saw that the factory lad was lying with

hide the traces of their guilt as quickly as possible.
They all plainly and certainly knew that they were criminals who must

from the post and began pushing it into the pit.
untied the ropes. The body collapsed. The soldiers dragged it awkwardly
The lower jaw of an old Frenchman with a thick mustache trembled as he
him. Pale, frightened people were doing something around the workman.
and one leg bent under him. Pierre ran up to the post. No one hindered
hanging body, and how the workman sat down, his head hanging unnaturally
itself in two places, how the ropes slackened under the weight of the
workman suddenly sank down on the cords that held him, how blood showed
having heard the slightest sound of the shots. He only saw how the
eight muskets; but try as he would Pierre could not afterwards remember
Probably a word of command was given and was followed by the reports of

his slightest movement.
more comfortably. Pierre did not take his eyes from him and did not miss
position, straightened himself, adjusted his feet, and leaned back again
bloodstained post, he leaned back and, not being comfortable in that
hurt the back of his head; then when they propped him against the
When they began to blindfold him he himself adjusted the knot which

wrapped his loose cloak closer and rubbed one bare foot with the other.
at this fifth murder. Like the others this fifth man seemed calm; he
and agitation, like that of the whole crowd, reached the highest pitch
Pierre was no longer able to turn away and close his eyes. His curiosity

animal looked around him with glittering eyes.
the post, waiting to be blindfolded like the others, and like a wounded
it incredible that men should kill him, at any rate he took his stand at
Whether he understood that screaming was useless or whether he thought
him to the post he grew quiet, as if he suddenly understood something.
along, holding him up under the arms, and he screamed. When they got
and shook himself free.) The lad was unable to walk. They dragged him
him he sprang aside in terror and clutched at Pierre. (Pierre shuddered
was the factory lad in the loose cloak. The moment they laid hands on
sense of joy or relief, he gazed at what was taking place. The fifth man
there only to witness the execution. With ever-growing horror, and no
understand that he was saved, that he and the rest had been brought
prisoner, the one next to Pierre, was led away--alone. Pierre did not
"Sharpshooters of the 86th, forward!" shouted someone. The fifth

his mind.
suffering as I am. Who then is it? Who?" flashed for an instant through
were in his own heart. "But who, after all, is doing this? They are all
without exception, he read the same dismay, horror, and conflict that
On the faces of all the Russians and of the French soldiers and officers

it meant. The same question was expressed in all the looks that met his.
one another. Pierre, breathing heavily, looked around as if asking what
were again doing something by the post, their trembling hands impeding
he saw smoke, blood, and the pale, scared faces of the Frenchmen who
sound as of a frightful explosion struck his ear, and at the same moment
Again Pierre did not wish to look and again turned away; but again the

nor believed that it could be taken from them.
alone knew what their life meant to them, and so they neither understood
what was going to happen to them. They could not believe it because they
protection in their eyes, evidently unable to understand or believe
these two glanced vainly at the onlookers with only a silent appeal for
Two more prisoners were led up. In the same way and with similar looks,
were doing something near the pit, with pale faces and trembling hands.
thunder, and he looked round. There was some smoke, and the Frenchmen
noise was heard which seemed to him louder than the most terrific
to avoid seeing what was going to happen. Suddenly a crackling, rolling
regular tread and halted eight paces from the post. Pierre turned away
Twelve sharpshooters with muskets stepped out of the ranks with a firm

bound them to the post.
the soldiers blindfolded them, drawing the sacks over their heads, and
and made a movement of the lips resembling a smile. With hurried hands
huntsman. One crossed himself continually, the other scratched his back
brought, looked dumbly around as a wounded beast looks at an approaching
convicts stopped when they reached the post and, while sacks were being
officer's command took the two convicts who stood first in the row. The
Then two pairs of Frenchmen approached the criminals and at the

prisoners and read out the sentence in Russian and in French.
A French official wearing a scarf came up to the right of the row of

incomprehensible task.
understand, but as people hurry to finish a necessary but unpleasant and
that they were all hurrying--not as men hurry to do something they
voice. There was a stir in the ranks of the soldiers and it was evident
two at a time. "In couples," replied the officer in command in a calm
Pierre heard the French consulting whether to shoot them separately or

factory hand, a thin, sallow-faced lad of eighteen in a loose coat.
man with a broad, light-brown beard and black eyes. The fifth was a
plump, well-nourished body. The fourth was a peasant, a very handsome
a domestic serf, about forty-five years old, with grizzled hair and a
the other dark, shaggy, and sinewy, with a flat nose. The third was
The two first were convicts with shaven heads. One was tall and thin,

Pierre looked round at his fellow prisoners and scrutinized them.
wish--that the frightful thing that had to happen should happen quickly.
or understanding. He could only hear and see. And he had only one
if part of his soul had been torn away. He lost the power of thinking
began to beat on both sides of them, and at that sound Pierre felt as
(Pierre was sixth), and were led to the post. Several drums suddenly
The prisoners were placed in a certain order, according to the list

boots and shakos.
stood rows of French troops in blue uniforms with red epaulets and high
Frenchmen, in a variety of uniforms. To the right and left of the post
Napoleon's soldiers who were not on duty--Germans, Italians, and
in a semicircle. The crowd consisted of a few Russians and many of
dug in the ground, and near the post and the pit a large crowd stood
in which a post had been set up. Beyond that post a fresh pit had been
Virgin's Field, to the left of the nunnery, as far as a kitchen garden
From Prince Shcherbatov's house the prisoners were led straight down the


CHAPTER XI





everything, annihilating him.
A system of some sort was killing him--Pierre--depriving him of life, of

It was a system--a concurrence of circumstances.

doing this? And Pierre felt that it was no one.
Pierre, with all his memories, aspirations, hopes, and thoughts? Who was
in. Then who was executing him, killing him, depriving him of life--him,
evidently had no evil intent though he might have refrained from coming
the adjutant had come in and interrupted him. The adjutant, also, had
Davout would have realized that he was doing wrong, but just then
Davout, who had looked at him in so human a way. In another moment
one of them wished to or, evidently, could have done it. It was not
death? Not the men on the commission that had first examined him--not
mind at that time was: who was it that had really sentenced him to
did till they all stopped and he stopped too. The only thought in his
and noticing nothing around him went on moving his legs as the others
in which direction. His faculties were quite numbed, he was stupefied,
Pierre could not afterwards remember how he went, whether it was far, or

not know.
"Yes, of course!" replied Davout, but what this "yes" meant, Pierre did

question to Davout.
He turned his head and saw that the adjutant was putting another

they crossed the Virgin's Field.
or to the place of execution his companions had pointed out to him as
where they were to take him Pierre did not know: back to the coach house
Pierre's direction with a frown and ordered him to be led away. But
When the adjutant reminded him of the prisoner, he jerked his head in

buttoning up his uniform. It seemed that he had quite forgotten Pierre.
Davout brightened up at the news the adjutant brought, and began

But at that moment an adjutant entered and reported something to Davout.

truth of his statements.
In a trembling, faltering voice Pierre began adducing proofs of the

"You are not what you say," returned Davout.

street where the house was.
Pierre remembered Ramballe, and named him and his regiment and the

coldly.
"How can you show me that you are telling the truth?" said Davout

human being. He reflected for a moment.
burdening his conscience with an evil deed, but now he saw in him a
was merely a circumstance, and Davout could have shot him without
papers where human affairs and lives were indicated by numbers, Pierre
At the first glance, when Davout had only raised his head from the

were brothers.
minds, and they realized that they were both children of humanity and
that moment an immense number of things passed dimly through both their
and law, that look established human relations between the two men. At
at one another, and that look saved Pierre. Apart from conditions of war
Davout looked up and gazed intently at him. For some seconds they looked

voice.
"Monseigneur!" exclaimed Pierre, not in an offended but in a pleading

"What proof have I that you are not lying?"

"Bezukhov."

"Your name?" asked Davout.

have not quitted Moscow."
"No, monseigneur, you cannot have known me. I am a militia officer and
"No, monseigneur," he said, suddenly remembering that Davout was a duke.

rapidly began:
Davout turned away. With an unexpected reverberation in his voice Pierre

who was present, but whom Pierre had not noticed.
"He is a Russian spy," Davout interrupted, addressing another general

"You cannot know me, General, I have never seen you..."

as in a vise.
The chill that had been running down Pierre's back now seized his head

calculated to frighten Pierre.
"I know that man," he said in a cold, measured tone, evidently

screwed up his eyes, and looked intently at him.
Davout raised his head, pushed his spectacles back on his forehead,
embarrassing. So he was silent. But before he had decided what to do,
examination, yet to disclose his rank and position was dangerous and
to say. He did not venture to repeat what he had said at his first
instant of delay might cost him his life; but he did not know what
who was prepared to wait awhile for an answer, Pierre felt that every
cruelty. Looking at his cold face, as he sat like a stern schoolmaster
Davout was not merely a French general, but a man notorious for his
Pierre was silent because he was incapable of uttering a word. To him

"Who are you?"

he said in a low voice:
a paper that lay before him, did not look up. Without raising his eyes,
the room. Pierre went close up to him, but Davout, evidently consulting
Davout, spectacles on nose, sat bent over a table at the further end of

study at the door of which stood an adjutant.
an anteroom, and a hall, which were familiar to him, into a long low
Pierre was the sixth to enter. He was conducted through a glass gallery,
They were taken to the entrance and led into the house one by one.

soldiers, was now occupied by the marshal, the Duke of Eckmuhl (Davout).
been in other days, and which, as he learned from the talk of the
convent. This was Prince Shcherbitov's house, where Pierre had often
Field, to a large white house with an immense garden not far from the
He and the other prisoners were taken to the right side of the Virgin's

action he did not understand but which was working well.
to be an insignificant chip fallen among the wheels of a machine whose
and that they were being taken to the proper place. Pierre felt himself
that he and all the other prisoners were exactly the ones they wanted
now leading him somewhere with unhesitating assurance on their faces
and under that appellation, which to Pierre seemed terrible, they were
back to him in his designation as "the man who does not give his name,"
the others. But no: the answers he had given when questioned had come
and it seemed that they might have forgotten him, or confused him with
and led first to one and then to another place with dozens of other men,
when he came that morning. Pierre had been taken by one set of soldiers
it especially from the list of prisoners the French officer had read out
music he heard from the left side of the field, and felt and realized
whom they met on the way. He felt it in the merry sounds of regimental
important French official in a carriage and pair driven by a soldier,
escorting him and the other criminals; he felt it in the looks of an
the soldiers who, marching in regular ranks briskly and gaily, were
established over this ruined nest. He felt this in the looks of
unconsciously felt that a quite different, firm, French order had been
place of the Russian order of life that had been destroyed, Pierre
It was plain that the Russian nest was ruined and destroyed, but in

the French.
seen were tattered and frightened people who tried to hide when they saw
holiday: everywhere were blackened ruins, and the few Russians to be
Nativity of the Virgin. But there seemed to be no one to celebrate this
These bells reminded Pierre that it was Sunday and the feast of the
glittered brightly and its bells were ringing particularly clearly.
the belfry of Ivan the Great. The domes of the New Convent of the Virgin
was not destroyed, gleamed white in the distance with its towers and
there he could see churches that had not been burned. The Kremlin, which
at the ruins and did not recognize districts he had known well. Here and
here and there the blackened walls of some brick houses. Pierre gazed
waste spaces with only stoves and chimney stacks still standing, and
as Pierre could see was one vast charred ruin. On all sides there were
were seen, but columns of smoke rose on all sides, and all Moscow as far
Zubovski rampart, but rose through the pure air in columns. No flames
as on the day when Pierre had been taken from the guardhouse on the
after rain, and the air was unusually pure. The smoke did not hang low
thirteen others was led to the Virgin's Field. It was a fine day, sunny
marshal. An hour later a squad of soldiers arrived and Pierre with
to have them decently dressed and tidied up before taking them to the
indifferently at all the prisoners, he ordered the officer in charge
Pierre as "the man who does not give his name." Glancing indolently and
a paper in his hand, and called over all the Russians there, naming
prisoners were. This officer, probably someone on the staff, was holding
the respect the guards showed him--entered the coach house where the
On the eighth of September an officer--a very important one judging by


CHAPTER X





had up for a second examination, were the hardest of all for Pierre.
These first days, before the eighth of September when the prisoners were

rather mysterious power.
soldiers. Evidently for them "the marshal" represented a very high and
from the marshal. What marshal this was, Pierre could not learn from the
those confined there were awaiting a decision which might come any day
during that time learned, from the talk of the French soldiers, that all
He passed four days in the coach house near the Crimean bridge and

horror.
significance of the burning of Moscow, and looked at the fires with
city. Fires were visible on all sides. He did not then realize the
felt stifled by the smoke which seemed to hang over the whole
house near the Crimean bridge. On his way through the streets Pierre
Pierre and thirteen others were moved to the coach house of a merchant's

On the fourth day fires broke out on the Zubovski rampart.


with the white mustache and red flushed face.
"Put that down, that's bad... very bad," sternly remarked the general

Again he replied that he could not answer it.
asked, repeating their first question, which he had declined to answer.
where he was going, but why he was found near the fire? Who was he? they
was happening in Moscow. Again they interrupted him: they had not asked
witnesses had seen him? He replied that he had gone out to see what
was not to the point. Why was he in the yard of a burning house where
was the duty of every man; that..." They interrupted him, for this
protecting a woman," and that "to protect a woman who was being insulted
flames. Why had he fought the marauder? Pierre answered that he "was
that he was restoring to its parents a child he had saved from the
was doing when he was arrested, Pierre replied in a rather tragic manner
evident that any answer would lead to conviction. When asked what he
him, this expedient of an inquiry and trial seemed unnecessary. It was
inculpate him. And so, as they had the power and wish to inculpate
to their questions, and that the sole object of that assembly was to
him there, that force alone gave them the right to demand answers
knew he was in these men's power, that only by force had they brought
kind of civility that this device of placing a channel was employed. He
put to him. He had a feeling that it was only out of condescension or a
always feel at their trial, perplexity as to why these questions were
the water could flow to waste. Pierre felt, moreover, what the accused
anything that did not fit in with that aim, the channel was removed and
the desired result, namely a conviction. As soon as Pierre began to say
the judges wished the answers of the accused to flow so as to lead to
being revealed, and were designed only to form a channel through which
essence of the matter aside, shut out the possibility of that essence's
These questions, like questions put at trials generally, left the

and so on.
was questioned as to who he was, where he had been, with what object,
and which is supposed to preclude human frailty, Pierre like the others
With the precision and definiteness customary in addressing prisoners,
sat with two colonels and other Frenchmen with scarves on their arms.
with the others to a house where a French general with a white mustache
them) were to be tried for incendiarism. On the third day he was taken
That evening he learned that all these prisoners (he, probably, among

he spoke French. Pierre felt sad at hearing them making fun of him.
recognizing him as a gentleman, they all avoided him, more especially as
All the Russians confined with Pierre were men of the lowest class and,

required by an officer.
other arrested suspects, as the separate room he had occupied was
surprisingly good. In spite of this he was placed that day with the
and thoughtfulness, and the way he spoke French, which struck them as
about Pierre, it was only his unabashed, meditative concentration
by order of the Higher Command. If they noticed anything remarkable
No. 17 of the captured Russians, arrested and detained for some reason
uttered those solemn words about saving a child; they saw in him only
who had fought so desperately with the marauder and the convoy and had
recognize in this big, stout man in a peasant coat the vigorous person
been to his captors; and in fact the guard of the second day did not
new guard--both officers and men--he was not as interesting as he had
But when the guard was relieved next morning, Pierre felt that for the

result of their recent personal conflict with him.
to who he might be--perhaps a very important person--and hostility as a
In their attitude toward him could still be felt both uncertainty as
hostility but yet with respect, in the guardhouse to which he was taken.
The officer and soldiers who had arrested Pierre treated him with


CHAPTER IX





touching letter the arrival of which had so amazed Nicholas.
times by the tears that dimmed her velvety black eyes--she wrote that
consciousness of performing a magnanimous deed--interrupted several
which she was accustomed to live and loved to live. So with a joyful
was joyfully conscious of a return of that self-sacrificing spirit in
Prince Andrew would prevent Nicholas from marrying Princess Mary, she
vision. Now that she knew that the renewal of Natasha's relations with
day, especially by the mysterious fulfillment she had just seen of her
Sonya was softened, excited, and touched by all that had occurred that

"Yes, Mamma, I will write," said she.

Sonya went up to the countess and, kneeling down, kissed her hand.

readiness for relentless hatred in case of such refusal.
eyes expressed entreaty, shame at having to ask, fear of a refusal, and
Sonya read all that the countess meant to convey with these words. Those
tremulous voice, and in the weary eyes that looked over her spectacles
niece passed, "Sonya, won't you write to Nicholas?" She spoke in a soft,
"Sonya!" said the countess, raising her eyes from her letter as her

countess was writing to her son.
They had an opportunity that day to send letters to the army, and the


thinking about the strangeness of what had occurred.
Sonya, feeling unusually excited and touched, remained at the window
A few minutes later Prince Andrew rang and Natasha went to him, but

her head.
"Oh, I don't know, it is all so strange," replied Sonya, clutching at

"But what does it mean?" she added meditatively.

extraordinary and mysterious part of the prediction.
too remembered the word pink being used, and saw in this the most
"Yes, yes, it really was pink!" cried Natasha, who now thought she

that he was covered with a pink quilt and that his eyes were closed.
something red--but was firmly convinced that she had then seen and said
then said--that he turned to look at her and smiled and was covered with
as real as any other recollection. She not only remembered what she had
came into her head, but what she had invented then seemed to her now
She had in fact seen nothing then but had mentioned the first thing that

seen were exactly what she had seen in the mirror.
folded," she concluded, convincing herself that the details she had just
closed and was covered just with a pink quilt, and that his hands were
her hand and a lifted finger at each detail, "and that he had his eyes
and Dunyasha. I saw him lying on a bed," said she, making a gesture with
"You remember?" Sonya went on. "I saw it then and told everybody, you

lying down.
that Sonya had told her something about Prince Andrew whom she had seen
"Yes, yes!" cried Natasha opening her eyes wide, and vaguely recalling

Christmas? Do you remember what I saw?"
"You remember when I looked in the mirror for you... at Otradnoe at
"You remember," said Sonya with a solemn and frightened expression.

yet understanding what the latter was telling her.
Natasha softly closed the door and went with Sonya to the window, not

"It's that, that..." said Sonya, with a white face and trembling lips.

"What? What is it?" asked Natasha.

arm and stepping back from the door.
"O, Natasha!" Sonya suddenly almost screamed, catching her companion's

calm, his eyes closed, and they could see his regular breathing.
Prince Andrew was lying raised high on three pillows. His pale face was

half-open door.
cautiously and glanced into the room, Sonya standing beside her at the
friends went together to Prince Andrew's door. Natasha opened it
thought. Having wept, talked, and wiped away their tears, the two
Sobbing, she kissed and comforted Natasha. "If only he lives!" she
grief and by her own personal feelings which she shared with no one.
Sonya was not less agitated than her friend by the latter's fear and

"Yes! I knew it! Thank God!" murmured Sonya. "He will live."

tears.
lives! He cannot... because... because... of" and Natasha burst into
unhappy!... Sonya, dovey, everything is as it used to be. If only he
"Sonya, will he live?" she asked. "Sonya, how happy I am, and how

went with her into the unoccupied room.
As soon as the prior withdrew, Natasha took her friend by the hand and

for aid to God and His saint.
Natasha went up to the monk for his blessing, and he advised her to pray

"Natasha, what are you about? Come here!" said the countess.

wide sleeve on his right arm, she went up to Sonya and took her hand.
noticing the monk, who had risen to greet her and was drawing back the
the door. That door opened and Natasha came out, looking excited. Not
Natasha were talking about. She heard the sound of their voices through
Sonya was there too, tormented by curiosity as to what Prince Andrew and
calling on them as old acquaintances and benefactors of the monastery.
count and countess respectfully conversing with the prior, who was
that day and Natasha was sitting with him. In the next room sat the
of which was occupied by Prince Andrew. The wounded man was much better
Three large rooms were assigned to them in the monastery hostelry, one

whole day.
At the Troitsa monastery the Rostovs first broke their journey for a

affairs cheered Sonya.
journey, this feeling that Providence was intervening in her personal
happened during those last days and during the first days of their
prohibited degrees of affinity. Despite all the terror of what had
then not be able to marry Princess Mary as they would be within the
they would again fall in love with one another, and that Nicholas would
knew that being thrown together again under such terrible circumstances
loved no one but Prince Andrew and had never ceased to love him. She
did not intend her to be separated from Nicholas. She knew that Natasha
Natasha, she was seized by a joyful and superstitious feeling that God
presence in their house, despite her sincere pity for him and for
from them in practical activity. But when she heard of Prince Andrew's
gloomy thoughts that oppressed Sonya. She was glad to find escape
The bustle and terror of the Rostovs' last days in Moscow stifled the

free but on the contrary at that meeting to bind him to her forever.
resolved to wait till she should see Nicholas, not in order to set him
the countess in vague general terms, avoided talking with her and
dependence had taught her involuntarily to be secretive, having answered
or religion. Under the influence of this feeling Sonya, whose life of
was beginning to grow up which was stronger than principle, virtue,
that out of her pure, quiet love for Nicholas a passionate feeling
her and yet was beloved by everybody. And for the first time Sonya felt
needed to sacrifice herself, but made others sacrifice themselves for
of Natasha who had never experienced anything of this sort, had never
her benefactors only to torture her the more painfully; she felt jealous
And for the first time she felt bitterness against those who had been
whole reward for her self-sacrifice and the whole meaning of her life.
now they wanted her to sacrifice the very thing that constituted the
worthy of Nicholas whom she loved more than anything in the world. But
raised her in her own esteem and in that of others, and so made her more
former acts of self-sacrifice she had been happily conscious that they
worth, and she was accustomed to this and loved doing it. But in all her
position in the house was such that only by sacrifice could she show her
brought her up. To sacrifice herself for others was Sonya's habit. Her
of her. She must sacrifice herself for the family that had reared and
promise and could not bring herself to decide to do what was demanded
she would do anything and was prepared for anything, but gave no actual
Sonya burst into hysterical tears and replied through her sobs that

"I shall not be at peace till you promise me this."

engagement with Nicholas.
and repay all that the family had done for her by breaking off her
making demands on her, tearfully implored her to sacrifice herself
was going on, she called Sonya to her and, instead of reproaching and
But a few days before they left Moscow, moved and excited by all that

making humiliating or cruel allusions to Sonya.
with Princess Mary in Bogucharovo. The countess let no occasion slip of
after they had received a letter from Nicholas telling of his meeting
life in the countess' house had grown harder and harder, especially
knew that Sonya was the chief obstacle to this happening, and Sonya's
married to an heiress occupied the old countess' mind more and more. She
Nicholas' prayer, was prompted by this: the thought of getting Nicholas
Sonya's letter written from Troitsa, which had come as an answer to


CHAPTER VIII





and a few days later left to rejoin his regiment.
The following day he saw Princess Mary off on her journey to Yaroslavl,

intimate with the princess as if they were relations.
might mean, but thanks to this letter Nicholas suddenly became almost as
Mary. Neither he nor she said a word about what "Natasha nursing him"
Next day Nicholas took his mother's letter and went to see Princess

hope. Sonya and Natasha were nursing him.
his state was very critical, but the doctor said there was now more
mentioned that Prince Andrew was among the wounded traveling with them;
the destruction of all their property. In this letter the countess also
described their last days in Moscow, their departure, the fire, and
Both letters were written from Troitsa. The other, from the countess,


Your Sonya

everything, no one can love you more than does
beg you to consider yourself free, and to be assured that, in spite of
love has no aim but the happiness of those I love; so, Nicholas, I
or discord in the family that has been so good to me (she wrote), and my
It would be too painful to me to think that I might be a cause of sorrow


from his promise and set him completely free.
coldness of late, had all combined to make her decide to release him
should marry Princess Bolkonskaya, together with his silence and
property--and the countess' repeatedly expressed wish that Nicholas
events--the loss of almost the whole of the Rostovs' Moscow
there had seemed no escape. She wrote that the last unfortunate
from Sonya freed him from the knot that fettered him and from which
This unexpected and, as it seemed to Nicholas, quite voluntary letter

had prayed, but by some ordinary coincidence.
had happened so quickly proved that it had not come from God to whom he
something extraordinary and unexpected, and as if the very fact that it
him had come to pass; but Nicholas was as much astonished as if it were
What he had just been praying for with confidence that God would hear
stretching out his hands, with his mouth wide open and his eyes fixed.
and standing still in the middle of the room he raised his shoulders,
reading it. He glanced through it, then read it again, and then again,
Unable to sit still he paced up and down the room holding the letter and

"No, it's not possible!" he cried aloud.

eyes opened wide with fear and joy.
Sonya's first. He had read only a few lines when he turned pale and his
the other from Sonya. He recognized them by the handwriting and opened
Nicholas took the two letters, one of which was from his mother and

"Well, all right, thanks. You can go!"

arrived and there's a letter for you."
"From the governor," said Lavrushka in a sleepy voice. "A courier has

quickly changing his attitude.
"Blockhead! Why do you come in without being called?" cried Nicholas,

door opened and Lavrushka came in with some papers.
done for a long time. Tears were in his eyes and in his throat when the
Softened by memories of Princess Mary he began to pray as he had not
down in a corner, and folding his hands placed himself before the icon.
No, but I am not praying for trifles now," he thought as he put his pipe
sugar--and then run out into the yard to see whether it had done so.
Natasha and I used to as children, that the snow might turn into
prayer can move mountains, but one must have faith and not pray as
this dreadful, inextricable position!" he suddenly began to pray. "Yes,
Besides, I don't love her--not as I should. O, God! release me from
grief for Mamma... business difficulties... muddles, terrible muddles!
said: "Nothing but misfortune can come of marrying Sonya. Muddles,
She was right," he thought, remembering what the governor's wife had
suddenly thought. "What do I want? To be free, released from Sonya...
sure her prayer will be answered. Why don't I pray for what I want?" he
her prayer. Yes, that was the prayer that moves mountains, and I am
"How she prayed!" he thought. "It was plain that her whole soul was in

dream of Princess Mary was always difficult and a little frightening.
Reveries about Sonya had had something merry and playful in them, but to

understand her but simply loved her.
impossible to picture a future with Princess Mary, because he did not
had all been thought out and he knew all there was in Sonya, but it was
future with Sonya, and that was all clear and simple just because it
presented itself to his mind. He had long ago pictured to himself a
But no, he could not imagine that. He felt awed, and no clear picture
he free. How he would propose to her and how she would become his wife.
therefore valued most highly. He tried to picture what would happen were
the abundance of it in the other--a spirituality he himself lacked and
involuntarily compared the two: the lack of spirituality in the one and
"Why am I not free? Why was I in such a hurry with Sonya?" And he
"She must be a wonderful woman. A real angel!" he said to himself.

attraction.
the depth of a whole spiritual world foreign to him was an irresistible
and dreaminess, but in Princess Mary that very sorrow which revealed
like Prince Andrew) and he referred to it contemptuously as philosophy
see the expression of a higher spiritual life (that was why he did not
agitated him and evoked his sympathy. In men Rostov could not bear to
and especially the deep and tender sorrow expressed in all her features
sad, refined face, that radiant look, those gentle graceful gestures,
felt, sunk deeper than was desirable for his peace of mind. That pale,
of chances of meeting her. But that day's encounter in church had, he
it had not entered his head to regret that he was thus depriving himself
observed in her at this time. He was, however, preparing to go away and
but powerful. Nicholas had been struck by the peculiar moral beauty he
again in Voronezh the impression she made on him was not merely pleasing
a good match, had drawn his particular attention to her. When he met her
circumstances, and his mother having at one time mentioned her to him as
her in Smolensk province. His having encountered her in such exceptional
Princess Mary had made an agreeable impression on him when he had met

life, a thing he rarely did.
and for a long time he paced up and down the room, reflecting on his
was already too late to go anywhere but still too early to go to bed,
accounts with the horse dealers. When he had finished that business it
That evening Nicholas did not go out, but stayed at home to settle some

went out, following her aunt.
everything she did in his presence and, looking up at him gratefully,
from finishing, she bent her head with a movement as graceful as
"Oh, that would be so dread..." she began and, prevented by agitation

Princess Mary interrupted him.

continued Nicholas. "We must hope for the best, and I am sure..."
it was a shell) "either proving fatal at once or being very slight,"
"And I have known so many cases of a splinter wound" (the Gazette said

by the expression of regretful sympathy on his face.
The princess looked at him, not grasping what he was saying, but cheered

would have been at once announced in the Gazette, as he is a colonel."
is that if your brother, Prince Andrew Nikolievich, were not living, it
"There is one thing I wanted to tell you, Princess," said Rostov. "It

her sorrow and her joy.
she heard his voice a vivid glow kindled in her face, lighting up both
had heard of her trouble and sympathized with his whole soul. As soon as
it was right and proper to address her here in church, and told her he
be prompted by the governor's wife and not asking himself whether or not
before when she was present, Nicholas went up to her without waiting to
pathetic expression of sorrow, prayer, and hope in it. As had occurred
spiritual labor, but now it was quite differently lit up. There was a
seen before, there was the same general expression of refined, inner,
Nicholas looked at her face with surprise. It was the same face he had

the church.
by her thoughts, was crossing herself for the last time before leaving
pity that immediately overcame him. Princess Mary, evidently engrossed
he saw under her bonnet as by the feeling of solicitude, timidity, and
Nicholas immediately recognized Princess Mary not so much by the profile

her head a lady standing on the opposite side, beyond the choir.
"Have you seen the princess?" she asked, indicating with a movement of

When the service was over the governor's wife beckoned him to her.
decorum through the service, meditating on a great variety of subjects.
He stood a little behind the governor and held himself with military
Nicholas was present, was held in the cathedral for the Russian victory.
A few days before his departure a special thanksgiving, at which

unreasonably angry with his servant and squadron quartermaster.
to him. He made haste to finish buying the horses, and often became
and felt that only in the regiment would everything again become clear
seemed to him insincere; he did not know how to judge all these affairs
indefinite feeling of shame and awkwardness. The conversations he heard
suddenly seemed to him dull and tiresome, and he experienced an
vengeance, or any feeling of that kind, but everything in Voronezh
of Moscow, Rostov was not seized with despair, anger, the desire for
When he received the news of the battle of Borodino and the abandonment

set off in search of Prince Andrew.
him, prepared (so Nicholas heard, he had not seen her again himself) to
her brother's wound only from the Gazette and having no definite news of
Voronezh in the middle of September. Princess Mary, having learned of
wounded, and the still more terrible news of the loss of Moscow reached
The dreadful news of the battle of Borodino, of our losses in killed and


CHAPTER VII





seemed incongruous and false. It made him afraid.
picture anything of future married life. If he tried, his pictures
Mary, to whom they were trying to get him engaged, he could never
these pictures of the future had given him pleasure. But with Princess
little ones, Mamma and Papa, their relations to her, and so on--and
a white dressing gown, his wife at the tea table, his wife's carriage,
adapting her in his imagination to all the conditions of married life:
almost all honest-hearted young men do, that is, as a possible wife,
thought about Sonya. He had pictured each of those young ladies as
in society, nor as he had for a long time, and at one time rapturously,
had thought of all the young ladies without exception whom he had met
and he often thought about her. But he never thought about her as he
externally as before, all his former amusements lost their charm for him
After meeting Princess Mary, though the course of his life went on

in his life.
something very important--more important than anything he had ever done
who were guiding him, he was not only doing nothing wrong, but was doing
that by resigning himself now to the force of circumstances and to those
act basely. But he also knew (or rather felt at the bottom of his heart)
declare his feelings to Princess Mary. And he knew that he would never
knew that after his promise to Sonya it would be what he deemed base to
to the power he felt irresistibly carrying him he knew not where. He
in obedient submission to circumstances, he chose the latter and yielded
between his effort to arrange his life by his own sense of justice, and
considered right was right, so now, after a short but sincere struggle
As at Tilsit Rostov had not allowed himself to doubt that what everybody

declaration to Princess Mary, he promised to go.
Though Rostov told the governor's wife that he would not make any

house before Mass.
purpose she arranged a meeting between the young people at the bishop's
versa, and insisting on his declaring himself to Princess Mary. For this
Nicholas the flattering things Princess Mary said of him and vice
the same the governor's wife went on with her matchmaking, passing on to
Nicholas did not think it the proper thing to visit her again; but all
As she was in mourning Princess Mary did not go out into society, and

good natured playfulness.
understanding it, flushed with pleasure and began to kiss the boy with
of the man she loved. Nicholas also noticed that look and, as if
softened, happy, timid look she watched the boy she loved in the arms
his knee, played with him, and looked round at Princess Mary. With a
and asking whether he would like to be an hussar. He took the boy on
there are children, turned to Prince Andrew's little son, caressing him
When a pause occurred during his short visit, Nicholas, as is usual when

moment.
he had prepared, but what, quite appropriately, occurred to him at the
her, but in her presence he felt quite at ease, and said not at all what
princess (as she did when he was mentioned) and even when he thought of
Nicholas blushed and was confused when people spoke to him about the
conviction that she was a quite unusual and extraordinary being.
with an observation unusual to him, and everything confirmed his
noticed this, as he noticed every shade of Princess Mary's character
her heart and she neither could nor would speak lightly of him. Nicholas
misfortunes with a certain artificiality, but her brother was too near
as her aunt mentioned Andrew. Evidently she could speak of Russia's
She did not talk about her brother, diverting the conversation as soon

relations, and of Princess Mary's.
the subject--they talked of the governor's kind wife, of Nicholas'
it; they spoke of their last meeting--Nicholas trying to change
war, and like everyone else unconsciously exaggerated their sorrow about
Their conversation was very simple and unimportant. They spoke of the

than, anyone he had met before, and above all better than himself.
felt that the being before him was quite different from, and better
Rostov saw all this as clearly as if he had known her whole life. He

eyes, in her delicate smile, and in every trait of her gentle face.
meekness, love, and self-sacrifice--all this now shone in those radiant
with herself, her sufferings, her strivings after goodness, her
lived appeared on the surface. All her inward labor, her dissatisfaction
time all that pure, spiritual, inward travail through which she had
was suddenly shown up in unexpected and striking beauty. For the first
work on its sides, that previously seemed dark, coarse, and meaningless,
in a carved and painted lantern and the intricate, skillful, artistic
face became suddenly transformed. It was as if a light had been kindled
speak and act apart from her own will. From the time Rostov entered, her
loved face, a new life force took possession of her and compelled her to
had taken place in herself. From the moment she recognized that dear,
have been more surprised than Mademoiselle Bourienne at the change that
Had Princess Mary been capable of reflection at that moment, she would

grace!" thought Mademoiselle Bourienne.
improved without my having noticed it. And above all, what tact and
"Either black is particularly becoming to her or she really has greatly

man she wished to attract.
consummate coquette, she could not have maneuvered better on meeting a
room, looked at Princess Mary in bewildered surprise. Herself a
womanly notes vibrated. Mademoiselle Bourienne, who was in the drawing
and began to speak in a voice in which for the first time new deep
with a smile of pleasure, held out her slender, delicate hand to him,
shining eyes. With a movement full of dignity and grace she half rose
just as Nicholas turned to her she raised her head and met his look with
instant, as if to give the visitor time to greet her aunt, and then
When Rostov entered the room, the princess dropped her eyes for an

understand that she could be outwardly so calm and natural.
"You have met him, Aunt?" said she in a calm voice, unable herself to

and radiant light.
only a slight blush suffused her cheeks and her eyes lit up with a new
room that Count Rostov had called, the princess showed no confusion,
But when on Sunday after church the footman announced in the drawing

soon as she saw him.
feared lest the confusion she felt might overwhelm her and betray her as
undeservedly cold and then to mean too much. More than anything she
to her and what she would say to him, and these words sometimes seemed
did go down to see him, Princess Mary imagined the words he would say
would be an insult to her and to her father's memory. Assuming that she
situated as she was, while still wearing deep mourning, such matchmaking
her sinful nature, could think this of them: they could not forget that
confirm this supposition--then she told herself that only she, with
concerning herself and Rostov--their looks and words at times seemed to
it occurred to her that her aunt and the governor's wife had intentions
then she thought this would be rude after what he had done for her; then
would not be proper for her, in her deep mourning, to receive visitors;
not to come to the drawing room when he called to see her aunt--that it
continually thought of how she ought to behave to him. First she decided
During the two days that elapsed before Rostov called, Princess Mary

self-reproach, and hopes reawoke.
feeling--her mental tranquillity was destroyed, and desires, doubts,
mentioned. But Princess Mary experienced a painful rather than a joyful
him and telling how he had blushed when Princess Mary's name was
governor's wife began to speak of Rostov in Mary's presence, praising
could get to know one another. Malvintseva expressed approval, and the
thought of, all the same the young people might be brought together and
under present circumstances a formal betrothal was, of course, not to be
and, after discussing her plan with the aunt, remarked that though
The day after her party the governor's wife came to see Malvintseva

related to her meeting with Rostov.
and hopes that had been on the point of awakening within her and were
peace arising from consciousness of having stifled those personal dreams
herself incompetent, but in the depths of her soul she felt at peace--a
worried too about her nephew's education for which she had always felt
the only intimate person now remaining to her, was exposed. She was
incessantly tortured by the thought of the dangers to which her brother,
was associated in her mind with the ruin of Russia. She was agitated and
surroundings, she felt more and more deeply the loss of her father which
her nephew's education. She was sad. Now, after a month passed in quiet
brother, settling in a new house, meeting new people, and attending to
Rostov was smothered by arrangements for the journey, anxiety about her
father's illness, since his death, and especially since her meeting with
That feeling akin to temptation which had tormented her during her
giving her instructions how to get to her Aunt Malvintseva at Voronezh.
found her nephew there with his tutor, and a letter from Prince Andrew
On reaching Moscow after her meeting with Rostov, Princess Mary had


CHAPTER VI





little hand.
"What a matchmaker you are, Aunt..." said Nicholas, kissing her plump

always a right way of doing things," replied the governor's wife.
"But you don't suppose I'm going to get you married at once? There is

now in mourning. How can one think of it!"
a short pause. "Besides, would the princess have me? And besides, she is
"All the same, Aunt, it is impossible," he rejoined with a sigh, after

Nicholas remained silent. It comforted him to hear these arguments.

understand that."
in despair, and you all ruined.... No, my dear, you and Sonya ought to
life would it be for Sonya--if she's a girl with a heart? Your mother
about your mother? It would kill her, that's one thing. And what sort of
you yourself say your Papa's affairs are in a very bad way. And what
"My dear boy, what a way to look at it! You know Sonya has nothing and

incoherently and blushing.
will do so.... So you see there can be no question about-" said Nicholas
"You know Sonya, my cousin? I love her, and promised to marry her, and

The governor's wife pressed his elbow gratefully.

and never will, only to you."
off... and then everything... So you see... I never told this to anyone
that I should meet her just when Natasha's engagement had been broken
the question for me to think of marrying her. And it must needs happen
as my sister Natasha was engaged to her brother it was of course out of
before, somehow it had always happened that we did not meet. And as long
Mamma had long been thinking of it; but I had never happened to meet her
often occurred to me: 'This is fate.' Especially if you remember that
then, after I met her under such circumstances--so strangely, the idea
truth. In the first place I like her very much, I feel drawn to her; and
"But Princess Bolkonskaya--that's another matter. I will tell you the

"Oh yes, I understand," said the governor's wife.

very idea of marrying for money is repugnant to me."
"You see, Aunt, Mamma has long wanted me to marry an heiress, but the

had immense consequences for him and for all his family.
him: yet that burst of frankness, together with other trifling events,
everyone in such cases--that it was merely some silly whim that seized
had very important results for him, it seemed to him--as it seems to
recalled that impulse to unsolicited and inexplicable frankness which
his friend) to this woman who was almost a stranger. When he afterwards
thoughts (which he would not have told to his mother, his sister, or
Nicholas suddenly felt a desire and need to tell his most intimate

"What is it, my dear? Come, let's sit down here," said she.

"But see here, to tell the truth, Aunt..."

aside.
when she again smilingly said to him, "Well then, remember!" he drew her
match... and Sonya...?" And on taking leave of the governor's wife,
Nicholas suddenly at supper. "She will really begin to arrange a
"But what nonsense I have been saying to the governor's wife!" thought

himself might not be pleasant to someone else.
of his heart; it did not enter his head that a pastime so pleasant to
"Oh no, we are good friends with him," said Nicholas in the simplicity

blonde. One is sorry for the husband, really...."
my dear boy, among other things you are too attentive to the other, the
"Yes, yes," the governor's wife said as if talking to herself. "But,

"Of course not!"

"Well then, remember, this is not a joke!"

said before he had time to consider what he was saying.
a soldier, Aunt, I don't force myself on anyone or refuse anything," he
"Not at all," replied Nicholas as if offended at the idea. "As befits

really! And she is not at all so plain, either."
am sure your mother will be grateful to me. What a charming girl she is,
speaks of Lily, but I say, no--the princess! Do you want me to do it? I
"I will make a match for you with the princess. Catherine Petrovna

"Whom do you mean, Aunt?" asked Nicholas.

you: would you like me to arrange it?"
expression on her kind little face, "that really would be the match for
"Do you know, dear boy," began the governor's wife with a serious

so as not to be in her way.
her sitting room, from which those who were there immediately withdrew
sleeve and, saying that she wanted to have a talk with him, led him to
dancing, but the governor's little wife placed her plump hand on his
When he had parted from Malvintseva Nicholas wished to return to the

which he himself did not understand.
of Princess Mary he experienced a feeling of shyness and even of fear,
Nicholas promised to come and blushed again as he bowed. At the mention

come to see her.
important old lady dismissed Nicholas after repeating her invitation to
knew of Prince Andrew, who also was evidently no favorite of hers, the
Malvintseva had evidently not liked, and having asked what Nicholas
After a few words about Princess Mary and her late father, whom

Nicholas. "Pray come and see me."
"Very pleased, mon cher," she then said, holding out her hand to

to upbraid the general who had won from her.
the game. She looked at him and, screwing up her eyes sternly, continued
Voronezh. When Rostov approached her she was standing settling up for
aunt on her mother's side, a rich, childless widow who always lived in
important personages of the town. This was Malvintseva, Princess Mary's
a blue headdress, who had just finished her game of cards with the most
The governor's wife led him up to a tall and very stout old lady with

"Very well, very well!... Oh, what a fellow you are!"

"Not a bit! Please don't, Aunt!"

Oho! How you blush. Why, are...?"
"Her niece, Princess Bolkonskaya. She is here in Voronezh with her aunt.

"I rescued such a lot of them!" said Nicholas.

rescued her... Can you guess?"
"Anna Ignatyevna Malvintseva. She has heard from her niece how you

"Oh, yes, Aunt. Who is she?"

important person. "Come, Nicholas! You know you let me call you so?"
name so that Nicholas at once understood that Anna Ignatyevna was a very
"Anna Ignatyevna wants to see you, Nicholas," said she, pronouncing the

wife came up with a look of disapproval.
The husband smiled gloomily, the wife gaily. The governor's good-natured

to elope with a blonde lady.
Nikita Ivanych to share his joke, he began to tell him of his intention
"Ah, Nikita Ivanych!" cried Nicholas, rising politely, and as if wishing

about.
The husband came up and sullenly asked his wife what she was talking

at her shoulders) "like Diana's...."
partner) "are blue, her mouth coral and ivory; her figure" (he glanced
"A charming lady, a divine one. Her eyes" (Nicholas looked at his

"Which lady?"

wished to run away with a certain lady here in Voronezh.
their well-fitting Hessian boots, Nicholas told the blonde lady that he
admiring his partner, himself, and the fine outlines of his legs in
legs in their tight riding breeches, diffusing an odor of perfume, and
smile that never left his face. Jauntily shifting the position of his
over the blonde lady and paying her mythological compliments with a
Nicholas sat leaning slightly forward in an armchair, bending closely


CHAPTER V





share increased the husband's diminished.
were but a given amount of animation between them and as the wife's
husband's became more and more melancholy and solemn, as though there
evening, however, as the wife's face grew more flushed and animated, the
involuntarily yielded to Nicholas' good humor. Toward the end of the
latter's good-natured naivete was so boundless that sometimes even he
conviction and tried to behave morosely with Rostov. But the
would get on together. The husband, however, did not seem to share that
without speaking of it, they knew how capitally Nicholas and the lady
treated her husband in a friendly and conspiratorial style, as if,
wives were created for them, Rostov did not leave the lady's side and
With the naive conviction of young men in a merry mood that other men's
pleasing little blonde, the wife of one of the provincial officials.
All the evening Nicholas paid attention to a blue-eyed, plump and

thing in the capital though new to them in the provinces.
something unusual, something they would have to accept as the regular
bad form, but here he felt it incumbent on him to astonish them all by
even have considered such a very free and easy manner improper and in
danced that evening. He had never danced like that in Moscow and would
surprised them all. Nicholas was himself rather surprised at the way he
society by his agility. His particularly free manner of dancing even
dancing began in which Nicholas still further captivated the provincial
Catherine Petrovna did actually play valses and the ecossaise, and

and called him "Nicholas."
was the governor's wife herself, who welcomed Rostov as a near relative
fine young daredevil of an hussar married and settled down. Among these
and, from the first day, the people concerned themselves to get this
impatiently awaiting his notice. The women and girls flirted with him
an inexhaustible number of pretty young women, married and unmarried,
here too at the governor's party there were (as it seemed to Nicholas)
landowner's snuggery, maidservants had been flattered by his notice, and
after his long privations. At posting stations, at inns, and in the
universal favorite: a very pleasant position, and intoxicatingly so
he had entered into his proper position in the province--that of a
clustered around him; all eyes turned on him, and he felt at once that
than never" and heard them repeated several times by others, people
a fragrance of perfume and wine, and had uttered the words "better late
As soon as Nicholas entered in his hussar uniform, diffusing around him

cordially though with dignity and restraint.
that everyone regarded the Italian in the same light, and he treated him
was, as it were, a war trophy. Nicholas felt this, it seemed to him
prisoner enhanced his own importance as a Russian hero. The Italian
officer of the French army; and Nicholas felt that the presence of that
and well-bred Count Rostov. Among the men was an Italian prisoner, an
cavalier of St. George, the hussar remount officer, the good-natured
acquaintances, but there were no men who could at all vie with the
There were a great many ladies and some of Nicholas' Moscow

Voronezh.
The society gathered together at the governor's was the best in

now turned on Moscow, the army, and Napoleon.
small talk, instead of turning on the weather and mutual acquaintances,
"in for a penny, in for a pound--who cares?" spirit, and the inevitable
went on in Russia at that time a special recklessness was noticeable, an
arrival of many wealthy families from Moscow, and as in everything that
difference, that it was livelier in the towns in consequence of the
Provincial life in 1812 went on very much as usual, but with this

to a ball.
clavichord and that there would be dancing, and so everyone had come as
that Catherine Petrovna would play valses and the ecossaise on the
It was not a ball, nor had dancing been announced, but everyone knew

"better late than never" on his lips.
Nicholas arrived at the governor's rather late, but with the phrase
When he had changed, poured water over his head, and scented himself,

to be in time for the governor's party.
in the brightest frame of mind, continually urging on the driver so as
already on the friendliest terms--galloped back over abominable roads,
Nicholas--having exchanged kisses with the landowner, with whom he was
After dining and taking rather too much of the Hungarian wine,
thousand rubles--to serve, as he said, as samples of his remounts.
In very few words Nicholas bought seventeen picked stallions for six

owned some splendid horses.
and some old Hungarian wine, who had a snuggery where he smoked, and who
horse fancier, a sportsman, the possessor of some century-old brandy
The landowner to whom Nicholas went was a bachelor, an old cavalryman, a

everything went well and easily.
and, as usually happens when a man is in a pleasant state of mind,
him pleasant and easy during that first part of his stay in Voronezh
landowner, fourteen miles away, who had the stud. Everything seemed to
taking his squadron quartermaster with him, drove at a gallop to the
Immediately on leaving the governor's, Nicholas hired post horses and,

and see us quite informally," said the governor, taking leave of him.
mother's. We are at home on Thursdays--today is Thursday, so please come
"You are Count Ilya Rostov's son? My wife was a great friend of your

the best horses, and promised to assist him in every way.
dealer in the town and a landowner fourteen miles out of town who had
farms at which Nicholas might procure horses, recommended to him a horse
was a brisk little man, very simple and affable. He indicated the stud
From the commander of the militia he drove to the governor. The governor

so. Nicholas was in such good spirits that this merely amused him.
progress of affairs and approving and disapproving with full right to do
and questioned him with an important air, as if considering the general
Nicholas brusquely (imagining this to be characteristically military)
evidently pleased with his military designation and rank. He received
The commander of the militia was a civilian general, an old man who was

time, went to present himself to the authorities.
clean-shaven and in a full-dress uniform he had not worn for a long
ordered things he had long been deprived of in camp, and next day, very
In the highest spirits Nicholas arrived at night at a hotel in Voronezh,

with them.
too, who were pleased and flattered that a passing officer should joke
and healthy, without a dozen officers making up to each of them; women,
a long while specially surprised and delighted him were the women, young
them, he rejoiced as though seeing all this for the first time. What for
where cattle were grazing, posthouses with stationmasters asleep in
with peasants and peasant women, gentlemen's country houses, fields
from soldiers, wagons, and the filthy traces of a camp--he saw villages
army's foraging operations, provision trains, and hospitals. When--free
the delight Nicholas felt when he escaped from the region covered by the
continuously in an atmosphere of campaigning and war--can understand
Only a man who has experienced it--that is, has passed some months

advance, he set out with post horses for Voronezh.
necessary money and warrants, and having sent some hussars on in
A few days before the battle of Borodino, Nicholas received the

comrades fully understood.
with the greatest pleasure--which he did not conceal and which his
regret at being prevented from taking part in the coming battle, but
sent to Voronezh to buy remounts for his division, not only without
As he looked at the matter in this way, he learned that he was being

of years' time.
so it was quite likely he might be in command of a regiment in a couple
fighting would probably go on for a long time yet, and that things being
heard that the regiments were to be made up to their full strength, that
it, that Kutuzov and others were there for that purpose, but that he had
Russia, he would have said that it was not his business to think about
brains over it. Had he been asked what he thought of the state of
going on in Russia without despair and without dismally racking his
without any aim at self-sacrifice, and he therefore looked at what was
and prolonged part in the defense of his country, but did so casually,
As the war had caught him in the service, Nicholas Rostov took a close

vivandiere, and like matters.
thought about their next pay, their next quarters, of Matreshka the
of its burned ruins no one swore to be avenged on the French, but they
there was little talk or thought of Moscow, and when they caught sight
self-sacrifice and so on; but in the army which retired beyond Moscow
militia uniforms, wept for Russia and its ancient capital and talked of
in the provinces at a distance from Moscow, ladies, and gentlemen in
Russia the less did he realize their significance. In Petersburg and
The more closely a man was engaged in the events then taking place in

realize it his efforts are fruitless.
in an historic event never understands its significance. If he tries to
applicable. Only unconscious action bears fruit, and he who plays a part
forbidding us to eat of the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge is specially
actions no one could possibly be guilty of. In historic events the rule
useless condemnation and anger directed against people accused of
into their conversation either a shade of pretense and falsehood or
who discussed Russia's position at the time involuntarily introduced
Even those, fond of intellectual talk and of expressing their feelings,
young ladies prepared and that never reached the wounded, and so on.
Mamonov's regiments which looted Russian villages, and the lint the
common good turned out to be useless and foolish--like Pierre's and
of society, they saw everything upside down, and all they did for the
part in it by self-sacrifice and heroism were the most useless members
Those who tried to understand the general course of events and to take

whose activities at that period were most useful.
guided only by their private interests, and they were the very people
that time paid no attention to the general progress of events but were
public interest from being felt or even noticed. Most of the people at
so much transcend the general interests that they always prevent the
that people had. Yet in reality those personal interests of the moment
interest of that time and do not see all the personal human interests
so. It appears so to us because we see only the general historic
despair, grief, and the heroism of the Russians. But it was not really
without exception speak only of the self-sacrifice, patriotic devotion,
or weeping over its downfall. The tales and descriptions of that time
were solely engaged in sacrificing themselves, saving their fatherland,
defense of the fatherland, all Russians from the greatest to the least
distant provinces, and one levy after another was being raised for the
when half Russia had been conquered and the inhabitants were fleeing to
It is natural for us who were not living in those days to imagine that


CHAPTER IV





With an inclination of the head the Emperor dismissed him.

the nation and the salvation of Europe!"
"Sire!" said he, "Your Majesty is at this moment signing the glory of

considered himself to be, in the following words:
own feelings and those of the Russian people whose representative he
heard (as he used afterwards to say), and gave expression to his
d'ame--at that solemn moment felt himself enraptured by all that he had
in the Emperor's eyes, Michaud--quoique etranger, russe de coeur et
When he heard these words and saw the expression of firm resolution

And the Emperor paused, with a frown.

learned to know him, and he will not deceive me any more...."
touching his breast. "We can no longer both reign together. I have
recall it with pleasure someday... Napoleon or I," said the Emperor,
"Colonel Michaud, do not forget what I say to you here, perhaps we may

flushed and his eyes gleamed with resolution and anger.
with a vigorous movement. The Emperor's mild and handsome face was
moments, he strode back to Michaud and pressed his arm below the elbow
and went to the further end of his study. Having stood there a few
turned away as if to hide from Michaud the tears that rose to his eyes,
Having uttered these words in an agitated voice the Emperor suddenly

sacrifices I know how to appreciate."
than sign the disgrace of my country and of my beloved people whose
chest) "and go and eat potatoes with the meanest of my peasants, rather
command, I shall let my beard grow to here" (he pointed halfway down his
throne of my ancestors, then after exhausting all the means at my
shining with emotion, "that my dynasty should cease to reign on the
by Divine Providence," he continued, raising to heaven his fine eyes
Emperor growing more and more animated; "but should it ever be ordained
my empire. It still offers me more than my enemies suppose," said the
beloved nobility and my good peasants and so use the last resources of
when I have not a soldier left I shall put myself at the head of my
"and tell our brave men and all my good subjects wherever you go that
full height and addressing Michaud with a gracious and majestic gesture,
"Well, then, go back to the army," he said, drawing himself up to his

He bent his head and was silent for some time.

he patted Michaud on the shoulder. "You set me at ease, Colonel."
"Ah!" said the Emperor reassured, and with a kindly gleam in his eyes,

the sacrifice of their lives how devoted they are...."
representative of the Russian nation, "and to prove to Your Majesty by
persuaded to make peace. They are burning for the combat," declared this
Your Majesty, in the goodness of your heart, should allow yourself to be
"Sire," he said, with respectful playfulness, "they are only afraid lest

prepared.
Michaud had only waited for this to bring out the phrase he had

misfortune make my Russians lose heart?... Never!"
"How is that?" the Emperor interrupted him, frowning sternly. "Would

desperate and agonized terror..."
whole army, from its chiefs to the lowest soldier, without exception in
lips, having now prepared a well-phrased reply, "sire, I left the
"Sire!" said Michaud with a subtle, scarcely perceptible smile on his

from me, I wish to know absolutely how things are."
"Colonel, I always require it," replied the Emperor. "Conceal nothing

asked to gain time.
"Sire, will you allow me to speak frankly as befits a loyal soldier?" he

direct and relevant question which required a direct answer.
grew calm, but was not immediately ready to reply to the Emperor's
Seeing that his most gracious ruler was calm once more, Michaud also

discouragement?..."
saw my ancient capital abandoned without a battle? Did you not notice
His will; but tell me, Michaud, how did you leave the army when it
great sacrifices of us... I am ready to submit myself in all things to
"I see, Colonel, from all that is happening, that Providence requires

firm voice:
himself for his weakness, and raising his head addressed Michaud in a
But this lasted only a moment. He suddenly frowned, as if blaming

trembled, and tears instantly appeared in his fine blue eyes.
The Emperor began to breathe heavily and rapidly, his lower lip

frightened by what he had done.
replied Michaud in a decided tone, but glancing at the Emperor he was
"Yes, sire, and Moscow is now in ashes. I left it all in flames,"

"Has the enemy entered the city?" he asked.

The Emperor listened in silence, not looking at Michaud.

latter.
Moscow, or losing Moscow alone, the field marshal had to choose the
as the only remaining choice was between losing the army as well as
which was that it had been impossible to fight before Moscow, and that
Michaud respectfully delivered the message Kutuzov had entrusted to him,

Emperor quickly, his face suddenly flushing.
"Have they surrendered my ancient capital without a battle?" asked the

abandonment of Moscow."
"Very sad, sire," replied Michaud, lowering his eyes with a sigh. "The

"Have you brought me sad news, Colonel?"

into the Emperor's study that the latter at once asked:
that which caused Russians to grieve, he had such a sad face when shown
Though the source of M. Michaud's chagrin must have been different from


     * (2) Whose flames illumined his route.

     * Our most gracious sovereign.


burning of Moscow, dont les flammes eclairaient sa route. *(2)
he appeared before notre tres gracieux souverain * with the news of the
and who did not know Russian, yet felt deeply moved (as he wrote) when
on Stone Island. Michaud, who had never seen Moscow before the campaign
The Emperor at once received this messenger in his study at the palace


    * Though a foreigner, Russian in heart and soul.


quoique etranger, russe de coeur et d'ame, * as he said of himself.
messenger was Michaud, a Frenchman who did not know Russian, but who was
reached Petersburg with the official announcement of that event. This
Nine days after the abandonment of Moscow, a messenger from Kutuzov


CHAPTER III





that have induced you to take this melancholy decision.
Volkonski, to hear from you the situation of the army and the reasons
increases my astonishment. I am sending this by Adjutant-General Prince
yourself imagine the effect this news has had on me, and your silence
news that you, with the army, have decided to abandon Moscow. You can
received from the commander in chief of Moscow, via Yaroslavl, the sad
received no communication from you, yet on the first of September I
Prince Michael Ilarionovich! Since the twenty-ninth of August I have


with the following rescript:
On receiving this dispatch the Emperor sent Prince Volkonski to Kutuzov


of my fatherland.
had everything removed, and it only remains for me to weep over the fate
which lie the ashes of your ancestors! I shall follow the army. I have
the abandonment of the city in which her greatness is centered and in
fate of the capital and of your empire! Russia will shudder to learn of
he is regretfully abandoning Moscow. Sire! Kutuzov's action decides the
police officers to guide the army to the Ryazan road. He writes that
Prince Kutuzov's adjutant has brought me a letter in which he demands


Rostopchin:
but the next day the following communication was received from Count
As long as this news remained unofficial it was possible to doubt it,

a man."
"I only wonder that the fate of Russia could have been entrusted to such

anything else from a blind and depraved old man.
grief to forget what he had said), that it was impossible to expect
Kutuzov, whom he had formerly praised (it was excusable for him in his
condolence paid to him on the occasion of his daughter's death said of
be in! Kutuzov was a traitor, and Prince Vasili during the visits of
the whole town. This was terrible! What a position for the Emperor to
Moscow, and news of the surrender of Moscow to the French spread through
On the third day after Kutuzov's report a country gentleman arrived from

lack of news, the loss of Kutuzov, and the death of Helene.
Talk in general centered round three melancholy facts: the Emperor's

deceased that they had immediately let the matter drop.
Italian, but the latter had produced such letters from the unfortunate
It was said that Prince Vasili and the old count had turned upon the
drug, and had died in agony before assistance could be rendered her.
Pierre) had not replied, had suddenly taken a very large dose of the
that her husband to whom she had written (that wretched, profligate
but Helene, tortured by the fact that the old count suspected her and
prescribed small doses of a certain drug to produce a certain effect;
were mentioned of how the private physician of the Queen of Spain had
terrible attack of angina pectoris, but in intimate circles details
gatherings, everyone said that Countess Bezukhova had died of a
malady it had been so agreeable to mention. Officially, at large
added. Countess Helene Bezukhova had suddenly died of that terrible
Petersburg society anxious and uneasy, a terrible piece of news was
mentioned. Moreover, toward evening, as if everything conspired to make
his protege Kutuzov, but remained silent when the commander in chief was
of the Emperor's anxiety. That day Prince Vasili no longer boasted of
Kutuzov as they had done the day before, they condemned him as the cause
"Fancy the Emperor's position!" said they, and instead of extolling

occasioned the Emperor.
anxious. The courtiers suffered because of the suffering the suspense
But next day no news arrived from the army and the public mood grew

Napoleon."
prophet's pride. "I always said he was the only man capable of defeating
"What did I tell about Kutuzov?" Prince Vasili now said with a

Kutaysov is! How sorry I am!"
"What a wonderful coincidence! Just during the service. But what a loss

everyone met with the words:
him, the Emperor liked him, and he was young and interesting. That day
centered round a single incident: Kutaysov's death. Everybody knew
the Petersburg world this sad side of the affair again involuntarily
among which figured the names of Tuchkov, Bagration, and Kutaysov. In
surprise. Mention was made in Kutuzov's report of the Russian losses,
on the fact of the victory itself. It was like a successfully arranged
much on the fact that the news had arrived on the Emperor's birthday as
some particular incident. So now the courtiers' pleasure was based as
scene of action. General events involuntarily group themselves around
and completeness amid the conditions of court life and far from the
It is very difficult for events to be reflected in their real strength

France.
captured, of his deposition, and of the choice of a new ruler for
to have been complete, and some even spoke of Napoleon's having been
joyously festive mood reigned in the city. Everyone believed the victory
Anna Pavlovna's presentiment was justified, and all that morning a

for His help and for the victory.
once, without leaving the church, thanks were rendered to the Creator
information. It followed that there must have been a victory. And at
was writing in haste from the field of battle before collecting full
step, that the French losses were much heavier than ours, and that he
day of the battle. Kutuzov wrote that the Russians had not retreated a
Prince Kutuzov. It was Kutuzov's report, written from Tatarinova on the
Volkonski was called out of the church and received a dispatch from
service at the palace church in honor of the Emperor's birthday, Prince
Anna Pavlovna's presentiment was in fact fulfilled. Next day during the


CHAPTER II





birthday, we shall receive news. I have a favorable presentiment!"
"You will see," said Anna Pavlovna, "that tomorrow, on the Emperor's

result of the battle to be fought in a few days.
of the state of the fatherland and offered various conjectures as to the
Animated by that address Anna Pavlovna's guests talked for a long time

of author.
"What force! What a style!" was uttered in approval both of reader and


fulfill the desires of Your Majesty."
Heaven that the Almighty may exalt the race of the just, and mercifully
in the sight of your most gracious presence. I raise fervent prayers to
Imperial Majesty. I grieve that my waning strength prevents rejoicing
zealous champion of old of our country's weal, is offered to Your
pride. This icon of the Venerable Sergius, the servant of God and
of the Russian David, shall suddenly smite his head in his bloodthirsty
the realms of Russia with death-bearing terrors; humble Faith, the sling
"Let the bold and insolent Goliath from the borders of France encompass


Prince Vasili continued.

Goliath..." she whispered.
muttering the prayer at Communion: "Let the bold and insolent
Pavlovna whispered the next words in advance, like an old woman
appeared intimidated, as if asking in what they were to blame. Anna
Bilibin attentively examined his nails, and many of those present

Prince Vasili pronounced these last words in a tearful voice.


cometh!'"
glory of thy rule, sings in exultation, 'Hosanna, blessed is he that
into her arms, and through the gathering mists, foreseeing the brilliant
sudden emphasis on the word her--"as a mother receives her zealous sons
ancient capital, the New Jerusalem, receives her Christ"--he placed a
anything to say to the contrary. But no one said anything. "Moscow, our
looking round at his audience as if to inquire whether anyone had
"Most Gracious Sovereign and Emperor!" Prince Vasili sternly declaimed,


begged him to begin. Everyone became silent.
Vasili to the table and bringing him two candles and the manuscript
and she, smiling and shaking a finger at Hippolyte, invited Prince
entered whom Anna Pavlovna had been waiting for and wished to convert,
awkward silence that ensued, that insufficiently patriotic person
if not, they'll know how to arrange matters." And really, during the
that entered his head. "It may turn out very well," he thought, "but
witty, and at every opportunity he uttered in that way the first words
he had more than once noticed that such utterances were received as very
more than the others what his words meant. During his diplomatic career
Prince Hippolyte himself glanced around with amused surprise. He knew no
unexpectedly. Everybody looked at him, understanding what he meant.
"The path to Warsaw, perhaps," Prince Hippolyte remarked loudly and

"Charming, charming!" observed Prince Vasili.

smooth again.
banners gone astray and found on a wrong path," and his brow became
"The Emperor returns these Austrian banners," said Bilibin, "friendly

he had himself composed.
And Bilibin repeated the actual words of the diplomatic dispatch, which

which she had heard before.
"What? What's that?" asked Anna Pavlovna, securing silence for the mot,

Petersburg.
French by Wittgenstein, "the hero of Petropol" as he was then called in
had been sent to Vienna with some Austrian banners captured from the
"I think it is delightful," he said, referring to a diplomatic note that

and utter one of his mots.
wrinkled up his face he was evidently preparing to smooth it out again
another group where Bilibin was talking about the Austrians: having
And having thus demolished the young man, Anna Pavlovna turned to

physician to the Queen of Spain."
authority that this doctor is a very learned and able man. He is private
venomously retorted on the inexperienced young man, "but I know on good
"Your information maybe better than mine," Anna Pavlovna suddenly and

employ dangerous remedies.
in and that the countess was being attended by a charlatan who might
ventured to express surprise that well known doctors had not been called
veil from the secret of the countess' malady, an unwary young man
Supposing that by these words Anna Pavlovna was somewhat lifting the

is very unfortunate!" added Anna Pavlovna.
camps, but that does not prevent my esteeming her as she deserves. She
went on, with a smile at her own enthusiasm. "We belong to different
better. Oh, she is certainly the most charming woman in the world," she
up just then. "I sent to ask for news, and hear that she is a little
"You are speaking of the poor countess?" said Anna Pavlovna, coming

"Oh, it would be a terrible loss, she is an enchanting woman."

told him the case was dangerous."
"The count is pathetic, they say. He cried like a child when the doctor

the word angina was repeated with great satisfaction.
"They say that the rivals are reconciled, thanks to the angina..." and

"Angina? Oh, that's a terrible illness!"

pectoris."
"They say the poor countess is very ill. The doctor says it is angina

appear to know it.
but in Anna Pavlovna's presence no one dared to think of this or even
and that the Italian's cure consisted in removing such inconvenience;
an inconvenience resulting from marrying two husbands at the same time,
They all knew very well that the enchanting countess' illness arose from

was treating her in some new and unusual way.
usually attended her had entrusted herself to some Italian doctor who
receiving no one, and instead of the celebrated Petersburg doctors who
several gatherings of which she was usually ornament, and was said to be
She had fallen ill unexpectedly a few days previously, had missed
The news of the day in Petersburg was the illness of Countess Bezukhova.

conversation.
did not let the reading begin but wound up the springs of a general
Pavlovna, not yet seeing all those whom she wanted in her drawing room,
to a patriotic temper. A good many people had already arrived, but Anna
had to be made ashamed of their visits to the French theater and aroused
significance. That evening she expected several important personages who
as was always the case at Anna Pavlovna's soirees, had a political
quite at random on one word and the murmur on another. This reading,
between a despairing wail and a tender murmur, so that the wail fell
independently of their meaning, in a loud and singsong voice alternating
art of his reading was supposed to lie in rolling out the words, quite
his elocution, was to read it. (He used to read at the Empress'.) The
of ecclesiastical, patriotic eloquence. Prince Vasili himself, famed for
the Emperor an icon of the Venerable Sergius. It was regarded as a model
to be the reading of a letter from His Lordship the Bishop when sending
battle of Borodino, there was a soiree, the chief feature of which was
At Anna Pavlovna's on the twenty-sixth of August, the very day of the

was concerned she would be the last to quit Petersburg.
for that was the affair of the sovereign, but as far as she personally
had replied that she could give no directions about state institutions
she would be pleased to give--with her characteristic Russian patriotism
packed up. The Empress Elisabeth, however, when asked what instructions
Kazan, and the things belonging to these institutions had already been
patronage, had given directions that they should all be removed to
the welfare of the charitable and educational institutions under her
in these difficult circumstances. The Empress Marya, concerned for
Stories were whispered of how differently the two Empresses behaved
attempts made to keep in mind the difficulties of the actual position.
interests and intrigues as usual. Only in the very highest circles were
balls, the same French theater, the same court interests and service
position of the Russian people. There were the same receptions and
except by a great effort, to realize the danger and the difficult
reflections of real life, went on in its old way and made it hard,
luxurious life of Petersburg, concerned only about phantoms and
drowned as usual by the buzzing of the court drones. But the calm,
of Rumyantsev, the French, Marya Fedorovna, the Tsarevich, and others,
with greater heat than ever in the highest circles, between the parties
In Petersburg at that time a complicated struggle was being carried on


CHAPTER I





BOOK TWELVE: 1812





being used as a guardhouse, Pierre was placed apart under strict guard.
brought for the night to a large house on the Zubov Rampart that was
was considered to be the most suspicious of all. When they had all been
several looters. But of all these various suspected characters, Pierre
shopkeeper, two seminary students, a peasant, and a house serf, besides
of streets the patrol arrested five more Russian suspects: a small
were the cause of the conflagrations. After marching through a number
opinion which had that day originated among the higher French officers,
and especially to catch the incendiaries who, according to the general
streets of Moscow by Durosnel's order to put a stop to the pillage,
The French patrol was one of those sent out through the various

resolute and triumphant steps between the French soldiers.
knowing how this aimless lie had escaped him, he went along with
I have just saved from the flames," said he. "Good-by!" And without
"What does she want?" he murmured. "She is bringing me my daughter whom

little girl he had saved.
Pierre was as if intoxicated. His elation increased at the sight of the

"What does that woman want?" asked the officer.

said the woman.
girl, the little girl, what am I to do with her if she's not theirs?"
"Where are they taking you to, you poor dear?" said she. "And the little

started she moved forward.
pockmarked peasant woman with the little girl, and when the patrol
A crowd had collected round the Uhlans. Nearest to Pierre stood the

"Ah, ah!" muttered the officer with a frown. "Well then, march!"

suddenly replied in French.
"I will not tell you who I am. I am your prisoner--take me!" Pierre

the chief."
"Who are you?" asked the interpreter in poor Russian. "You must answer

ask him who he is," he added.
"Ah, he looks very much like an incendiary," remarked the officer. "And

searching look at Pierre.
"He does not look like a common man," said the interpreter, after a

French salesman from one of the Moscow shops.
by his clothes and manner of speaking Pierre at once knew him to be a
A little man in Russian civilian clothes rode out from the ranks, and

from Pierre. "Call the interpreter."
"Do you speak French?" the officer asked again, keeping at a distance

both sides of Pierre.
a whisper and four more Uhlans left the ranks and placed themselves on
face probably looked very terrible, for the officer said something in
Pierre looked around him with bloodshot eyes and did not reply. His

at the court-martial." Then he turned to Pierre. "Do you speak French?"
who had been arrested with Pierre. "All right, you can tell all about it
"Ah, a weapon?" said the officer and turned to the barefooted soldier

"Lieutenant, he has a dagger," were the first words Pierre understood.

crowd of French soldiers stood around him and were searching him.
being beaten and finally feeling that his hands were bound and that a
of what happened after that. He only remembered beating someone and
Pierre and the Frenchman and surrounded them. Pierre remembered nothing
Uhlans appeared from round the corner. The Uhlans came up at a trot to
from the crowd around, and at the same moment a mounted patrol of French
feet and hammered him with his fists. Shouts of approval were heard
and, before the latter had time to draw his sword, knocked him off his
his strength increased tenfold. He rushed at the barefooted Frenchman
Pierre was in such a transport of rage that he remembered nothing and


    * "Look here, no nonsense!"


"Voyons, Pas de betises!" * he cried.

the boots and drawing his sword, moved threateningly toward Pierre.
The soldier fell, got up, and ran away. But his comrade, throwing down

seizing the soldier by his round shoulders and throwing him aside.
"Let that woman alone!" exclaimed Pierre hoarsely in a furious voice,

woman, clutching at her neck, screamed piercingly.
from her neck the necklace the young Armenian was wearing, and the young
Frenchman, the tall marauder in the frieze gown was already tearing
While Pierre was running the few steps that separated him from the

soldier was doing to her.
with her long lashes drooping as if she did not see or feel what the
The beautiful Armenian still sat motionless and in the same attitude,

pockets had seized her by the neck.
side, had drawn nearer to the young woman and taking his hands from his
Frenchman in the frieze gown who meanwhile, swaying slowly from side to
caught but a glimpse of this, his whole attention was directed to the
The old man was saying something in a voice broken by sobs, but Pierre
secured his second boot and was slapping one boot against the other.
The old man was already sitting barefoot. The little Frenchman had

ground, and again looking at the Frenchman and the Armenian family.
back!" he almost shouted, putting the child, who began screaming, on the
woman, handing the little girl to her. "Give her back to them, give her
"Here, take the child!" said Pierre peremptorily and hurriedly to the

his pockets stood staring at her, motionless and silent.
stopped in front of the beautiful Armenian girl and with his hands in
man at once began pulling off his boots. The other in the frieze gown
saying something, immediately seized the old man by his legs and the old
barefooted Frenchman in the blue coat went up to the Armenians and,
of frieze, blue trousers, and large torn Hessian boots. The little
and with an idiotic expression of face. He wore a woman's loose gown
long, lank, round-shouldered, fair-haired man, slow in his movements
bare. The other, whose appearance particularly struck Pierre, was a
the waist with a rope. He had a nightcap on his head and his feet were
One of these, a nimble little man, was wearing a blue coat tied round
the Armenian family and at two French soldiers who had gone up to them.
intently watching what was going on a few steps away. He was looking at
But Pierre was not listening to the woman. He had for some seconds been

crying," continued the woman. "It's she. Here, this way!"
"Go over that way, they're there. It's she! She kept on lamenting and

"O Lord, have mercy!" added the deacon.

swooped down," said the woman, pointing to the French soldiers.
"That's Mary Nikolievna! They went inside the garden when these wolves

"Do you know her? She's thin, with long teeth," said Pierre.

serf.
"He says 'a woman,' and Mary Nikolievna is a lady," remarked a house

be either Mary Nikolievna's or the Ivanovs'!"
"The Anferovs? No," said the woman. "They left in the morning. That must

in his customary bass.
pockmarked peasant woman. "Lord have mercy, Lord have mercy!" he added
"Why, that must be the Anferovs," said an old deacon, addressing a

anyone knew where she had gone.
had been sitting there with her other children, and he asked whether
Pierre replied that the child belonged to a woman in a black coat who

aren't you? Whose child is it?" they asked him.
"Have you lost anyone, my dear fellow? You're of the gentry yourself,

before, and a group of Russians, both men and women, gathered about him.
With the child in his arms his figure was now more conspicuous than

stopped and looked about him.
When he had reached the fence, still without finding those he sought, he
hurrying along by the fence, he turned several times to look at her.
of her beauty and fearful because of it. Her face struck Pierre and,
almond-shaped eyes at the ground before her. Evidently she was aware
woman, and looked from under her long lashes with motionless, large,
onto the snow. She was sitting on some bundles a little behind the old
lilac shawl on her head, suggested a delicate exotic plant thrown out
crowd on the open space, she, in her rich satin cloak with a bright
beautiful, expressionless face. Amid the scattered property and the
black eyebrows and the extraordinarily soft, bright color of her long,
perfection of Oriental beauty, with her sharply outlined, arched,
type, and a young woman. That very young woman seemed to Pierre the
cloth-covered, sheepskin coat and new boots, an old woman of similar
consisting of a very handsome old man of Oriental type, wearing a new,
met. Involuntarily he noticed a Georgian or Armenian family
walked among the crowd with rapid steps, scanning the various faces he
He did not find the civil servant or his wife where he had left them. He

frightened, sickly little face.
slight smile. He fancied he saw something pathetically innocent in that
her like some little wild animal. He glanced at her occasionally with a
with her little hands to Pierre's coat, sat on his arm gazing about
when he ran to save the child. She had now become quiet and, clinging
the sense of youth, animation, and determination that had come on him
heat and from running, he felt at that moment more strongly than ever
felt that he had still much to do and to do quickly. Glowing with the
restore the daughter to her mother and go to save someone else. Pierre
of them. He hurried to find the family of that civil servant in order to
several French soldiers in a variety of clothing. Pierre took no notice
had taken refuge here from the fire with their belongings, there were
that had been dragged out of the houses. Besides Russian families who
out to look for the child, so crowded was it now with people and goods
Povarskoy. He did not at first recognize the place from which he had set
with his little burden to the Gruzinski garden at the corner of the
Having run through different yards and side streets, Pierre got back


CHAPTER XXXIV





with her through the garden seeking another way out.
wet, painfully sobbing child to himself as tenderly as he could and ran
longer there, and Pierre with a feeling of pity and disgust pressed the
impossible to get back the way he had come; the maid, Aniska, was no
the child down and ran with her to the large house. It was now, however,
touching some nasty little animal. But he made an effort not to throw
by a sense of horror and repulsion such as he had experienced when
hands away and to bite them with her slobbering mouth. Pierre was seized
desperately and angrily and tried with her little hands to pull Pierre's
Pierre, however, seized her and lifted her in his arms. She screamed
child, unattractively like her mother, began to yell and run away.
her in his arms. But seeing a stranger the sickly, scrofulous-looking
Breathless with joy, Pierre ran to the little girl and was going to take

comrades.
know!" and the Frenchman with the spot on his cheek ran back to his
Frenchman. "Good-by, Fatty. We must be human, we are all mortal you
"There is your child! Oh, a girl, so much the better!" said the

three-year-old girl in a pink dress was lying under a seat.
Pierre by the arm and pointed to a round, graveled space where a
When they reached a gravel path behind the house the Frenchman pulled

hot."
"Hurry up, you others!" he called out to his comrades. "It's getting

garden.
ground floor, and clapping Pierre on the shoulder ran with him into the
on his cheek, in shirt sleeves, really did jump out of a window on the
And a minute or two later the Frenchman, a black-eyed fellow with a spot

garden at the back of the house. "Wait a bit--I'm coming down."
"There! There!" shouted the Frenchman at the window, pointing to the

"Where is it? Where?" said Pierre.

looking for. After all, one must be human, you know...."
squealing in the garden. Perhaps it's his brat that the fellow is
"A child?" shouted a Frenchman from above. "I did hear something

threateningly toward him.
them some of the plate and bronzes that were in the drawer, moved
the soldiers, evidently afraid that Pierre might want to take from
"What's he talking about? Get along!" said several voices, and one of

"There's a child in that house. Haven't you seen a child?" cried Pierre.

"What does this fellow want?" shouted one of them referring to Pierre.

articles. Other French soldiers standing below went up to the drawer.
who had just thrown out the drawer of a chest, filled with metal
Pierre looked up and saw at a window of the large house some Frenchmen

beside him.
and then a cracking sound and the ring of something heavy falling close
standing, when just above his head he heard several voices shouting
the lodge and was about to dash into that part of it which was still
young, bright, adroit, and resolute. He ran round to the other side of
himself suddenly freed from the ideas that had weighed him down. He felt
peculiarly strong effect on him because at the sight of the fire he felt
on Pierre the usual animating effects of a conflagration. It had a
the walls), and the heat and smoke and rapidity of motion, produced
sheaves of flame (now red and now like golden fish scales creeping along
and now soaring up with glittering sparks, with here and there dense
the sight of the swaying smoke, now gathering into thick black clouds
whistle and hiss of the flames, the excited shouts of the people, and
The sounds of crackling and the din of falling walls and ceilings, the

going on there, but he had no time to dwell on that idea.
to take from him a fox-fur coat, he vaguely understood that looting was
before him a Frenchman hitting a peasant with a blunt saber and trying
what these men, who were dragging something out, were about; but seeing
which swarmed a crowd of Frenchmen. At first Pierre did not realize
that was as yet burning only at one end, just below the roof, and around
involuntarily passed round in a curve and came upon the large house
Pierre rushed to the wing, but the heat was so great that he

too must give expression to her feelings.
missy! Ooh!" lamented Aniska, who at the sight of the fire felt that she
lodging. You've burned to death, our treasure, Katie, my precious little
"Ooh!" wailed the girl, pointing to the wing. "That's it, that was our

"Which is it? Which is your house?" he asked.

involuntarily stopped.
As Pierre passed through the fence gate, he was enveloped by hot air and

the openings of the windows and from under the roof.
sides had fallen in, another was on fire, and bright flames issued from
wing of the house, which was burning brightly and fiercely. One of its
gate in a wooden fence and, stopping, pointed out to him a small wooden
"It's here, close by," said she and, running across the yard, opened a

passing three houses, turned into a yard on the right.
She ran across the street, turned down a side street to the left, and,
Pierre turned back, giving a spring now and then to keep up with her.

by the Nikulins'!"
"This way, uncle," cried the girl. "We'll pass through the side street,


    * "You can't pass!"


"On ne passe pas!" * cried a voice.

soldiers stopped him.
maid, was advancing to the spot where the general stood, but the French
general saying something to those around him. Pierre, accompanied by the
front of the conflagration. In the middle of the street stood a French
and there broke through that cloud. A great number of people crowded in
whole street was full of clouds of black smoke. Tongues of flame here
he followed the maid, overtook her, and came out on the Povarskoy. The
higher, his eyes shone with the light of life, and with swift steps
as if he had come back to life after a heavy swoon. He held his head
sighed, and went on her short, bare feet along the path. Pierre felt
The dirty maidservant stepped from behind the trunk, put up her plait,

"Show me the way, show me, I... I'll do it," gasped Pierre rapidly.

her long teeth.
cried to the maid, angrily opening her mouth and still farther exposing
my heart at ease.... Aniska, go, you horrid girl, show him the way!" she
"Oh, dear sir!" she cried, seizing him by the legs. "My benefactor, set

might help her.
From the expression of his animated face the woman saw that this man

"But where was she left?" asked Pierre.

began to sob. "My child, my dear one! Burned, burned!"
We seized the children. But not Katie! Ooh! O Lord!..." and again she
have brought away.... The icons, and my dowry bed, all the rest is lost.
to collect our things. We ran out just as we were.... This is what we
alongside, and blew our way, the maid called out 'Fire!' and we rushed
addressing Pierre rapidly between her sobs. "The fire broke out
man nor a father! You, honored sir, are a noble man," she went on,
have rescued her from the fire. But this is a monster and neither a
"You have no heart, you don't feel for your own child! Another man would
"Monster! Villain!" shouted the woman angrily, suddenly ceasing to weep.

taken her, or else where can she be?" he added.
evidently only to justify himself before the stranger. "Sister must have
"Don't, Mary Nikolievna!" said her husband to her in a low voice,

I nursed you.... Ooh!"
My youngest daughter is left behind. She's burned! Ooh! Was it for this
us, somebody," she muttered between her sobs. "My girl... My daughter!
"Dear people, good Christians, save me, help me, dear friends... help

As soon as she saw Pierre, the woman almost threw herself at his feet.

some garments from under them.
moving the trunks, which were placed one on another, and was dragging
smoothly brushed forward over his temples, with expressionless face was
sausage-shaped whiskers and showing under his square-set cap the hair
round-shouldered man in the undress uniform of a civilian official, with
and sniffing at her singed hair. The woman's husband, a short,
and, having undone her pale-colored plait, was pulling it straight
old nurse's arms. A dirty, barefooted maid was sitting on a trunk,
overcoat and an immense cap evidently not his own, was crying in his
frightened faces. The youngest child, a boy of about seven, who wore an
were staring at their mother with a look of stupefaction on their pale
girls of about ten and twelve, dressed in dirty short frocks and cloaks,
swaying to and fro and muttering something, was choking with sobs. Two
prominent upper teeth, and wearing a black cloak and cap. This woman,
ground, beside the trunks, sat a thin woman no longer young, with long,
goods lay in a heap: featherbeds, a samovar, icons, and trunks. On the
By the side of the path, on the dusty dry grass, all sorts of household

from a dream and lifted his head.
desperate weeping of a woman close to him. He stopped as if awakening
of Prince Gruzinski's house on the other, Pierre suddenly heard the
wide-open space adjoining the Povarskoy on one side and the gardens
approaching the fire. As he was going along a foot path across a
unusual was happening around him, did not realize that he was
and they were more excited. But Pierre, though he felt that something
from under the roofs of the houses. He met more people in the streets
even felt the heat of the fire. Occasionally curly tongues of flame rose
As Pierre approached that street the smoke became denser and denser--he

and did not go wrong in the side streets that led to the Povarskoy.
Though he heard and saw nothing around him he found his way by instinct

fear of weakening at the decisive moment and so losing his self-esteem.
difficulty but because of its incompatibility with their natures--by the
undertake a task that is impossible for them not because of its
in what lay before him, and was tortured--as those are who obstinately
inhabitants. But Pierre did not know this; he was entirely absorbed
to extinguish the fire, to prevent looting, and to reassure the
detailed and exact orders as to measures to be taken immediately
a very gloomy frame of mind in a royal study in the Kremlin, giving
way from the Dorogomilov suburb to the Kremlin, and was now sitting in
for Napoleon had passed the Arbat more than four hours previously on his
anything on the way, his intention could not now have been carried out,
his mood safely to his destination. And even had he not been hindered by
experience, he was afraid of losing it. But he was not destined to bring
something dreadful and alien to him, for, after the previous night's
him. He carried his resolution within himself in terror and haste, like
of the street. He heard nothing and saw nothing of what went on around
he raised it did Pierre understand that he had to pass on the other side
was threateningly repeated and he heard the click of the man's musket as
standing beside a green caisson shouted at him, but only when the shout
Pierre shook his head and went on. In another side street a sentinel

stopped Pierre asking if he did not know French.
explaining something to some Russians who did not understand them,
attention to them. At the gate of one house three Frenchmen, who were
other Russians who gazed at the French with fear and curiosity, paid no
astonishment in their eyes chiefly because Pierre, unlike all the
not make out to what class he could belong. The French followed him with
face and whole figure, the Russians stared at Pierre because they could
height and stoutness, and the strange morose look of suffering in his
the Russians and the French looked at Pierre with surprise. Besides his
the city but of the camp, walking in the middle of the streets. Both
Russians with anxious and timid faces, and Frenchmen with an air not of
The air was full of smoke and the smell of burning. Now and then he met
were locked and the shutters up. The streets and lanes were deserted.
decided that the deed should be done. The gates of most of the houses
to the church of St. Nicholas on the Arbat, where he had long before
Pierre's way led through side streets to the Povarskoy and from there

River and the timber yards by the Dorogomilov Bridge, were all ablaze.
in the Bazaar and the Povarskoy, as well as the barges on the Moskva
fire in several places. The buildings in Carriage Row, across the river,
evening before, had greatly increased during the night. Moscow was on
The conflagration, at which he had looked with so much indifference the

the captain, and passed out into the street.
Pierre went down the corridor, trying to avoid making a noise or meeting
Having tied a girdle over his coat and pulled his cap low on his head,

and hid it under his waistcoat.
green sheath which he had bought at the Sukharev market with the pistol,
could to achieve it, Pierre hastily took the blunt jagged dagger in a
to himself that he would not abandon his intention and was doing all he
his chief aim consisted not in carrying out his design, but in proving
student in 1809 had been to try to kill Napoleon with a dagger. But as
more than once come to the conclusion that the chief mistake made by the
will do," he said to himself, though when planning his design he had
discharged, and he had not had time to reload it. "No matter, dagger
carry it unnoticed in his belt or under his arm. Besides, it had been
to hide such a big pistol even under his wide coat. He could not
not carry the weapon in his hand through the streets. It was difficult
But it then occurred to him for the first time that he certainly could
After arranging his clothes, he took the pistol and was about to go out.

hastened to act.
Pierre did not allow himself to reflect on what lay before him, but

into Moscow before noon."
"Am I not too late?" he thought. "No, probably he won't make his entry

where he was and what lay before him that very day.
stock which Gerasim had replaced on the writing table, he remembered
Pierre rose, rubbed his eyes, and seeing the pistol with an engraved
It was eleven by the clock, but it seemed peculiarly dark out of doors.

conversation with Captain Ramballe.
he had done the day before. That something shameful was his yesterday's
his body, and his mind had a dim consciousness of something shameful
clothes in which he had slept without undressing felt uncomfortable on
On the third of September Pierre awoke late. His head was aching, the


CHAPTER XXXIII





considerations.
hung not only over Bolkonski but over all Russia, shut out all other
Andrew--spoke of this: the unsettled question of life and death, which
engagement would be renewed, no one--least of all Natasha and Prince
man and Natasha the thought occurred that should he recover their former
Natasha. Though with the intimacy now established between the wounded
the doctor said, it seemed might easily happen--she could not oppose
die in her daughter's arms during the journey--as, judging by what
Dreadful as the countess imagined it would be should Prince Andrew

wounded man.
from a young girl either such firmness or such skill in nursing a
wounded Bolkonski, and the doctor had to admit that he had not expected
halting place and wherever they spent a night, Natasha never left the
From that time, during all the rest of the Rostovs' journey, at every


and, returning to her hut, fell sobbing on her bed.
Like a somnambulist aroused from her sleep Natasha went out of the room

daughter's absence, knocked at the door.
At that moment a maid sent by the countess, who had noticed her

madam!"
"What's this?" said the doctor, rising from his bed. "Please go away,

body with the sheet as he huddled up on his bench.
long been watching all that was going on, carefully covering his bare
Timokhin, who had not slept at all because of the pain in his leg, had
Peter the valet, who was now wide awake, had roused the doctor.

They heard the sound of voices behind them.
Andrew did not see that, he saw her shining eyes which were beautiful.
its swollen lips, was more than plain--it was dreadful. But Prince
compassionately, and with joyous love. Natasha's thin pale face, with
Those eyes, filled with happy tears, gazed at him timidly,

face with his hand so as to look into her eyes.
"I love you more, better than before," said Prince Andrew, lifting her

touching it with her lips.
audible, broken whisper, and began kissing his hand more rapidly, just
"Forgive me for what I ha-ve do-ne!" faltered Natasha in a scarcely

"Forgive what?" he asked.

"Forgive...!"

"I love you," said Prince Andrew.

"Forgive me!"
"Forgive me!" she whispered, raising her head and glancing at him.

kissing it, just touching it lightly with her lips.
knees and, taking his hand carefully, bent her face over it and began
With a rapid but careful movement Natasha drew nearer to him on her

"You?" he said. "How fortunate!"

Prince Andrew sighed with relief, smiled, and held out his hand.

lower part of it something quivered.
him, was restraining her sobs. Her face was pale and rigid. Only in the
on her knees (she was unable to stir), with frightened eyes riveted on
Natasha, and he was not surprised but quietly happy. Natasha, motionless
him, was kneeling before him. He realized that it was the real living
longed to love with this new pure divine love that had been revealed to
himself, Natasha, that same living Natasha whom of all people he most
like a man plunged into water he lost consciousness. When he came to
suddenly there was a ringing in his ears, a dimness in his eyes, and
his strength in an effort to recover his senses, he moved a little, and
out, and the strange face was before him. Prince Andrew collected all
continued its rhythmic murmur, something oppressed him and stretched
and delirium drew him back into its domain. The soft whispering voice
wished to return to that former world of pure thought, but he could not,
before him with the force of reality and drew nearer. Prince Andrew
trying to drive that face from his imagination. But the face remained
"Oh, how oppressive this continual delirium is," thought Prince Andrew,

been thinking.
the pale face and shining eyes of the very Natasha of whom he had just
a new white sphinx appeared, standing at the door. And that sphinx had
besides all this something creaked, there was a whiff of fresh air, and
was still burning, and the same shirtlike sphinx lay near the door; but
something was still stretching out, and the candle with its red halo
that world some structure was still being erected and did not fall,
reality and delirium in which something particular was happening. In
And his attention was suddenly carried into another world, a world of
"Piti-piti-piti and ti-ti and piti-piti-piti boom!" flopped the fly...


Just once, looking into those eyes to say..."
rupture with her. "If only it were possible for me to see her once more!
first time all the cruelty of his rejection of her, the cruelty of his
feelings, her sufferings, shame, and remorse. He now understood for the
the first time picturing to himself her soul. And he understood her
the past with nothing but her charms which gave him delight, but for
her." And he vividly pictured to himself Natasha, not as he had done in
I hated in my life? And of them all, I loved and hated none as I did
destroy it. It is the very essence of the soul. Yet how many people have
divine love cannot change. No, neither death nor anything else can
"When loving with human love one may pass from love to hatred, but

loved that man. What has become of him? Is he alive?...
by divine love. That is why I experienced such joy when I felt that I
love someone dear to you with human love, but an enemy can only be loved
everything, to love God in all His manifestations. It is possible to
that bliss. To love one's neighbors, to love one's enemies, to love
essence of the soul and does not require an object. Now again I feel
and yet loved him. I experienced that feeling of love which is the very
but the love which I--while dying--first experienced when I saw my enemy
for something, for some quality, for some purpose, or for some reason,
"Yes--love," he thought again quite clearly. "But not love which loves

his mind with peculiar clearness and force.
someone. And suddenly thoughts and feelings again swam to the surface of
That's enough, please leave off!" Prince Andrew painfully entreated
itself out, and 'piti-piti-piti' and 'ti-ti' and 'piti-piti-piti'...?
legs, and that is the door, but why is it always stretching and drawing
"But perhaps that's my shirt on the table," he thought, "and that's my

which also oppressed him.
importance. It was something white by the door--the statue of a sphinx,
face where it was rising. But besides this there was something else of
destroy the structure, though it knocked against the very region of his
face it gave him a burning sensation and yet to his surprise it did not
flopped against his pillow and his face. Each time the fly touched his
heard the rustle of the cockroaches and the buzzing of the fly that
of needles, he also saw by glimpses a red halo round the candle, and
the sensation of this drawing out and the construction of this edifice
Prince Andrew to himself. While listening to this whispering and feeling
music--"it stretches, stretches, spreading out and stretching," said
collapsing and again slowly rising to the sound of whispered rhythmic
that this airy structure should not collapse; but nevertheless it kept
He felt that he had to balance carefully (though it was difficult) so
of slender needles or splinters, to the sound of this whispered music.
the very middle of it, some strange airy structure was being erected out
"ti-ti" once more. At the same time he felt that above his face, above
"piti-piti-piti," and then "titi," and then again "piti-piti-piti," and
soft whispering voice incessantly and rhythmically repeating
heard (without knowing whether it was a delusion or reality) a
And suddenly the sequence of these thoughts broke off, and Prince Andrew

only for God. But how did God enjoin that law? And why was the Son...?"
man can understand it, but to conceive it and enjoin it was possible
on man--a happiness of the soul alone, the happiness of loving. Every
lying beyond material forces, outside the material influences that act
gazing fixedly before him with feverish wide open eyes. "A happiness
deprived," he thought as he lay in the semidarkness of the quiet hut,
"Yes, a new happiness was revealed to me of which man cannot be

to turn it back again.
work it would turn to some unexpected idea and he had not the strength
never reached when he was in health, but suddenly in the midst of its
brain suddenly began to work with a vigor, clearness, and depth it had
diverse thoughts and images occupied him simultaneously. At times his
active and clearer than ever, but they acted apart from his will. Most
in a normal state in that respect. All the powers of his mind were more
then return again to his own thoughts. But Prince Andrew's mind was not
deepest reflections to say a civil word to someone who comes in and can
fix his whole attention. A healthy man can tear himself away from the
power and will to select one sequence of thoughts or events on which to
feels, and remembers innumerable things simultaneously, but has the
His mind was not in a normal state. A healthy man usually thinks of,

like a mushroom.
candle beside him, the wick of which was charred and had shaped itself
the walls, and a big fly flopped at the head of the bed and around the
the street; cockroaches rustled on the table, on the icons, and on
chirped from across the passage; someone was shouting and singing in
stillness of the night. Everybody near him was sleeping. A cricket
and when he came to himself a third time it was in the complete
which they had put him and turned him over again confused his thoughts,
That was why he asked for a copy of them. The uncomfortable position in
happiness and that this happiness had something to do with the Gospels.
possessed his soul. He remembered that he had now a new source of
happiness. And those thoughts, though now vague and indefinite, again
a man he disliked, those new thoughts had come to him which promised him
moment at the ambulance station when, at the sight of the sufferings of
all that had happened to him, and above all vividly remembered the
again regained consciousness, and while drinking tea once more recalled
After growing confused from pain while being carried into the hut he
to be carried into the hut after his caleche had stopped at Mytishchi.
matter with him and remembered being wounded and how was when he asked
The first time Prince Andrew understood where he was and what was the

said the valet.
"By the Lord Jesus Christ, I thought we had put something under him!"

It's such pain, you know, that I wonder how he can bear it."
water over his hands. "For just one moment I didn't look after you...
"You fellows have no conscience," said he to the valet who was pouring

The doctor went into the passage to wash his hands.

voice.
get it for me and put it under for a moment," he pleaded in a piteous
"What trouble would it be to you?" he said. "I have not got one. Please

them to get him the book and put it under him.
again and grew unconscious and delirious from the agony. He kept asking
change in the dressings, turning the wounded man over so that he groaned
place. The doctor was very much displeased about something and made a
mortifying flesh that came from the wound, began examining that dreadful
with which he was covered and, making wry faces at the noisome smell of
uncomfortable and in great pain. The doctor and valet lifted the cloak
reasonably, and then said he wanted a bolster placed under him as he was
was feeling. Prince Andrew answered all his questions reluctantly but
The doctor promised to procure it for him and began to ask how he

"The Gospels. I haven't one."

"What book?"

"Couldn't one get a book?" he asked.

Prince Andrew again pondered as if trying to remember something.

"Mine, sir? All right. But how about you?"

"How's your wound?"

"I am here, your excellency."

Timokhin crept along the bench to him.

"I don't want any more. Is Timokhin here?" he asked.

remember something.
feverish eyes at the door in front of him as if trying to understand and
They gave Prince Andrew some tea. He drank it eagerly, looking with

coachman, and two orderlies.
Borodino. They were accompanied by a doctor, Prince Andrew's valet, his
taken along with him, having been wounded in the leg at the battle of
Prince Andrew's regiment, had joined him in Moscow and was being
a little later with greater suffering. Timokhin, the red-nosed major of
knew by experience that if his patient did not die now, he would do so
dissatisfaction found it had improved. He was dissatisfied because he
the doctor. He felt Prince Andrew's pulse, and to his surprise and
His remembering such a small detail of everyday life astonished
closed eyes. Then he opened them and whispered softly: "And the tea?"
had been placed on his camp bed he lay for a long time motionless with
the hut had made him groan aloud and again lose consciousness. When he
to be taken out and given some tea. The pain caused by his removal into
remained in the caleche, but at Mytishchi the wounded man himself asked
The first night after they left Moscow had been fairly warm and he had
temperature was lower. He had regained consciousness that morning.
pleasure a piece of bread with some tea, and the doctor noticed that his
opinion sure to carry him off. But on the seventh day he ate with
inflammation of his bowels, which were injured, were in the doctor's
ambulance station on the field of Borodino. His feverish state and the
Seven days had passed since Prince Andrew found himself in the


CHAPTER XXXII





He smiled and held out his hand to her.

youthful movement dropped on her knees.
seen on him before. She went up to him and with a swift, flexible,
gave him a peculiarly innocent, childlike look, such as she had never
delicate as a child's, revealed by the turn-down collar of his shirt,
glittering eyes rapturously turned toward her, and especially his neck,
He was the same as ever, but the feverish color of his face, his

had always seen him.
Prince Andrew clearly with his arms outside the quilt, and such as she
She passed the valet, the snuff fell from the candle wick, and she saw
corner. Horribly unlike a man as that body looked, she must see him.
the matter?" made Natasha approach more swiftly to what was lying in the
The valet's sleepy, frightened exclamation, "What do you want? What's
apparition of a girl in a white chemise, dressing jacket, and nightcap.
pain in his wounded leg, gazed with wide-open eyes at this strange
The valet sat up and whispered something. Timokhin, kept awake by the

doctor and a valet--lay on the floor.
lying in a corner on the benches beneath the icons, and two others--the
middle of a small room containing baggage. Another man--Timokhin--was
cautiously took one step and then another, and found herself in the
still in terror. But an irresistible impulse drew her forward. She
quilt for his shoulders, she imagined a horrible body there, and stood
indistinct shape in the corner, and mistook his knees raised under the
imagination he was that terrible moaning personified. When she saw an
moaning of the adjutant's? Yes, he was altogether like that. In her
see. How was he maimed? What was left of him? Was he like that incessant
that the moment had come she was filled with dread of what she might
All day she had lived only in hope of seeing him that night. But now

more convinced that it was necessary.
know why she had to, she knew the meeting would be painful, but felt the
and his presence there, Natasha had resolved to see him. She did not
From the moment she had been told that morning of Prince Andrew's wound

smoldering wick.
something was lying, stood a tallow candle with a long, thick, and
in there. In the farthest corner, on a bench beside a bed on which
the door into the part of the hut where Prince Andrew lay. It was dark
her bare feet she touched a sleeping man, stepped over him, and opened
damp earthen floor of the passage. The cold she felt refreshed her. With
She opened the door and stepped across the threshold and onto the cold,

terror and overflowing with love.
all the walls of the room: it was her own heart, sinking with alarm and
It seemed to her that something heavy was beating rhythmically against

grasped the cold door handle.
foot to the other she ran like a kitten the few steps to the door and
bare feet. The boards of the floor creaked. Stepping cautiously from one
stepped cautiously on the cold and dirty floor with her slim, supple,
No one replied. Natasha rose slowly and carefully, crossed herself, and

"Sonya, are you asleep? Mamma?" she whispered.

adjutant was heard. Natasha sat up.
by. The shouting in the tavern had died down; only the moaning of the
crack in the wall. A cock crowed far off and another replied near
As if to celebrate a victory over everybody, a cricket chirped in a

was growing cold on the bare floor.
not move, though her little bare foot, thrust out from under the quilt,
Soon after that Natasha heard her mother's even breathing. Natasha did

replied.
After a short silence the countess spoke again but this time no one

"I think she's asleep, Mamma," said Sonya softly.

breathing. Then the countess called to Natasha. Natasha did not answer.
her, then Madame Schoss' familiar whistling snore and Sonya's gentle
her mother praying and sighing and the creaking of her bed under
her from inside and outside the room and did not move. First she heard
For a long time Natasha listened attentively to the sounds that reached

street, and the adjutant's unceasing moans could still be heard.
of people shouting at a tavern Mamonov's Cossacks had set up across the
Mytishchi a mile and a half away, and through the night came the noise
the room. But in the yard there was a light from the fire at Little
The small lamp in front of the icons was the only light left in
The countess, Madame Schoss, and Sonya undressed hastily and lay down.

and buried her face in the pillow.
"I'll stay here," muttered Natasha. "Do lie down," she added crossly,

"Natasha, you'd better lie in the middle," said Sonya.

sheet spread over the hay on the side nearest the door.
her. When her toilet for the night was finished she sank gently onto the
to side from habit, but her eyes, feverishly wide, looked fixedly before
unplaited, replaited, and tied up her plait. Her head moved from side
and began replaiting it. Her long, thin, practiced fingers rapidly
floor, jerked her thin and rather short plait of hair to the front,
down with her foot under her on the bed that had been made up on the
When she had thrown off her dress and put on a dressing jacket, she sat

undressing, tugging at the tapes of her petticoat.
"Oh, yes... I'll lie down at once," said Natasha, and began hurriedly

touching Natasha's shoulders. "Come, lie down."
"Lie down, darling; lie down, my pet," said the countess, softly

a look with Sonya.
but this dreadful incessant moaning made her sob. The countess exchanged
the same yard as themselves and in a part of the hut across the passage;
it was not Prince Andrew who was moaning. She knew Prince Andrew was in
shaking with sobs and throbbing against the window frame. Natasha knew
her head out into the damp night air, and the countess saw her slim neck
window the moans of the adjutant could be heard more distinctly. She put
irritably and she went to the window and opened it. Through the open
"No, Mamma, I will lie down here on the floor," Natasha replied

and the two girls were to sleep on some hay on the floor.
A bed had been made on a bedstead for the countess only. Madame Schoss

"Natasha, undress, darling; lie down on my bed."

know, and this alarmed and tormented her.
in her mind. The countess knew this, but what it might be she did not
planning something and either deciding or had already decided something
way on the bench where she had seated herself on arriving. She was
countess knew so well and feared so much, and now she sat in the same
of the coach with wide open eyes, and the expression in them which the
still be told the same. All the way she had sat motionless in a corner
what they told her, and convinced that say what she might she would
she ceased to ask questions or to speak at all, evidently disbelieving
him, that he was seriously wounded but that his life was not in danger,
could she see him? But after she had been told that she could not see
questions: Where was he going? How was he wounded? Was it serious? And
wounded and was traveling with their party, she had at first asked many
When Natasha had been told that morning that Prince Andrew was seriously

"Lie down? All right, I will. I'll lie down at once," said Natasha.

the countess.
"You are cold. You are trembling all over. You'd better lie down," said

lips as if to feel whether she was feverish, and finally kissed her.
was wont to do when Natasha was ill, then touched her forehead with her
up to her daughter and touched her head with the back of her hand as she
The count returned and lay down behind the partition. The countess went

Natasha.
nor the burning of Moscow nor anything else could seem of importance to
Both the countess and Sonya understood that, naturally, neither Moscow

in peace.
"Yes, really I did," Natasha replied in a voice that pleaded to be left

"But you didn't see it!"

attitude.
that she could not see anything, and again settled down in her former
her face to the window, looked out in such a way that it was evident
And as if in order not to offend Sonya and to get rid of her, she turned

"What's burning?" asked Natasha. "Oh, yes, Moscow."

"Look, Natasha, how dreadfully it is burning!" said she.

cousin.
as if trying to atone for her fault, paid unceasing attention to her
she was with Sonya. Sonya had cried and begged to be forgiven and now,
with their party. The countess had seldom been so angry with anyone as
it necessary to tell Natasha of Prince Andrew's wound and of his being
and annoyance of the countess, had for some unaccountable reason found
this condition of stupor since the morning, when Sonya, to the surprise
and again fixed her eyes on the corner of the stove. She had been in
But Natasha looked at her as if not understanding what was said to her

cousin, evidently wishing to distract her mind.
glow! Natasha, do look! You can see it from the window," she said to her
frightened. "I believe the whole of Moscow will burn, there's an awful
"Oh, how terrible," said Sonya returning from the yard chilled and

houses off.
words. She was listening to the ceaseless moaning of the adjutant, three
where she had sat down on arriving and paid no attention to her father's
pale, with a fixed look, was sitting on the bench under the icons just
The countess, on hearing that Moscow was on fire, began to cry. Natasha,

Troitsa.
with the family, he had gone on with his regiment which was making for
Natasha and the countess remained in the room. Petya was no longer
and Madame Schoss, who had not yet undressed, went out with him. Only
burning. The count donned his dressing gown and went out to look. Sonya
The valet, returning to the cottage, informed the count that Moscow was


CHAPTER XXXI





words of prayer, and the sobbing of the count's old valet.
significance for them of the glow they were watching. Sighs were heard,
And it was as if they had all only waited for this to realize the

and he gave way to an old man's sob.
brothers," said he. "Mother Moscow, the white..." his voice faltered,
was heard to say. His voice was calm and deliberate. "Moscow it is,
"Who's to put it out?" Daniel Terentich, who had hitherto been silent,

"They'll put it out, no fear!"

flying. Lord have mercy on us sinners!"
"Just look! See what it's doing now. O Lord! You can even see the crows

"God have mercy.... It's windy and dry..." said another voice.

silent. The glow spread, rising and falling, farther and farther still.
Daniel Terentich made no reply, and again for a long time they were all

glow were in Moscow?" remarked one of the footmen.
"But what do you think, Daniel Terentich? Doesn't it look as if that

"I only ran out to get some water," said Mishka.

calling and there's nobody there; go and gather the clothes together."
"What are you staring at, you good-for-nothing?... The count will be

the group and shouted at Mishka.
Old Daniel Terentich, the count's valet (as he was called), came up to

at the spreading flames of the second fire in the distance.
No one replied to this remark and for some time they all gazed silently

the Sushchevski or the Rogozhski quarter."
"See how it's flaring," said one. "That's a fire in Moscow: either in

Several men joined the first two.

right on the other side."
"It's more to the left, why, Little Mytishchi is over there, and this is

on its steps.
Two of the gazers went round to the other side of the coach and sat down

"Look, it must be in Moscow!"

"But that's not Mytishchi, it's farther away."

Cossacks."
"But they told us Little Mytishchi had been set on fire by Mamonov's

All turned their attention to the glow.

"But look here, brothers, there's another fire!" remarked an orderly.

Little Mytishchi burning--set on fire by Mamonov's Cossacks.
fire. One glow had long been visible and everybody knew that it was
body of a coach standing before the porch, the small glow of another
In the darkness of the night one of the servants noticed, above the high

wounded man.
Mytishchi she moved into a worse hut simply to be farther away from the
she had been unable to close her eyes on account of his moaning, and at
spent the first night in the same yard as the Rostovs. The countess said
moaning sounded terrible in the darkness of the autumn night. He had
awful pain he suffered made him moan incessantly and piteously, and his
In a neighboring hut lay Raevski's adjutant with a fractured wrist. The

supper, fed the horses, and came out into the porches.
orderlies of the wounded officers, after attending to their masters, had
huts of that large village. The Rostovs' servants and coachmen and the
the wounded traveling with them were all distributed in the yards and
as Great Mytishchi. At ten o'clock that evening the Rostov family and
they woke late and were again delayed so often that they only got as far
spend that night at a place three miles out of Moscow. The next morning
forgotten for which servants were sent back, that they had decided to
had been so blocked by vehicles and troops, so many things had been
Moscow. They had started so late on the first of September, the road
The Rostov party spent the night at Mytishchi, fourteen miles from

retreating troops, with many different feelings.
watched from the various roads by the fugitive Muscovites and by the
The glow of the first fire that began on the second of September was


CHAPTER XXX





immediately fell asleep.
unsteady steps and returning to his room lay down on the sofa and
Without taking leave of his new friend, Pierre left the gate with

against the fence to save himself from falling.
remembering his intention he grew dizzy and felt so faint that he leaned
how good it is, what more does one need?" thought he. And suddenly
glow from the fire, Pierre experienced a joyful emotion. "There now,
Gazing at the high starry sky, at the moon, at the comet, and at the

city.
There was nothing terrible in the one small, distant fire in the immense

town.
two languages could be heard. They were looking at the glow seen in the
Frenchmen. Their laughter and their mutually incomprehensible remarks in
heart with his love. At the gate stood Gerasim, the cook, and two
opposite to it hung that bright comet which was connected in Pierre's
right and high up in the sky was the sickle of the waning moon and
fire glowed--the first of those that were beginning in Moscow. To the
night was warm and light. To the left of the house on the Pokrovka a
When it was late at night they went out together into the street. The

concealing his name and station.
he had abandoned everything and not left the city, but remained there
the fact that Pierre was very rich, had two mansions in Moscow, and that
More than anything else in Pierre's story the captain was impressed by

his name.
he also told what he had at first concealed--his own position and even
all his own simple relations with her. Urged on by Ramballe's questions
marriage, Natasha's love for his best friend, her betrayal of him, and
look in his shining eyes, he told the whole story of his life: his
something loosened Pierre's tongue. Speaking thickly and with a faraway
played a part in his story, or whether it was all these things together,
thought that this man did not, and never would, know any of those who
Whether it was the wine he had drunk, or an impulse of frankness, or the

"Platonic love, clouds..." he muttered.

it he begged Pierre to continue.
The captain made a gesture signifying that even if he did not understand

understood that.
When he had reached this point, Pierre asked the captain whether he

the world, and especially therefore above himself.
her because he loved her too well, placing her far above everything in
Afterwards when he had received a name and wealth he dared not think of
young, and because he had been an illegitimate son without a name.
years, but that he had not dared to think of her because she was too
Pierre then explained that he had loved this woman from his earliest

"Tiens!" said the captain.

never be his.
his life he had loved and still loved only one woman, and that she could
understood love for a women somewhat differently. He said that in all
express the thoughts that filled his mind. He began to explain that he
Challenged by this question Pierre raised his head and felt a need to

himself for love and a feeling of envy of the legitimate husband.
asked Pierre if he had ever experienced a similar impulse to sacrifice
Having finished his tale about the enchanting Polish lady, the captain

seemed to him something pathetic and touching in all this.
smile, her traveling hood, and a stray lock of her hair... and there
to hear the words she had uttered and to see before him her eyes, her
"Peter Kirilovich, come here! We have recognized you," he now seemed

important and poetic.
now it seemed to him that that meeting had had in it something very
not produced an effect upon him--he had not even once recalled it. But
his love at the Sukharev water tower. At the time of that meeting it had
his eyes every minutest detail of his last meeting with the object of
to the story of the struggle between love and duty, Pierre saw before
imagination he mentally compared them with Ramballe's tales. Listening
rose to his mind, and going over the pictures of that love in his
listening to these love stories his own love for Natasha unexpectedly
memories which, he knew not why, suddenly arose in his mind. While
understood it all, and at the same time followed a train of personal
evening and under the influence of wine--followed all that was told him,
Listening to the captain's tales, Pierre--as often happens late in the

weakness which assailed him at this touching recollection.
captain wiped his eyes and gave himself a shake, as if driving away the
saved your life, and I save your honor!" Having repeated these words the
captain restored the wife to the husband, saying as he did so: "I have
Polish lady wished to elope with him, but, prompted by magnanimity, the
entering the French service. The captain was happy, the enchanting
entrusted to him his enchanting wife (parisienne de coeur) while himself
life continually occurred in the captain's stories) and the Pole had
of how he had saved the life of a Pole (in general, the saving of
memory, and which he narrated with rapid gestures and glowing face, was
Finally, the latest episode in Poland still fresh in the captain's

sauerkraut and the young girls are "too blonde."
Germany, where "shelter" is called Unterkunft and where the husbands eat
husband, as well as several droll incidents from his recollections of
played the part of the lover, and he--the lover--assumed the role of the
a distant past. Then he recounted an episode in which the husband
to her lover, even now agitated the captain, though it was the memory of
the mother's sacrificing herself and offering her daughter in marriage
conflict of magnanimity between the mother and the daughter, ending in
innocent child of seventeen, daughter of the bewitching marquise. The
fascinating marquise of thirty-five and at the same time for a charming,
Thus the captain touchingly recounted the story of his love for a

combination of incongruities giving the chief charm to the feeling.
principally in the unnaturalness of his relation to the woman and in a
of simpletons.") L'amour which the Frenchman worshiped consisted
he considered the "love of clodhoppers" and the other the "love
Natasha. (Ramballe despised both these kinds of love equally: the one
was it the romantic love stimulated by himself that he experienced for
that low and simple kind that Pierre had once felt for his wife, nor
It was plain that l'amour which the Frenchman was so fond of was not

curiosity.
and he described women so alluringly that Pierre listened to him with
conviction that he alone had experienced and known all the charm of love
charm and poetry of love, yet he told his story with such sincere
stories had the sensual character which Frenchmen regard as the special
enthusiasm with which he spoke of women. Though all Ramballe's love
at the officer's handsome, self-satisfied face, and noting the eager
There were very many of these, as one could easily believe, looking

Pierre, began talking of love and of his love affairs.
"Oh, women, women!" and the captain, looking with glistening eyes at

Pierre again emptied his glass and poured himself out a third.

not right, Monsieur Pierre?" said he, growing animated. "Another glass?"
"But all that is only life's setting, the real thing is love--love! Am I

mere" playing of course an important part in the story.
about his relations and his financial and family affairs, "ma pauvre
the story of his ancestors, his childhood, youth, and manhood, and all
And with a Frenchman's easy and naive frankness the captain told Pierre

is one of the most ancient in France."
measured tones of a man who intends to tell a long story, "that our name
with him. I must tell you, mon cher," he continued in the sad and
service of Bonaparte, as we used to call him? Yet here I am in Moscow
have said that I should be a soldier and a captain of dragoons in the
"Yes, my dear friend," he began, "such is fortune's caprice. Who would

pensive attitude.
again pressed Pierre's hand, and leaned his elbows on the table in a
Pierre took one of the glasses and emptied it. Ramballe emptied his too,

two glasses with wine.
"Well, in that case, I drink to our friendship!" he cried gaily, filling

"shelter" was Unterkunft in German, and his face suddenly brightened.
The captain gazed intently at him as he had done when he learned that

"Thank you," said Pierre.

I say it with my hand on my heart!" said he, striking his chest.
you. Can I do anything for you? Dispose of me. It is for life and death.
"Honestly, without speaking of what I owe you, I feel friendship for

whose expression of sympathy was pleasing to him.
Pierre did not answer, but looked cordially into the Frenchman's eyes

"Perhaps it's the state of affairs?"
upset you? No, really, have you anything against me?" he asked Pierre.
"There now, we're sad," said he, touching Pierre's hand. "Have I

his face, went up to Pierre and bent over him.
on his companion's face. Ramballe, with genuine distress and sympathy in
by the candlelight and was evidently struck by the troubled expression
Morel brought candles and a bottle of wine. The captain looked at Pierre

gaily.
Morel will warm us up another little bottle. Morel!" he called out
"Well, let's have another bottle of this Moscow Bordeaux, shall we?

Monsieur Pierre?" he concluded.
laughing eyes. "These Germans are first-rate fools, don't you think so,
"Onterkoff," said the captain and looked at Pierre for some seconds with

"Unterkunft," Pierre repeated.

"How do you say it?" the captain asked quickly and doubtfully.

"Shelter?" Pierre repeated. "The German for shelter is Unterkunft."

"What is the German for 'shelter'?"

Pierre looked at him in silence.

He sat down facing Pierre. "By the way, you know German, then?"
"He's a German, but a nice fellow all the same.... But he's a German."
"The colonel of those Wurttembergers is delightful," he suddenly said.

were smiling to himself at some amusing thought.
down the room twice. His eyes shone and his mustache twitched as if he
The captain, on the other hand, seemed very cheerful. He paced up and

could not do so.
weakness tied him to the spot; he wished to get up and go away, but
thought this, but still sat in the same place. A strange feeling of
immediately. I won't say another word to him," thought Pierre. He
he twirled his mustache, all now seemed offensive. "I will go away
him. The tune he was whistling, his gait, and the gesture with which
The Frenchman's chatter which had previously amused Pierre now repelled

The captain returned to the room, limping slightly and whistling a tune.

man he met.
self-sacrifice, had been dispersed like dust by contact with the first
former gloomy frame of mind, concerning vengeance, killing, and
weakness but dimly felt that he could not overcome it and that his
carry out his intention. He struggled against the confession of his
do it. He did not know why, but he felt a foreboding that he would not
worthy action to slay the evildoer, but now he felt that he would not
town next day. Pierre still considered that it would be a useful and
pistol, dagger, and peasant coat were ready. Napoleon was to enter the
few days and which was essential for the execution of his design. The
destroyed the mood of concentrated gloom in which he had spent the last
wine he had drunk and the conversation with this good-natured man had
tormented by the consciousness of his own weakness. The few glasses of
that was it was not that which tormented Pierre at the moment. He was
conquerors were masters in it and were patronizing him. Painful as
he was in. It was not that Moscow had been taken or that the happy
was left alone, suddenly he came to himself and realized the position
really was suffering at that moment. When the captain went out and he
before, with his head in his hands. His face expressed suffering. He
When he returned to the room Pierre was sitting in the same place as

captain went out into the porch and gave some orders in a loud voice.
was said to him, the German submitted and took his men elsewhere. The
reply to the Wurttemberg hussar in German. When he had understood what
translated what the German said to the captain and gave the captain's
occupy all the houses one after another. Pierre, who knew German,
quartermaster of the regiment and his commander had ordered him to
said, introducing broken French into his own German, that he was the
officer, but in reply to the third question which he did not understand
questions by giving the names of his regiment and of his commanding
occupied. The German who knew little French, answered the two first
and by what right he allowed himself to claim quarters that were already
asked him to what regiment he belonged, who was his commanding officer,
The captain had their senior sergeant called in, and in a stern voice

not understand what was said to them in French.
horses were. This difficulty had arisen chiefly because the hussars did
come and wanted to put up their horses in the yard where the captain's
the gate and by Morel, who came to say that some Wurttemberg hussars had
Their conversation was interrupted by the cries of several voices at

talk.
"No, he will make his entry tomorrow," he replied, and continued his

The Frenchman looked at his guilty face and smiled.

"Is he in Moscow?" Pierre stammered with a guilty look.

man of the ages past or future."
I devoted myself to him! So there! Oh yes, mon cher, he is the greatest
of laurels for us, you know, I said to myself: 'That is a monarch,' and
When I understood what he wanted--when I saw that he was preparing a bed
the sight of the grandeur and glory with which he has covered France.
that man has vanquished me. He has taken hold of me. I could not resist
I was his enemy eight years ago. My father was an emigrant count.... But
what the Emperor is! It is I, Ramballe, who tell you so.... I assure you
"The Emperor? He is generosity, mercy, justice, order, genius--that's

embarrassed, "is the Emperor...?"
"The Emperor," Pierre repeated, and his face suddenly became sad and

interrupted him.
We are nice to know. And then the Emperor..." he began, but Pierre
Warsaw, all the world's capitals.... We are feared, but we are loved.
us better than that. We took Vienna, Berlin, Madrid, Naples, Rome,
now--that's another thing; but you civilized people, you ought to know
in Moscow. What a chance those girls have missed! Your peasants,
to go and bury themselves in the steppes when the French army is
"To return to your ladies--I hear they are lovely. What a wretched idea

talking with this cheerful and good-natured man.
spent alone with his depressing thoughts, Pierre involuntarily enjoyed
Under the influence of the wine he had drunk, and after the days he had

remained Russian. Well, I don't esteem you the less for it."
"There is only one Paris in the world. You have been to Paris and have
his conclusion was weaker than what had gone before, he added quickly:
Duchenois, Potier, the Sorbonne, the boulevards," and noticing that
is a savage. You can tell a Parisian two leagues off. Paris is Talma, la
"Oh yes, one sees that plainly. Paris!... A man who doesn't know Paris

"I have been in Paris. I spent years there," said Pierre.

having uttered this compliment, he again gazed at him in silence.
that you were Parisian! You have that... I don't know what, that..." and
"Well, if you hadn't told me you were Russian, I should have wagered

middle of his talk and gazing intently with his laughing, kindly eyes.
The captain looked at Pierre. He had a habit of stopping short in the

"Paris--the capital of the world," Pierre finished his remark for him.

But Paris, Paris..."
Pierre on the shoulder. "What a thing to say!" he exclaimed. "Paris?...
"Ha, ha, ha!" The Frenchman emitted a merry, sanguine chuckle, patting

asked Pierre.
"Would not the French ladies leave Paris if the Russians entered it?"

Moscow? What a queer idea! What had they to be afraid of?"
"Apropos, tell me please, is it true that the women have all left

state of Moscow.
at him. Probably the word "gallant" turned the captain's thoughts to the
pleased with himself that Pierre almost winked back as he looked merrily
The captain was so naively and good-humoredly gay, so real, and so

French are, Monsieur Pierre, aren't they?"
gallant... with the fair" (he winked and smiled), "that's what the
the better, so much the better, Monsieur Pierre! Terrible in battle...
us soldiers!" he added, smiling, after a momentary pause. "So much
Naples, who knows what's what, cried 'Bravo!' Ha, ha! So you are one of
times in succession and march as if on parade. Fine fellows! Our King of
grenadiers were splendid, by heaven! I saw them close up their ranks six
back like cardboard figures. Oh, it was beautiful, Monsieur Pierre! Your
here. Three times we reached the guns and three times we were thrown
you made us pay dear for it. I was at it three times--sure as I sit
great redoubt held out well, by my pipe!" continued the Frenchman. "And
"Bah, really? So much the better! You are certainly brave foes. The

"I was there," said Pierre.

it."
there, I should be ready to begin again. I pity those who did not see
You may be proud of it! And on my honor, in spite of the cough I caught
fire was worth seeing. It was a tough job you set us there, my word!
great battle of la Moskowa. Sacre Dieu! It was splendid! That deluge of
as you see does not want to march, I got that on the seventh at the
second at Smolensk"--he showed a scar on his cheek--"and this leg which
body already. Here is one I got at Wagram" (he touched his side) "and a
saving me from that maniac.... You see, I have bullets enough in my
"Yes, my dear Monsieur Pierre, I owe you a fine votive candle for

still more lively and he chatted incessantly all through dinner.
Pierre. The satisfaction of his hunger and the wine rendered the captain
to its neck in a table napkin and poured out wine for himself and for
applied himself to the bottle of Bordeaux. He wrapped the bottle up
had taken while passing through Moscow, he left the kvass to Morel and
cochon he had found in the kitchen. But as the captain had the wine they
de cochon (pig's lemonade), and Morel spoke well of the limonade de
to the French and had been given a special name. They called it limonade
taken from the kitchen for them to try. That beverage was already known
and placed a bottle of claret in it. He also brought a bottle of kvass,
with pleasure. Morel, the orderly, brought some hot water in a saucepan
was covered with perspiration. Pierre was hungry and shared the dinner
his lips, and repeating--"Excellent! Delicious!" His face grew red and
munching his food rapidly with his strong teeth, continually smacking
himself began to eat greedily and quickly like a healthy and hungry man,
and brought with them, Ramballe invited Pierre to share his dinner, and
brought, with some wine which the French had taken from a Russian cellar
When the mutton and an omelet had been served and a samovar and vodka

want to know."
please. That is all I ask. Monsieur Pierre, you say.... That's all I
inquiry in his tone. Pierre bent his head. "Your baptismal name, if you
your service. You belong to the gentry?" he concluded with a shade of
my business. I owe you my life. That is enough for me. I am quite at
a superior officer perhaps. You have borne arms against us. That's not
"Oh, please!" said he. "I understand your reasons. You are an officer...

concealing it, but the Frenchman hastily interrupted him.
began to try to invent a name and to say something about his reason for
Pierre replied that he could not tell him his name and, blushing,

with that maniac's bullet in my body?"
the honor of conversing so pleasantly, instead of being in the ambulance
his mustache. "Will you now be so good as to tell me with whom I have
himself, a self-satisfied irrepressible smile puckering his lips under
of Honor for the affair on the seventh of September," he introduced
"Captain Ramballe, of the 13th Light Regiment, Chevalier of the Legion

Frenchman's smile, pressed the hand held out to him.
his gestures, that Pierre, unconsciously smiling in response to the
word) in the officer's voice, in the expression of his face and in
There was so much good nature and nobility (in the French sense of the

is all I can say."
forgets either an insult or a service. I offer you my friendship. That
"I owe my life to you and offer you my friendship. A Frenchman never
at Pierre's fine though dirty linen and at the ring on his finger.
"A Frenchman or a Russian prince incognito," said the officer, looking

obtuseness to everything other than himself disarmed Pierre.
were, the latter would probably have left him, but the man's animated
feelings of others, and had he at all understood what Pierre's feelings
Had this man been endowed with the slightest capacity for perceiving the

for saving his life.
be so, but for all that he would be forever bound to Pierre by gratitude
said that if Pierre absolutely insisted on passing for a Russian let it
could decline so flattering an appellation, shrugged his shoulders and
was not a Frenchman, the captain, evidently not understanding how anyone
the parlor--the first room they entered. To Pierre's assurances that he
life that Pierre had not the heart to refuse, and sat down with him in
amiable, good-natured, and genuinely grateful to Pierre for saving his
go away, but the officer would not hear of it. He was so very polite,
thought it his duty to assure him that he was not French and wished to
When the French officer went into the room with Pierre the latter again


CHAPTER XXIX





"Yes, and some wine," answered the captain.

"Shall I serve them up?"
"Captain, there is soup and a leg of mutton in the kitchen," said he.

to visit the kitchen, came up to his officer.
The soldiers went out again, and the orderly, who had meanwhile had time

"You will be called in when you are wanted," he said.

but the officer sternly checked them.
what had happened, and expressed their readiness to punish the culprits,
The soldiers in the yard, hearing the shot, came into the passage asking

life, he went with him into the room.
the arm of Pierre whom he had promoted to be a Frenchman for saving his
you. Lead that man away!" said he quickly and energetically, and taking
"You have saved my life! You are French. You ask his pardon? I grant it

arm.
The Frenchman expanded his chest and made a majestic gesture with his

him, and begged the officer to let the deed go unpunished.
had seized the loaded pistol which they had not had time to recover from
Alexeevich was and how just before their arrival that drunken imbecile
and tone. In reply to his last question Pierre again explained who Makar
of human appellations he could not renounce it, said the officer's look
Even if Pierre were not a Frenchman, having once received that loftiest

brother.
to do with this man?" he added, addressing himself to Pierre as to a
presently. I am delighted to meet a compatriot. Well, and what are we
finger before his nose and smiling. "You shall tell me all about that
"Tut, tut, tut! Tell that to others," said the officer, waving his

"I am Russian," he said quickly.

based upon it, Pierre felt it necessary to disillusion him.
But however indubitable that conclusion and the officer's conviction

captain of the 13th Light Regiment--was undoubtedly a very great deed.
perform a great deed, and to save his life--the life of M. Ramballe,
For a Frenchman that deduction was indubitable. Only a Frenchman could

"You have saved my life. You are French," said he.

melodramatically gentle expression and he held out his hand.
a few seconds he looked at him in silence. His handsome face assumed a
same gloomy expression, but suddenly turned to Pierre with a smile. For
drunken imbecile to account. The Frenchman listened in silence with the
Pierre continued, in French, to persuade the officer not to hold that

gesture.
traitors," he added, with a look of gloomy dignity and a fine energetic
of him. "We French are merciful after victory, but we do not pardon
"Brigand! You shall pay for this," said the Frenchman, letting go

fall asleep, as he leaned against the wall.
Makar Alexeevich was standing with parted lips, swaying, as if about to

The officer went up to Makar Alexeevich and took him by the collar.

madman who did not know what he was doing."
quite forgetting the part he had intended to play. "He is an unfortunate
"Oh, I am really in despair at what has occurred," said Pierre rapidly,

of the wall. "Who is that man?" said he, looking sternly at Pierre.
had a lucky escape this time," he added, pointing to the damaged plaster
"I think not," answered the Frenchman, feeling himself over. "But I have

"You are not wounded?" he asked.

and addressed him in French.
snatching away the pistol and throwing it down, ran up to the officer
Forgetting his intention of concealing his knowledge of French, Pierre,

Frenchman turned pale and rushed to the door.
was a deafening report, and all were enveloped in a cloud of smoke. The
pistol Makar Alexeevich at last got his fingers on the trigger, there
himself on the drunkard. Just when Pierre snatched at and struck up the
the yell the officer turned round, and at the same moment Pierre threw
"Board them!" yelled the tipsy man, trying to press the trigger. Hearing

pistol, and took aim.
a madman's cunning, Makar Alexeevich eyed the Frenchman, raised his
appearing at the open kitchen door with the pistol in his hand. With
away and conceal himself, but at that moment he saw Makar Alexeevich
limping, to the door at which Pierre was standing. Pierre wished to go
nose, intimating that he did not understand him either, and moved,
Still smiling, the French officer spread out his hands before Gerasim's

to render his words more comprehensible by contorting them.
"Master, not here--don't understand... me, you..." said Gerasim, trying

in the house.
Again the officer turned to Gerasim and asked him to show him the rooms


     fellow!"
     fellows. What the devil! There, don't let us be cross, old
     * "Quarters, quarters, lodgings! The French are good


moved away from the door.
asked again in French, looking around and meeting Pierre's eyes. Pierre
shoulder. "Well, does no one speak French in this establishment?" he
vieux!" * added he, clapping the scared and silent Gerasim on the
sont de bons enfants. Que diable! Voyons! Ne nous fachons pas, mon
little man with a condescending and good-natured smile. "Les francais
"Quartier, quartier, logement!" said the officer, looking down at the

Gerasim gazed at the officer with an alarmed and inquiring look.


    * "Are you the master here?"


"Vous etes le bourgeois?" * the officer asked Gerasim.

No one gave any reply.


    * "Good day, everybody!"


"Bonjour, la compagnie!" * said he gaily, smiling and looking about him.

mustache and lightly touched his hat.
that, the officer, lifting his elbow with a smart gesture, stroked his
a loud voice of command ordered them to put up the horses. Having done
quarters, turned round to the soldiers standing at the entrance, and in
a few steps he stopped, having apparently decided that these were good
front, leaning on a stick and slightly limping. When he had advanced
thin, with sunken cheeks and a dull expression. The officer walked in
man--the other evidently a private or an orderly, sunburned, short, and
There were two of them. One was an officer--a tall, soldierly, handsome

retire--an irresistible curiosity kept him there.
as the French entered. But the French entered and still Pierre did not
half-open door of the corridor, intending to conceal himself as soon
disclose neither his identity nor his knowledge of French, stood at the
Pierre, having decided that until he had carried out his design he would


CHAPTER XXVIII





heard.
corridor the sound of several hands knocking at the front door could be
Gerasim and the porter let Makar Alexeevich go, and in the now silent

cried.
"It's them! Gracious heavens! O Lord, four of them, horsemen!" she

the porch and the cook came running into the vestibule.
Suddenly a fresh sound, a piercing feminine scream, reverberated from

a tipsy, hoarse voice.
The vestibule was filled with the discordant sounds of a struggle and of

They seized Makar Alexeevich by the arms and dragged him to the door.

"Catch hold!" whispered Gerasim to the porter.

Alexeevich, brandishing the pistol. "Board them!"
"Be off, thou base slave! Touch me not! See this?" shouted Makar

have the pistol."
"That's not right, sir. Come to your room, please, and rest. Allow me to

"Who are you? Bonaparte!..." shouted Makar Alexeevich.

Alexeevich by the elbows back to the door.
let go! Please, sir..." pleaded Gerasim, trying carefully to steer Makar
"That will do, please, that will do. Have the goodness--please, sir, to

"To arms! Board them! No, you shan't get it," he yelled.

and screamed hoarsely, evidently with some heroic fancy in his head.
old man. Makar Alexeevich, frowning with exertion, held on to the pistol
out into the corridor, looked with pity and repulsion at the half-crazy
in the vestibule and tried to take the pistol from him. Pierre, coming
Gerasim and the porter, who had followed Makar Alexeevich, stopped him

with unexpected rapidity and ran out into the corridor.
He paused and then suddenly seeing the pistol on the table seized it

won't surrender, I say... Am I not right, sir?"
"They're frightened," he said confidentially in a hoarse voice. "I say I

staggering on his thin legs, advanced into the middle of the room.
noticing embarrassment on Pierre's face immediately grew bold and,
was obviously drunk. On seeing Pierre he grew confused at first, but
His dressing gown was unfastened, his face red and distorted. He

transformed.
the figure of Makar Alexeevich, always so timid before but now quite
in this way, the study door opened and on the threshold appeared
While Pierre, standing in the middle of the room, was talking to himself

speaking to himself and bowing his head with a sad but firm expression.
when killing Napoleon. "Well then, take me and execute me!" he went on,
punishes thee,' I shall say," thought he, imagining what he would say
But that is all the same! 'It is not I but the hand of Providence that
"Yes, I will approach... and then suddenly... with pistol or dagger?
"Yes, alone, for the sake of all, I must do it or perish!" he thought.

melancholy enjoyment imagined his own destruction and heroic endurance.
blow or the death of Napoleon, but with extraordinary vividness and
fancy he did not clearly picture to himself either the striking of the
his undertaking, going over its minutest details in his mind. In his
Moscow. Pierre knew this, but instead of acting he only thought about
It was two o'clock in the afternoon. The French had already entered

this kept him in a state of excitement bordering on insanity.
two almost sleepless nights passed on a short sofa without bedding--all
those days, the absence of wine and cigars, his dirty unchanged linen,
mental state. The unaccustomed coarse food, the vodka he drank during
Pierre's physical condition, as is always the case, corresponded to his

this Pierre was very sensitive.
become not merely meaningless but contemptible and ridiculous, and to
his announcement to the Rostovs that he would remain in Moscow would all
everyone else, his flight from home, the peasant coat, the pistol, and
had already done in that direction. If he were now to leave Moscow like
was supported in his design and prevented from renouncing it by what he
only now found full satisfaction for it. Moreover, at this moment Pierre
at the Sloboda Palace he had been continuously under its influence, but
From the very day Pierre had experienced this feeling for the first time

criterion of life.
power and strength, affirming the existence of a higher, nonhuman
an ordinary point of view are insane, to test, as it were, his personal
possesses: the feeling which causes a man to perform actions which from
apparent reason and knowing that it will cost him all the money he
penny on drink, and a drunken man to smash mirrors or glasses for no
It was the feeling that induces a volunteer recruit to spend his last

by reason of the joy with which it can all be renounced.
men so painstakingly acquire and guard--if it has any worth has so only
Palace, when he had suddenly felt that wealth, power, and life--all that
first experienced this strange and fascinating feeling at the Sloboda
majority of men regard as the greatest good in the world. Pierre had
everything conventional, artificial, and human--for everything the
The other was that vague and quite Russian feeling of contempt for
on a hard sofa without undressing and eat the same food as Gerasim.
place of the luxury and comfort to which he was accustomed, to sleep
of the battle and had now caused him to run away from his home and, in
to Mozhaysk on the twenty-fifth and to make his way to the very thick
view of the common calamity, the same feeling that had caused him to go
The first was a feeling of the necessity of sacrifice and suffering in
Two equally strong feelings drew Pierre irresistibly to this purpose.

design excited him still more.
And the risk to which he would expose his life by carrying out his
by a German student in Vienna, and knew that the student had been shot.
Pierre knew all the details of the attempt on Bonaparte's life in 1809

to him was solely due to Napoleon.
either perish or put an end to the misery of all Europe--which it seemed
Moscow, concealing his name, and must meet Napoleon and kill him, and
had now become absolutely necessary and inevitable. He must remain in
suddenly felt that what before had seemed to him merely a possibility
returned to the house convinced that Moscow would not be defended, he
any way behind them, Pierre went to the Three Hills gate. But when he
Next day, with the sole idea of not sparing himself and not lagging in

predestined to do.
even if Moscow were taken, for him to remain there and do what he was
the thought flashed into his mind that it really would be a good thing,
Natasha had said to him: "Are you remaining in Moscow?... How splendid!"
the people in the defense of Moscow, Pierre had met the Rostovs and
When, having bought the coat merely with the object of taking part among

often passed through his mind and left no trace behind.
limit to the power of the Beast was as yet only one of the fancies that
itself. But the idea that he, L'russe Besuhof, was destined to set a
his name in connection with Bonaparte's more than once vaguely presented
that had previously occurred to him of the cabalistic significance of
attention on the Masonic manuscripts, but was unable to do so) the idea
day spent in inaction and solitude (he tried several times to fix his
Alexeevich's house and keeping his name secret. Then during the first
a pistol, confiding to him his intentions of remaining in Joseph
with that object he had asked Gerasim to get him a peasant's coat and
part in the popular defense of Moscow which he knew was projected. And
Gerasim roused him from his reverie the idea occurred to him of taking
and strength of the class of men he mentally classed as they. When
own insignificance and insincerity compared with the truth, simplicity,
particularly of the battle of Borodino and of that vague sense of his
of the last few days rose one after another in his imagination,
in the deathlike stillness of the study, calm and significant memories
really found it. When he sat with his elbows on the dusty writing table
drawn. He sought a quiet refuge, and in Joseph Alexeevich's study he
contrary to the restless confusion into which he felt himself being
connected with a world of eternal, solemn, and calm thoughts, quite
life's turmoil, for in his mind the memory of Joseph Alexeevich was
sorting the deceased's books and papers, only in search of rest from
to unravel. He had gone to Joseph Alexeevich's house, on the plea of
that enmeshed him, and which in his present condition he was unable
He had left home only to escape the intricate tangle of life's demands

him like a dream.
understood nothing of the present, and all he saw and heard appeared to
taken such possession of him, but he remembered nothing of the past,
by one persistent thought. He did not know how or when this thought had
Pierre was in a state bordering on insanity. He was completely obsessed
After the last two days spent in solitude and unusual circumstances,

second of September.
only reached the quarter where Pierre was staying by the evening of the
The absorption of the French by Moscow, radiating starwise as it did,


CHAPTER XXVII





bring them the keys of the city.
abandoned it and did not welcome the French with bread and salt, nor
Berlin, Vienna, and other towns, simply because its inhabitants
in it. Moscow when occupied by the enemy did not remain intact like
is true, but by those who had abandoned it and not by those who remained
live and cook their porridge. Moscow was burned by its inhabitants, it
burn which is left by its owners and in which strangers are allowed to
fire, for Moscow had to burn as every village, factory, or house must
impossible not to see that there could be no such direct cause of the
on to place an heroic torch in the hands of their own people, it is
ferocity and for Russians to blame the scoundrel Bonaparte, or later
However tempting it might be for the French to blame Rostopchin's


    * To Rostopchin's ferocious patriotism.


without any incendiarism.
cannot be regarded as the cause, for the same thing would have happened
houses--in any case a troublesome and dangerous thing to do), arson
arson (which is very doubtful, for no one had any reason to burn the
enemy soldiers occupying houses they did not own. Even if there was any
the soldiers' pipes, kitchens, and campfires, and by the carelessness of
of the French were not to blame in the matter. Moscow was set on fire by
are quartered. "Le patriotisme feroce de Rostopchine" and the barbarity
of fire be increased in an abandoned, wooden town where foreign troops
that district immediately increases. How much then must the probability
billet troops in the villages of any district and the number of fires in
cook themselves meals twice a day. In peacetime it is only necessary to
pipes, make campfires of the Senate chairs in the Senate Square, and
its inhabitants have left it and it is occupied by soldiers who smoke
are in residence and a police force is present, cannot help burning when
where scarcely a day passes without conflagrations when the house owners
which sparks continually fall for several days. A town built of wood,
Moscow had to burn as inevitably as a heap of shavings has to burn on
had, or had not, a hundred and thirty inferior fire engines. Deserted
any town built of wood was bound to burn, quite apart from whether it
for it. Moscow was burned because it found itself in a position in which
of Moscow by making any individual, or any group of people, responsible
however, it was not, and could not be, possible to explain the burning
Rostopchine, * the Russians to the barbarity of the French. In reality,
The French attributed the Fire of Moscow au patriotisme feroce de


of both the army and the wealthy city.
rich and deserted city resulted in fires and looting and the destruction
mud results; and in the same way the entry of the famished army into the
spilled on dry ground both the dry ground and the water disappear and
And Moscow engulfed the army ever deeper and deeper. When water is
and unoccupied where, they thought, yet greater riches might be found.
the quarters occupied by the French were other regions still unexplored
There were masses of wealth and there seemed no end to it. All around
their houses, hoping thereby to secure themselves from being plundered.
The few inhabitants who had remained invited commanding officers to
generals flocked there to select caleches and coaches for themselves.
the same. In Carriage Row carriages had been left in the shops, and
followed to check the soldiers and were involuntarily drawn into doing
to places where valuables were to be had for the taking. The officers
see the city and, hearing that everything had been abandoned, rushed
had time to secure quarters the soldiers ran out into the streets to
quarreled and even fought with other companies for them. Before they had
them appropriated several houses, chalked their names on them, and
all the same, to the next house which seemed to them better. Many of
finding there stabling more than sufficient for their horses, went on,
cavalry, on entering a merchant's house that had been abandoned and
directions from the Kremlin into which they had first marched. The
percolating through sand--spread irresistibly through the city in all
No residents were left in Moscow, and the soldiers--like water

pastures, so did the army disperse all over the wealthy city.
of hand and at once disperses uncontrollably as soon as it reaches rich
cattle keeps well together when crossing a barren field, but gets out
city with its comforts and plentiful supplies. As a hungry herd of
till then constituted an army, flowed all over the wealthy, deserted
for that very evening. But despite all these measures the men, who had
violence to the inhabitants or any looting, and announcing a roll call
forbidding the men to disperse about the town, sternly forbidding any
Order after order was issued by the French commanders that day

in the shops and houses--but there was no army.
amusing, or caressing women and children. There were many such men both
and baking bread with rolled-up sleeves, and cooking; or frightening,
coach house and stable doors, lighting fires in kitchens and kneading
busy among the provisions, and in the yards unlocking or breaking open
walking through the rooms. In cellars and storerooms similar men were
and Hessian boots could be seen through the windows, laughing and
district, not a soldier or officer was left. Men in military uniforms
go of its nuts. Ten minutes after each regiment had entered a Moscow
impossible for them as it is for the monkey to open its paw and let
carried their loot with them, yet to abandon what they had stolen was as
French when they left Moscow had inevitably to perish because they
fist for fear of losing what it holds, and therefore perishes, the
neck of a jug, and having seized a handful of nuts will not open its
what he had acquired. Like a monkey which puts its paw into the narrow
Moscow was no longer, as it had been, to conquer, but merely to keep
seemed to him valuable or useful. The aim of each man when he left
were a mob of marauders, each carrying a quantity of articles which
later these same men left Moscow, they no longer formed an army. They
citizens nor soldiers but what are known as marauders. When five weeks
forever and there came into being something nondescript, neither
to disperse among the wealthy and deserted houses, the army was lost
different lodgings. As soon as the men of the various regiments began
it remained an army only until its soldiers had dispersed into their
was a weary and famished, but still a fighting and menacing army. But
original number, the French entered Moscow in good marching order. It
Though tattered, hungry, worn out, and reduced to a third of their

in a camp.
not billeted on the inhabitants as is usual in towns but lived in it as
Streets. No masters of the houses being found anywhere, the French were
themselves along the Vozdvizhenka, the Nikolski, and the Tverskoy
the Moroseyka, the Lubyanka, and Pokrovka Streets. Others quartered
Other detachments passed through the Kremlin and encamped along

for fuel and kindled fires there.
windows of the Senate House the soldiers threw chairs into the Square
the gates and began pitching their camp in the Senate Square. Out of the
Murat was informed that the way had been cleared. The French entered

purged of their presence."
wretches) "at the French. Some of them were sabered and the Kremlin was
supplied themselves with guns from the arsenal, and fired" (the
their memory: "These wretches had occupied the sacred citadel, having
they might not stink. Thiers alone dedicates a few eloquent lines to
of them, and they were thrown over the parapet and removed later on that
Who these men were nobody knew. "Clear that away!" was all that was said

the corpses over the parapet.
corpses, and the French soldiers, after dispatching the wounded, threw
"Clear that away!" said the officer, pointing to the beams and the

toward the Znamenka.
four dead. Two men in peasant coats ran away at the foot of the wall,
and officers advanced to the gate. In the gateway lay three wounded and
Nothing more stirred behind the screens and the French infantry soldiers

simultaneously. The gate was again hidden by smoke.
and the reports of a musket and of two cannon shots were heard
and took aim at the French. "Fire!" repeated the officer once more,
the figure of a bareheaded man in a peasant's coat. He grasped a musket
came a solitary human cry from the gateway and amid the smoke appeared
air, cawing and noisily flapping their wings. Together with that sound
their head. Thousands of crows rose above the walls and circled in the
stone-built Kremlin had died away the French heard a strange sound above
A few instants after the echo of the reports resounding over the

wavering clouds of smoke rose over the Square.
the stone of the gate and upon the wooden beams and screens, and two
sounds of canister shot, one after another. The shot rattled against
and an officer gave the word "Fire!" This was followed by two whistling
guns were advanced, the artillerymen blew the ash off their linstocks,
And all made ready for that battle. The cries from the gates ceased. The
Moscow), but a new battlefield which would probably prove sanguinary.
Mokhavaya, or Kutafyev Street, nor the Troitsa Gate (places familiar in
the marshal to the least soldier, that place was not the Vozdvizhenka,
concentrated readiness for strife and suffering. To all of them from
the French general, officers, and men changed to one of determined
word of command the expression of cheerful serenity on the faces of
came the strange sound of a few voices shouting. Instantly as at a
One shot struck a French soldier's foot, and from behind the screens

The sound of three more shots came from the gate.

ran back again with his men.
by the guns shouted some words of command to the officer, and the latter
an officer and men began to run toward it. A general who was standing
put there, and two musket shots rang out from under the gate as soon as
infantrymen ran to the Kutafyev Gate. Beams and wooden screens had been
troubled the French. They imagined it to be a call to arms. A few
The bells in the Kremlin were ringing for vespers, and this sound

placing of the guns and looked at the Kremlin through field glasses.
halted and drew in the Square. Several French officers superintended the
up the Arbat. When they reached the end of the Vozdvizhenka Street they
The guns emerged at a trot from the column following Murat and advanced

ordered four light guns to be moved forward to fire at the gates.
"Good!" said Murat and, turning to one of the gentlemen in his suite,

probably an ambuscade there.
that the gates of the citadel had been barricaded and that there was
returning from the advanced detachment, rode up to Murat and reported
voices at once began answering the interpreter. A French officer,
army was. One of the Russians understood what was asked and several
Murat approached the interpreter and told him to ask where the Russian

slipped behind the others.
speaking Russian, did not understand what was being said to him and
unfamiliar Polish accent and not realizing that the interpreter was
it was far to the Kremlin. The porter, listening in perplexity to the
in the crowd. The interpreter addressed an old porter and asked if
"Take off your cap... your caps!" These words went from one to another

An interpreter rode up to the group.

saying.
"Is that their Tsar himself? He's not bad!" low voices could be heard

dressed up in feathers and gold.
all stared in timid bewilderment at the strange, long-haired commander
Around Murat gathered a group of those who had remained in Moscow. They

Kremlin.
detachment as to the condition in which they had found the citadel, le
Icon of St. Nicholas, Murat halted to await news from the advanced
About the middle of the Arbat Street, near the Church of the Miraculous

them rode the King of Naples himself accompanied by a numerous suite.
Moscow. In front rode a detachment of Wurttemberg hussars and behind
Toward four o'clock in the afternoon Murat's troops were entering


CHAPTER XXVI





to drive on the carts that blocked the way.
took up a Cossack whip and went to the bridge where he began with shouts
And strange to say, the Governor of Moscow, the proud Count Rostopchin,
meaningless, at any rate Rostopchin made no reply and hastily left him.
he spoke those words, or uttered them purposely, knowing them to be
Whether Kutuzov was thinking of something entirely different when

"No! I shall not give up Moscow without a battle!"

gaze from Rostopchin's face muttered softly:
silent. Kutuzov slightly shook his head and not taking his penetrating
face of the man addressing him. Rostopchin grew confused and became
he was trying to read something peculiar written at that moment on the
Kutuzov looked at Rostopchin as if, not grasping what was said to him,

would not have happened," he said.
me that you would not abandon Moscow without another battle; all this
"Things would have been different if your Serene Highness had not told

because Moscow, the capital, was no more and only the army remained.
in French. It was Count Rostopchin. He told Kutuzov that he had come
uniform with plumes in his hat went up to Kutuzov and said something
whip in the sand when a caleche dashed up noisily. A man in a general's
dejected and frowning, sat on a bench by the bridge toying with his
Troops were still crowding at the Yauza bridge. It was hot. Kutuzov,

welfare," thought he.
sake. I was bound to act that way.... The mob, the traitor... the public
fur-lined coat had turned upon him. "But I did not do it for my own
who dealt the blow, the look of silent, timid reproach that boy in the
happened." He saw the frightened and then infuriated face of the dragoon
I need not have said them," he thought. "And then nothing would have
"Why did I utter those words? It was by some accident I said them....

the sound of his own words: "Cut him down! I command it...."
cruelly and painfully to the end of his life. He seemed still to hear
the terrible memory would, on the contrary, dwell in his heart ever more
the gory trace of that recollection would not pass with time, but that
cut deep into his heart and drawn blood. Even now he felt clearly that
Recent as that mental picture was, Rostopchin already felt that it had

bloodstained face of "the traitor" in the fur-lined coat.
distance, while his eyes saw nothing but the astonished, frightened,
still heard the insane despairing screams growing fainter in the
fast as the horses could draw it, but for a long time Count Rostopchin
trembling voice to his coachman. The caleche flew over the ground as
in on Vereshchagin. He turned away. "Go fas... faster!" he cried in a
Count Rostopchin suddenly grew pale as he had done when the crowd closed

voice higher and higher.
will I overthrow it and thrice re-establish it!" he cried, raising his
They have torn my body. The kingdom of God will be overthrown... Thrice
stoned me, crucified me... I shall rise... shall rise... shall rise.
"Thrice have they slain me, thrice have I risen from the dead. They

Coming abreast of the caleche he ran beside it.

shouted something breathlessly with emphatic intonations and gestures.
"Stop! Pull up, I tell you!" he cried in a piercing voice, and again

saffron-yellow whites moved restlessly near the lower eyelids.
its beard growing in uneven tufts. His black, agate pupils with
to stop. The lunatic's solemn, gloomy face was thin and yellow, with
Rostopchin, shouting something in a hoarse voice and making signs to him
dressing gown, this lunatic was running impetuously, his gaze fixed on
Swaying from side to side on his long, thin legs in his fluttering

especially at the one running toward them.
looked with vague horror and curiosity at these released lunatics and
carriage, and the count himself, his coachman, and his dragoons
One of these was running to cross the path of Count Rostopchin's

gesticulating.
and others like them walking singly across the field shouting and
almshouse and the lunatic asylum, could be seen some people in white
The Sokolniki field was deserted. Only at the end of it, in front of the

turned angrily in his caleche and gazed sternly from side to side.
old head. Planning beforehand what he would say to Kutuzov, Rostopchin
ruin of Russia (as Rostopchin regarded it) would fall upon his doting
the calamities that would follow the abandonment of the city and the
would make that foxy old courtier feel that the responsibility for all
stinging reproaches he meant to address to Kutuzov for his deception. He
that Kutuzov was. Count Rostopchin was mentally preparing the angry and
what was to come. He was driving to the Yauza bridge where he had heard
Sokolniki field, no longer thinking of what had occurred but considering
Half an hour later he was driving with his fast horses across the

arrangements, the count grew quite tranquil.
Having reached his country house and begun to give orders about domestic

and at the same time punished a miscreant."
killed two birds with one stone: to appease the mob I gave them a victim
was a traitor and a spy. I could not let him go unpunished and so I have
(though the Senate had only condemned Vereshchagin to hard labor), "he
"Vereshchagin was tried and condemned to death," thought Rostopchin

criminal and at the same time pacify the mob.
contrived to avail himself of a convenient opportunity to punish a
he even found cause for self-satisfaction in having so successfully
Not only did his reason not reproach him for what he had done, but

Rostopchin now knew it.
who commits such a crime always knows just where that welfare lies. And
To a man not swayed by passion that welfare is never certain, but he

other people.
this same idea. This idea is le bien public, the hypothetical welfare of
such a crime against his fellow man without comforting himself with
world began and men have killed one another no one has ever committed
thought which tranquillized Rostopchin was not a new one. Since the
his mind devised reasons why he should be mentally tranquil too. The
calm and, as always happens, as soon as he became physically tranquil
hearing the terrible sounds of the crowd, Rostopchin grew physically
Lightly swaying on the flexible springs of his carriage and no longer

commander in chief."
different, but it was my duty to safeguard my life and dignity as
simply Theodore Vasilyevich my course of action would have been quite
governor, the representative of authority and of the Tsar. "Had I been
Rostopchin was sacrificing himself for the public good) but himself as
Theodore Vasilyevich Rostopchin (he fancied that Theodore Vasilyevich
and to the city entrusted to him, and of himself--not himself as
public good"--and he began thinking of his social duties to his family
appeased. Many other victims have perished and are perishing for the
at himself. "I had other duties," thought he. "The people had to be
was only a momentary feeling and Count Rostopchin smiled disdainfully
recurred to him, and a disagreeable shiver ran down his back. But this
"Count! One God is above us both!"--Vereshchagin's words suddenly
in French. "They are like wolves whom nothing but flesh can appease."
subordinates. "The mob is terrible--disgusting," he said to himself
dissatisfaction the agitation and fear he had betrayed before his
the shouts of the mob, the count began to repent. He remembered with
When they reached the Myasnitski Street and could no longer hear

Sokolniki.
took his seat and told the coachman to drive him to his country house in
distant roar of the yelling crowd was audible even there. He hastily
the direction indicated. At the back entrance stood his caleche. The
Count Rostopchin was unable to reply and, turning obediently, went in

please..." said a trembling, frightened voice behind him.
"This way, your excellency... Where are you going?... This way,

white and he could not control the feverish twitching of his lower jaw.
passage leading to the rooms on the ground floor. The count's face was
with hurried steps and bent head, not knowing where and why, along the
of going to the back entrance where his carriage awaited him, went
yells and swayed about him, Rostopchin suddenly turned pale and, instead
At the moment when Vereshchagin fell and the crowd closed in with savage

trailed twisting along the ground. The crowd shrank back from it.
ground. The gory, dust-stained, half-shaven head with its long neck
Two dragoons took it by its distorted legs and dragged it along the
his excellency's courtyard unseemly, told the dragoons to take it away.
A painstaking police officer, considering the presence of a corpse in

livid face stained with blood and dust.
distress at the dead body with its long, thin, half-severed neck and its
they afraid of sinning?..." said the same mob now, looking with pained
beaten too--they say he's nearly done for.... Oh, the people... Aren't
one.... How not the right one?... O Lord! And there's another has been
have been a merchant's son. What men!... and they say he's not the right
in the crowd could be heard saying. "Quite a young fellow too... must
"O Lord! The people are like wild beasts! How could he be alive?" voices

astonishment pushed back again.
up, glanced at what had been done, and with horror, reproach, and
bleeding corpse begin rapidly to change places. Each one came
long-drawn, measured death rattle did the crowd around his prostrate,
Only when the victim ceased to struggle and his cries changed to a

right. Use the hatchet!... What--still alive?"
Still alive... tenacious... serves him right! Torture serves a thief
"Hit him with an ax, eh!... Crushed?... Traitor, he sold Christ....

let him go.
in the center and rendering it impossible for them either to kill him or
him, for the crowd pressed from all sides, swaying as one mass with them
hitting, throttling, and tearing at Vereshchagin were unable to kill
which the mob tried to end the work that had been begun, those who were
almost to death. And for a long time, despite the feverish haste with
time before the dragoons could extricate the bleeding youth, beaten
rescue the tall lad only increased the fury of the crowd. It was a long
screams of those that were being trampled on and of those who tried to
Some beat and tore at Vereshchagin, others at the tall youth. And the

crowd.
yelling wildly, fell with him under the feet of the pressing, struggling
against whom he stumbled, seized his thin neck with his hands and,
his head with his hands, rushed toward the crowd. The tall youth,
about to repeat his blow. Vereshchagin with a cry of horror, covering
carrying them off their feet and engulfing them all. The dragoon was
last irresistible wave burst from the rear and reached the front ranks,
of the crowd. Like the seventh and last wave that shatters a ship, that
plaintive moan of reproach was drowned by the threatening and angry roar
check suddenly broke. The crime had begun and must now be completed. The
of human feeling, strained to the utmost, that had held the crowd in
he uttered a plaintive cry of pain, and that cry was fatal. The barrier
But after the exclamation of surprise that had escaped from Vereshchagin

exclaimed a sorrowful voice.
similar moan of surprise and horror ran through the crowd. "O Lord!"
frightened glance as if not understanding why this was done to him. A
"Ah!" cried Vereshchagin in meek surprise, looking round with a

struck Vereshchagin on the head with the blunt side of his saber.
And one of the soldiers, his face all at once distorted with fury,

"Saber him!" the dragoon officer almost whispered.

beside Vereshchagin.
youth, with a stony look on his face, and rigid and uplifted arm, stood
front ranks carried it swaying to the very steps of the porch. The tall
Another still stronger wave flowed through the crowd and reaching the

"Draw sabers!" cried the dragoon officer, drawing his own.

pale like Vereshchagin.
"Cut him down! I command it..." shouted Rostopchin, suddenly growing

He did not finish what he wished to say.

filled with blood and the color rapidly came and went in his face.
both...." He lifted his head and again the thick vein in his thin neck
midst of the momentary silence that ensued, "Count! One God is above us
"Count!" exclaimed the timid yet theatrical voice of Vereshchagin in the

the crowd moaned and heaved forward, but again paused.
Hearing not so much the words as the angry tone of Rostopchin's voice,

shouted Rostopchin. "Cut him down. I command it."
"Beat him!... Let the traitor perish and not disgrace the Russian name!"

and held back the crowd that was pushing behind them.
stood with wide open eyes and mouths, straining with all their strength,
in front, who had seen and heard what had taken place before them, all
uncomprehended, and terrible, was becoming unbearable. Those standing
atmosphere, to be unable to stir, and to await something unknown,
one another. To keep one another back, to breathe in that stifling
The crowd remained silent and only pressed closer and closer to

"Deal with him as you think fit! I hand him over to you."

arm and addressed the people, almost shouting:
the same submissive attitude. As if inflamed by the sight, he raised his
but suddenly he glanced down at Vereshchagin who continued to stand in
he has caused Moscow to perish," said Rostopchin in a sharp, even voice,
Bonaparte. He alone of all the Russians has disgraced the Russian name,
"He has betrayed his Tsar and his country, he has gone over to

and timidly, and lowering his head shifted his feet on the step.
hopeful by the expression he read on the faces there, he smiled sadly
All eyes were fixed on him. He looked at the crowd, and rendered more

cord and went blue behind the ear, and suddenly his face flushed.
not look at him. A vein in the young man's long thin neck swelled like a
wishing to say something or at least to meet his eye. But Rostopchin did
the count's first words he raised it slowly and looked up at him as if
face, disfigured by the half-shaven head, hung down hopelessly. At
submissive attitude, his fingers clasped before him. His emaciated young
The young man in the fur-lined coat, stooping a little, stood in a

Vereshchagin, is the scoundrel by whose doing Moscow is perishing."
"Lads!" said he, with a metallic ring in his voice. "This man,

stood frowning and rubbing his face with his hand.
While waiting for the young man to take his place on the step Rostopchin

of feet be heard.
all pressing toward the one spot, could sighs, groans, and the shuffling
the silence continued. Only among the back rows of the people, who were
For several seconds while the young man was taking his place on the step

submissively folded before him his thin hands, unused to work.
his neck, turned his long neck twice this way and that, sighed, and
indicated, holding away with one finger the coat collar which chafed
The young man in his clattering chains stepped clumsily to the spot

"Put him there."
man in the fur-lined coat and pointing to the bottom step of the porch.
"Ah!" said Rostopchin, hurriedly turning away his eyes from the young

movements.
On his thin, weak legs were heavy chains which hampered his irresolute
trousers, over which were pulled his thin, dirty, trodden-down boots.
lined with fox fur, that had once been smart, and dirty hempen convict
short hair. This young man was dressed in a threadbare blue cloth coat
neck, and his head, that had been half shaved, was again covered by
round the corner of the house between two dragoons. He had a long thin
"Where is he?" he inquired. And as he spoke he saw a young man coming

with quick angry steps, looked hastily around as if seeking someone.
eagerly from the balcony toward the porch. Rostopchin, coming out there
gave an order, and the dragoons formed up in line. The crowd moved
A few minutes later an officer came hurriedly out of the front door,

another for their lack of confidence.
He'll show you what law is!" the mob were saying as if reproving one
settle with all the villains, you'll see! And you said the French...
A murmur of approbation and satisfaction ran through the crowd. "He'll

behind him.
And the count stepped as briskly back into the room and slammed the door

Moscow. Wait for me!"
with the villain. We must punish the villain who has caused the ruin of
coming. I'll come out to you in a moment, but we must first settle
"Good morning, lads!" said the count briskly and loudly. "Thank you for

were raised to the count.
The talking instantly ceased, hats and caps were doffed, and all eyes
And rapidly opening the door he went resolutely out onto the balcony.

"Ah!" exclaimed Rostopchin, as if struck by an unexpected recollection.

waiting at the porch," said the adjutant.
"Yes, your excellency. What are your orders about Vereshchagin? He is

"Is the carriage ready?" he asked again.

something on which to vent his rage.
thought occurred to him just because he himself desired a victim,
he thought as he looked at the tall lad flourishing his arm. And this
"this rabble they have roused by their folly! They want a victim,"
that mob, the dregs of the people," he thought as he gazed at the crowd:
anger but was still seeking an object on which to vent it. "Here is
attributed. As often happens with passionate people, he was mastered by
within him against the someone to whom what was happening might be
with me!" thought he, full of an irrepressible fury that welled up
"This is what they have done with Russia! This is what they have done

He stood by the balcony door looking at the crowd.

Rostopchin angrily.
"You may go. I don't need you to tell me what to do!" exclaimed

managed to get away from it. Your excellency, I venture to suggest..."
treachery. But it is a turbulent crowd, your excellency--I hardly
orders, to go against the French, and they shouted something about
"Your excellency, they say they have got ready, according to your

"But what do they want?" he asked the superintendent of police.

Rostopchin went again to the balcony door.

"It is, your excellency," replied the adjutant.

"Is my carriage ready?" asked Rostopchin, stepping back from the window.

audible through the closed window.
stained smith stood beside him with a gloomy face. A drone of voices was
flourishing his arm and saying something with a stern look. The blood
better view of the whole crowd. The tall lad was standing in front,
handle, let it go again, and went to the window from which he had a
luxurious drawing room, went to the balcony door, took hold of the
Without saying a word Rostopchin rose and walked hastily to his light,

courtyard and wished to see him.
received, informed the count that an immense crowd had collected in the
police, after reporting that he had executed the instructions he had
horses were harnessed. They were both pale, and the superintendent of
see him at the same time as an adjutant who informed the count that the
The superintendent of police, whom the crowd had stopped, went in to

Rostopchin felt this, and it was this which exasperated him.

useless, feeble man.
of appearing a ruler and a source of power, becomes an insignificant,
reaches the moving vessel, and suddenly the administrator, instead
independently with its own enormous motion, the boat hook no longer
the ship to move, such a delusion is no longer possible. The ship moves
on to. But as soon as a storm arises and the sea begins to heave and
moving, naturally imagines that his efforts move the ship he is holding
holding on with a boat hook to the ship of the people and himself
sea of history remains calm the ruler-administrator in his frail bark,
administrator finds the chief reward of his labor and efforts. While the
kept going, and in this consciousness of being indispensable every
is only by his efforts that the whole population under his rule is
In quiet and untroubled times it seems to every administrator that it

in his study with folded hands, morose, sallow, and taciturn.
The count ordered his carriage that he might drive to Sokolniki, and sat

who remained behind decided for themselves what they must do.
Those who were able to get away were going of their own accord, those
through Moscow, nobody came to the count any more for instructions.
Toward nine o'clock in the morning, when the troops were already moving


CHAPTER XXV





him to me!"
"Vereshchagin! Hasn't he been hanged yet?" shouted Rostopchin. "Bring

Vereshchagin..."
"Your excellency, there are some political prisoners, Meshkov,

a convoy? Release them, that's all about it!"
"Do you expect me to give you two battalions--which we have not got--for

Rostopchin shouted angrily at the governor:
In reply to an inquiry about the convicts in the prison, Count

these other madmen to be free."
out into the town. When lunatics command our armies God evidently means
"My commands? Let them go away, that's all.... And let the lunatics

what are your commands?"
"Your excellency, the superintendent of the lunatic asylum has come:

horses, let them be off to Vladimir, and not leave them to the French."
Now why are you asking silly questions about the Fire Brigade? They have
Registrar's Department, "that he should remain to guard his documents.
"Oh, tell that blockhead," he said in reply to the question from the

would have to bear the whole responsibility for all that might happen.
prepared by him, had now been ruined by somebody, and that that somebody
orders from him were not now needed, that the whole affair, carefully
To all these inquiries he gave brief and angry replies indicating that

being received by the count.
lunatic asylum..." All night long such announcements were continually
From the governor of the prison... from the superintendent of the
asking for information.... What are your orders about the Fire Brigade?
University, from the Foundling Hospital, the Suffragan has sent...
for instructions... From the Consistory, from the Senate, from the
"Your excellency, the Director of the Registrar's Department has sent

so morose and irritable.
him from all parts of Moscow. Those about him had never seen the count
All that night Count Rostopchin issued orders, for which people came to

which he found himself.
they might be who were to blame for the false and ridiculous position in
traitors were, but feeling it necessary to hate those traitors whoever
Traitors!" he thought, without clearly defining who the villains and
firmly in hand. And this is what they have let it come to! Villains!
ruminated. "Not I, of course. I had everything ready. I had Moscow
"Who is to blame for it? Who has let things come to such a pass?" he

longer possible to take the whole of it away.
property which he should have removed, was still in Moscow and it was no
to blame. All that he had been specially put in charge of, the state
from Kutuzov, he felt the more irritated the more he felt himself
When, awakened from his sleep, he received that cold, peremptory note

weak, and alone, with no ground to stand on.
suddenly appeared senseless. He unexpectedly felt himself ridiculous,
the depth of their national feeling, then the role chosen by Rostopchin
abandoning their belongings and proving by that negative action all
Moscow, when the whole population streamed out of Moscow as one man,
self-confidence was of no avail in relation to the one question before
even possible to express that hatred by fighting a battle, when
hatred for the French in words proved insufficient, when it was not
But when events assumed their true historical character, when expressing

hatred of the French.
directed toward arousing in the masses his own feeling of patriotic
and had any effect on the people is another question) had been simply
All his painstaking and energetic activity (in how far it was useful

did not adapt himself mentally to this new position of affairs.
knew it only with his intellect, he did not believe it in his heart and
imagination, though he had long known that Moscow would be abandoned he
for himself. As is often the case with those gifted with an ardent
yielded reluctantly. He was absorbed in the role he had created
removed, this was only done on the demand of officials to whom the count
inhabitants left against his wishes. If the government offices were
that Moscow would be abandoned, and did not prepare for it. The
it was coming, he did not till the last moment wholeheartedly believe
his feet, so that he positively did not know what to do. Though he knew
took him unawares and he suddenly felt the ground slip away from under
relinquishing that role and abandoning Moscow without any heroic display
popular feeling, and had grown so used to it, that the necessity of
authority. Rostopchin was so pleased with the fine role of leader of
people despise in their own class and do not understand from those in
means of his broadsheets and posters, written in a coarse tone which the
inhabitants, but he also thought he controlled their mental attitude by
administrators) that he controlled the external actions of Moscow's
of "the heart of Russia." Not only did it seem to him (as to all
imagination been playing the role of director of the popular feeling
be guiding. Ever since the enemy's entry into Smolensk he had in
and had no understanding at all of the people he supposed himself to
impulsive man who had always moved in the highest administrative circles
Rostopchin, though he had patriotic sentiments, was a sanguine and

population plainly that the town would be abandoned.
the holy relics, the gunpowder, munitions, and money, and had told the
by distributing arms and broadsheets had taken steps to remove all
certain or at least probable, Rostopchin instead of exciting the people
if after the battle of Borodino, when the surrender of Moscow became
have been even less reason to expect a disturbance among the people
there at his bidding, nothing happened. It is obvious that there would
September, and except for a mob in the governor's courtyard, assembled
ten thousand people were still in Moscow on the first and second of
insurrection ever occur when the enemy entered a town. More than
Neither in Moscow nor anywhere in Russia did anything resembling an

riot?
retreating troops were filling it. Why should that cause the masses to
of an uprising in the city? The inhabitants were leaving it and the
Moscow based in 1812? What reason was there for assuming any probability
On what, then, was Count Rostopchin's fear for the tranquillity of

public tranquillity.
All the horrors of the reign of terror were based only on solicitude for

finds a justification.
One need only admit that public tranquillity is in danger and any action
articles removed?" "To leave the town empty," explains Count Rostopchin.
papers from the government offices, and Leppich's balloon and other
of the city," explains Count Rostopchin. "Why were bundles of useless
not be given up--and thereby ruined?" "To preserve the tranquillity
were thousands of inhabitants deceived into believing that Moscow would
the arms, ammunition, gunpowder, and stores of corn not removed? Why
Rostopchin's actions appear irreproachable. "Why were the holy relics,
departure of the inhabitants. If one accepts this twofold aim all
considerations: to maintain tranquillity in Moscow and expedite the
this time, he repeatedly says that he was then actuated by two important
When later on in his memoirs Count Rostopchin explained his actions at

in on his beauty sleep.
simple note with an order from Kutuzov, and received at night, breaking
astonished and irritated the count, coming as it did in the form of a
with Rostopchin's own permission. Yet all the same this information
removed every night, and half the inhabitants had left the city
fight another battle, and since then the government property had been
Moscow after that battle had said unanimously that it was impossible to
ever since the battle of Borodino, for all the generals who came to
his interview the previous day with Kutuzov on the Poklonny Hill but
Rostopchin. He had known that Moscow would be abandoned not merely since
was retreating to the Ryazan road beyond Moscow. This was not news to
send police officers to guide the troops through the town, as the army
bringing him a letter from Kutuzov. This letter requested the count to
without undressing, and was awakened soon after midnight by a courier
Rostopchin had returned to Moscow. After supper he lay down on a sofa
unimportant matters. Distressed, offended, and surprised by all this,
patriotic fervor as not merely secondary but quite irrelevant and
at the camp, which treated the tranquillity of the capital and its
defense of the city; amazed also at the novel outlook revealed to him
because Kutuzov had paid no attention to his offer to take part in the
because he had not been invited to attend the council of war, and
Kutuzov, Count Rostopchin had returned to Moscow mortified and offended
On the evening of the first of September, after his interview with


CHAPTER XXIV





more and more frequently.
perish. Do they think we're dogs?" voices in the crowd were heard saying
"There now, the gentry and merchants have gone away and left us to

in the direction of the Lubyanka Street.
Following the superintendent of police and talking loudly the crowd went

different people and the people dashed in pursuit of the trap.
youth. "Don't let him go, lads! Let him answer us! Keep him!" shouted
"It's a fraud, lads! Lead the way to him, himself!" shouted the tall

speed.
look, said something to his coachman, and his horses increased their
The superintendent of police turned round at that moment with a scared

superintendent had said, and looking at the departing trap.
The crowd halted, pressing around those who had heard what the

his coachman.
concerning you," said the superintendent of police. "Go on!" he ordered
"The count has not left, he is here, and an order will be issued

riot, but as his highest excellence said..."
desire to serve, not sparing their lives, and it is not any kind of
accord with the proclamation of his highest excellency the count, they
"Your honor..." replied the shopman in the frieze coat, "your honor, in

"What people are these?" he shouted again, receiving no answer.

and timidly in the direction of his trap.
"What people are these?" he shouted to the men, who were moving singly

stop.
pocket, on seeing a crowd bearing down upon him told his coachman to
matter acquired a large sum of money which was at that moment in his
Rostopchin's orders to burn the barges and had in connection with that
The superintendent of police, who had gone that morning by Count

mounted dragoons.
superintendent's trap which drove into the square attended by two
suddenly heard saying, and the general attention turned to the police
Why not? He'll explain"... voices in the rear of the crowd were
"We should ask him... that's he himself?"... "Yes, ask him indeed!...

swayed from side to side.
They all stood despondent and silent. The tall youth moved his lips and

not say.
therefore was what an ukase emanating from the highest authority should
comprehensible--it was what any one of them might have said and
were tuned to a high pitch and this was too simple and needlessly
evidently displeased both reader and audience. The people's minds
the last part. In particular, the words "I will come back to dinner,"
lad hung his head gloomily. It was evident that no one had understood
The last words were read out in the midst of complete silence. The tall

scoundrels."
dinner, and we'll set to work. We will do, completely do, and undo these
them, and will send these visitors to the devil. I will come back to
"he's going to clear up the whole affair for you...."), "in destroying
went on, and then paused ("Do you see," shouted the youth victoriously,
to exterminate these scoundrels. We too will take part..." the reader
a frown on his brow), "to consult with him to act, and to aid the army
Highness," said the tall fellow with a triumphant smile on his lips and
"Early tomorrow I shall go to his Serene Highness," he read ("Sirin

tremulous voice to read the sheet from the beginning.
of the tall lad who had pushed his way up to him, he began in a rather
the crowd collected round him he seemed confused, but at the demand
The man in the frieze coat was reading the broadsheet of August 31 When

the crowd, and the people rushed toward the reader.
"An ukase, they are reading an ukase! Reading an ukase!" cried voices in

a man in a frieze coat who held a paper in his hand.
By the wall of China-Town a smaller group of people were gathered round

saying," said some of the mob pointing to the tall youth.
what the government is for. You'd better listen to what people are
Aren't there plenty of troops on the march? Let him in, indeed! That's
up Moscow like this? They told you that for fun, and you believed it!
"Why talk nonsense?" rejoined voices in the crowd. "Will they give

one do without government? Or else there would be plenty who'd rob us."
scarcely perceptible smile. "He thinks there's no government! How can
for. Am I not right, good Christians?" said the tall youth, with a
"He must keep order, keep the law, that's what the government is there

answers from him to the questions that occupied all their minds.
to himself. It was around him that the people chiefly crowded, expecting
bare arm and went on talking incessantly, attracting general attention
The tall youth, not noticing the disappearance of his foe, waved his

increased crowd, dropped behind and returned to his tavern.
Questions and answers were heard. The publican, taking advantage of the

Look what folks are saying."
"I say, is it true that we have been beaten?" "And what did you think?

"Why, to the police, of course!"

"Where are all the folks going?"

crowd.
speaking, and with eager curiosity all the bootmakers joined the moving
On seeing the crowd and the bloodstained man the workman ceased

he's made off."
misleading us all the week and now that he's brought us to this pass
"But he's sucked our blood and now he thinks he's quit of us. He's been

brows and a straggly beard, was saying.
"He should pay folks off properly," a thin workingman, with frowning

coats.
worn-out, gloomy-faced bootmakers, wearing overalls and long tattered
shutters and bearing a bootmaker's signboard, stood a score of thin,
At the corner of the Moroseyka, opposite a large house with closed

followed behind, talking and shouting.
The bloodstained smith went beside them. The factory hands and others

together.
fellow repeated one after the other, and they moved up the street
"Come along then! Come along then!" the publican and the tall young

anybody now a days!" shouted the publican, picking up his cap.
of police. You think I won't get to him? Robbery is not permitted to
"I know the law very well, mates! I'll take the matter to the captain

workmen surrounding the publican paused in indecision.
As if this action had some mysterious and menacing significance, the

flung it on the ground.
away the men advancing on him, and snatching his cap from his head he
"I daresay you would like to bind me!" shouted the publican, pushing

"Murderer!" he shouted suddenly to the publican. "Bind him, lads!"

fight now.
publican to the smith and back again as if considering whom he ought to
The tall lad, standing in the porch, turned his bleared eyes from the

thief?"
voice addressing the publican. "What have you killed a man for, you
"Haven't you robbed people enough--taking their last shirts?" said a

A crowd gathered round the bloodstained smith.

coming out of a gate close by.
"Oh, gracious me, a man beaten to death--killed!..." screamed a woman

They've killed a man, lads!"
face to make it bleed, shouted in a tearful voice: "Police! Murder!...
At that moment the first smith got up and, scratching his bruised

cried wildly: "They're fighting us, lads!"
The lad with the turned-up sleeve gave the smith a blow in the face and

with his chest.
Another smith tried to enter the doorway, pressing against the publican

keeper, fell face downward on the pavement.
workmen came out the smith, wrenching himself free from the tavern
The publican was fighting one of the smiths at the door, and when the

to force their way in too and a fight in the porch had resulted.
revelry in the tavern and supposing it to have been broken into, wished
them. The blacksmiths from a neighboring smithy, hearing the sounds of
publican some skins from the factory and for this had had drink served
the tall lad were drinking in the dramshop that morning, had brought the
The factory hands followed him. These men, who under the leadership of

still rolling up his sleeve, he went out to the porch.
"Stop it!" he exclaimed peremptorily. "There's a fight, lads!" And,

in the passage and porch. The tall lad waved his arm.
bare. In the midst of the song cries were heard, and fighting and blows
most important that the sinewy white arm he was flourishing should be
always carefully rolled it up again with his left hand, as if it were
out his dirty fingers. The sleeve of his coat kept slipping down and he
arm with the sleeve turned up to the elbow, trying unnaturally to spread
singing, and solemnly and jerkily flourished above their heads his white
eyes. Evidently possessed by some idea, he stood over those who were
been for his thin, compressed, twitching lips and dull, gloomy, fixed
face with its fine straight nose would have been handsome had it not
fair-haired lad in a clean blue coat, was standing over the others. His
they wanted to show they were drunk and on a spree. One, a tall,
great effort, evidently not because they wished to sing, but because
some song or other. They were singing discordantly, arduously, and with
with dim eyes and wide-open mouths, they were all laboriously singing
in a dirty little room sat some ten factory hands. Tipsy and perspiring,
a dramshop, came drunken shouts and songs. On benches round the tables
From an unfinished house on the Varvarka, the ground floor of which was


CHAPTER XXIII





motherly tenderness and pity for the unknown young officer.
eyes, pensively swaying her head and feeling an unexpected flow of
But Mavra Kuzminichna stood at the closed gate for some time with moist

overtake his regiment.
almost at a trot through the deserted streets toward the Yauza bridge to
Swaying his head and smiling as if amused at himself, the officer ran

she, bowing as she saw him out.
apologetically. "Christ be with you, sir! May God preserve you!" said
"If the count had been at home..." Mavra Kuzminichna went on

decline, but took the note quietly and thanked her.
Mavra Kuzminichna grew abashed and confused. The officer did not

but as it is..."
"If his excellency had been at home, as a kinsman he would of course...

twenty-five-ruble assignat and hastily handed it to him.
the officer she unfolded the kerchief and took out of it a white
rolled-up check kerchief in her hand. While still a few steps from
the corner of the house with a frightened yet resolute look, carrying a
gate?" thought he. Just then Mavra Kuzminichna appeared from behind
to overtake my regiment, which must by now be getting near the Rogozhski
woman! Where has she run off to? And how am I to find the nearest way
smile on his lips. "What a pity I've missed Uncle! What a nice old
the yard gazing at his worn-out boots with lowered head and a faint
While Mavra Kuzminichna was running to her room the officer walked about

servants' quarters.
hurrying away on her old legs, went through the back yard to the
And as soon as the officer let go of the gate handle she turned and,

"Just wait a minute, sir. One little moment," said she.

Mavra Kuzminichna did not let him finish.

have no money, so I was going to ask the count..."
good-natured smile at his coat and boots) "my things are worn out and I
been very kind to me. As you see" (he glanced with an amused air and
"You see," he suddenly said, "I am a kinsman of the count's and he has

He again paused in indecision.

placed his hand on the gate as if to leave.
"Oh well... it can't be helped!" said he in a tone of vexation and

"What did you want to see the count for?" she asked.

tattered coat and trodden-down boots.
examining the familiar Rostov features of the young man's face, his
Meanwhile, Mavra Kuzminichna was attentively and sympathetically

what a pity."
"Ah, how annoying!" he muttered. "I should have come yesterday.... Ah,

enter or not, clicked his tongue.
The young officer standing in the gateway, as if hesitating whether to

Mavra Kuzminichna cordially.
"They have gone away, sir. Went away yesterday at vespertime," said

round face of a Rostov, entered the yard.
Mavra Kuzminichna opened the gate and an officer of eighteen, with the

Russian voice.
"An officer, I have to see him," came the reply in a pleasant, well-bred

"And who are you?"

"The count--Count Ilya Andreevich Rostov."

"Who do you want?"

Mavra Kuzminichna went to the gate.
stopped at the gate, and the latch rattled as someone tried to open it.
She heard the sound of quick footsteps in the quiet street. Someone

storeroom to put away what still lay about.
next--to drink tea in the servants' wing with Vasilich, or into the
Going out into the yard she paused to consider where she should go

with a deep sigh left the drawing room and locked its main door.
Mavra Kuzminichna flicked the dust off the clavichord and closed it, and

boil for your grandfather."
Kuzminichna, raising her arm threateningly. "Go and get the samovar to
"I'll give you something gently, you monkey you!" cried Mavra

"Aunt, I did it gently," said the boy.

meekly downcast eyes.
Ignat left off smiling, adjusted his belt, and went out of the room with

Vasilich is worn out. Just you wait a bit!"
Is that what you're here for? Nothing's cleared away down there and
Kuzminichna who had entered silently. "How he's grinning, the fat mug!
"Impudence! Impudence!" they heard behind them the voice of Mavra

face in the mirror.
"Only fancy!" answered Ignat, surprised at the broadening grin on his

strike the keyboard with both hands.
"Isn't it fine, eh, Uncle Ignat?" said the boy, suddenly beginning to

satisfaction before the large mirror.
one finger. The yard porter, his arms akimbo, stood smiling with
Mishka had opened the clavichord and was strumming on it with
Vasilich's grandson who had stayed in Moscow with his grandfather.
two people. They were the yard porter Ignat, and the page boy Mishka,
room of the house, which had been left with all it contained, were
horses, and not a soul was to be seen there. In the great drawing
Rostovs' house was littered with wisps of hay and with dung from the
Povarskaya was quite still and deserted. The huge courtyard of the
drove through the streets and footsteps were rarely heard. The
the taverns solitary shouts or drunken songs could be heard. Nobody
streets. The gates and shops were all closed, only here and there round
Meanwhile, the city itself was deserted. There was hardly anyone in the


CHAPTER XXII





were now moving forward.
and squeezing desperately, had cleared off the bridge and the troops
bridge. The crowd, crushing one another, upsetting carts, and shouting
had ordered two guns to be unlimbered and made a show of firing at the
dispersing among the shops while crowds of civilians blocked the bridge,
General Ermolov, coming up to the crowd and learning that soldiers were
of the crowd and the shrieks of the woman were due to the fact that
desperate shrieks. He was told by his fellow officers that the screams
with its legs in the air, sat a peasant woman uttering piercing and
The cart was loaded high, and at the very top, beside a child's chair
harnessed. Four borzois with collars were pressing close to the wheels.
troops. Beside the cannon a cart was standing to which two horses were
several overturned carts, and frightened and laughing faces among the
bridge he saw two unlimbered guns, the infantry crossing the bridge,
The officer mounted his horse and rode after him. When he reached the

screams came.
galloping off past Vasili the Beatified in the direction from which the
"What is it? What is it?" he asked, but his comrade was already

bridge and the officer ran out into the square.
moment fearful screams reached them from the huge crowd on the Moskva
officer pounced on the soldiers who were in the shops, but at that
This man, bent double, rushed past the tradesman and the officer. The

flung out violently.
as the officer came up to it a man in a gray coat with a shaven head was
From one open shop came the sound of blows and vituperation, and just

the passages.
"It's not my business!" he exclaimed, and strode on quickly down one of

The officer stood perplexed and his face showed indecision.

"Come inside, your honor!" repeated the tradesman, bowing.

has gone? Eh, what people! 'Against God's might our hands can't fight.'"
hundred thousand rubles' worth of goods. Can they be saved when the army
"Talk indeed!" cried the thin one. "In my three shops here I have a

tradesman angrily. "Please step inside, your honor!"
"It's all very well for you, Ivan Sidorych, to talk," said the first

officer.
like!" And flourishing his arm energetically he turned sideways to the
one's head is gone one doesn't weep for one's hair! Take what any of you
"Eh, what twaddle!" said one of them, a thin, stern-looking man. "When

Several shopkeepers crowded round the officer.

to let us close the shop...."
this--sheer robbery! If you please, could not guards be placed if only
or even two pieces with pleasure. For we feel how it is; but what's all
I'll fetch a piece of cloth at once for such an honorable gentleman,
trifles, you are welcome to anything--we shall be delighted! Pray!...
"Your honor!" said he. "Be so good as to protect us! We won't grudge

ostentatiously approached the officer, swinging his arms.
persistent, calculating expression on his plump face, hurriedly and
shopkeeper with red pimples on his cheeks near the nose, and a calm,
him into the arcade. Some soldiers started running away in a group. A
The officer in the scarf dismounted, called up a drummer, and went with

"Come, go in there and drive them out!" shouted the senior officer.

running away?"
don't move. Shouldn't we put a cordon round to prevent the rest from
"How can one push on? They are stuck there, wedged on the bridge, and

that's all!"
no getting them together. The army should push on before the rest bolt,
"But how are you going to stop them?" replied another officer. "There is

slipping past him into the Bazaar passage. "Stop, you rascals!"
without muskets who, holding up the skirts of their overcoats, were
"Where are you off to?... Where?..." he shouted to three infantrymen

This is outrageous! Half the men have dispersed."
"The general orders them all to be driven out at once, without fail.

Street, talking. A third officer galloped up to them.
the other in an overcoat and on foot, stood at the corner of Ilyinka
with a scarf over his uniform and mounted on a lean, dark-gray horse,
to be seen in gray coats, with closely shaven heads. Two officers, one
farther away. Among the soldiers in the shops and passages some men were
direction of the drum as formerly, but made them, on the contrary, run
But the roll of the drums did not make the looting soldiers run in the
square in front of the Bazaar were drummers beating the muster call.
themselves carried goods away with the help of their assistants. On the
bewildered. They unlocked their shops and locked them up again, and
(of whom there were but few) moved about among the soldiers quite
out through its passages with bundles. Tradesmen and their assistants
muskets, entering the Bazaar empty-handed and silently making their way
purchasers--but only soldiers, in uniforms and overcoats though without
enter; there were no hawkers, nor the usual motley crowd of female
dealers with voices of ingratiating affability inviting customers to
filled all the passages and alleys of the Bazaar. But there were no
things not belonging to them. Crowds of the kind seen at cheap sales
to the Red Square where some instinct told them they could easily take
Vasili the Beatified and under the Borovitski gate, back up the hill
from the bridges and slipped stealthily and silently past the church of
soldiers, taking advantage of the stoppage and congestion, turned back
Kremlin, were thronging the Moskva and the Stone bridges, a great many
While the troops, dividing into two parts when passing around the

Stone, Moskva, and Yauza bridges.
The greatest crush during the movement of the troops took place at the

last of the inhabitants who were leaving.
till two in the afternoon and bore away with them the wounded and the
The Russian troops were passing through Moscow from two o'clock at night


CHAPTER XXI





The coup de theatre had not come off.

suburb.
He did not drive into the town, but put up at an inn in the Dorogomilov

event!"
suburb. "Moscow deserted!" he said to himself. "What an incredible
He took his seat beside the aide-de-camp on duty and drove into the

"My carriage!" he said.

continued to walk to and fro.
empty, he looked angrily at his informant, turned away, and silently
When with due circumspection Napoleon was informed that Moscow was

were doing.
moving about, following their old habits and hardly aware of what they
In various corners of Moscow there still remained a few people aimlessly

the proprieties--a deputation.
awaiting what to his mind was a necessary, if but formal, observance of
morose, paced up and down in front of the Kammer-Kollezski rampart,
So in the same way Moscow was empty when Napoleon, weary, uneasy, and

on it, and when he has time tears out its contents and burns it clean.
as lightly as fish scales. The beekeeper closes the hive, chalks a mark
hand, lacking the spirit to die stinging him; the rest are dead and fall
a few of them still move, rise, and feebly fly to settle on the enemy's
had guarded and which is now no more. They reek of decay and death. Only
bees. They have almost all died unawares, sitting in the sanctuary they
of generation, he sees hundreds of dull, listless, and sleepy shells of
thousands of bees sitting back to back and guarding the high mystery
the brood cells. In place of the former close dark circles formed by
of corpses. The keeper opens the two center partitions to examine
killed, drops from above slowly and lightly as a feather, among the heap
some victim and fight and smother it, and the victim, enfeebled or
intent. In a third place a crowd of bees, crushing one another, attack
without themselves knowing whether they do it with friendly or hostile
are languidly fighting, or cleaning themselves, or feeding one another,
bumblebee without knowing why they do it. In another corner two old bees
efforts beyond their strength laboriously drag away a dead bee or
bees, by force of habit and custom cleaning out the brood cells, with
an angry buzzing can sometimes be heard. Here and there a couple of
flight. Here and there among the cells containing dead brood and honey
and butterflies knock awkwardly against the walls of the hive in their
having lost all motive and all sense of life. Drones, bumblebees, wasps,
were old, creep slowly about without trying to hinder the robbers,
the combs, and the short home bees, shriveled and listless as if they
and foul. Black robber bees are swiftly and stealthily prowling about
combs, but no longer in their former state of purity. All is neglected
keeping the brood warm, he sees the skillful complex structures of the
Instead of serried rows of bees sealing up every gap in the combs and
The beekeeper opens the upper part of the hive and examines the super.

away.
scarcely moving their legs, and dead ones that have not been cleared
there is a floor littered with bits of wax, excrement, dying bees
neatly glued floor, swept by the bees with the fanning of their wings,
in various directions on the floor and walls of the hive. Instead of a
the floor of the hive, drowsy shriveled bees crawl about separately
ceaseless hum of labor--that used to hang in long clusters down to
toil, clinging to one another's legs and drawing out the wax, with a
part of the hive and peers in. Instead of black, glossy bees--tamed by
flew out empty; now they fly out laden. The beekeeper opens the lower
danger. Formerly only bees laden with honey flew into the hive, and they
honey fly timidly and shiftily. They do not sting, but crawl away from
disorder. In and out of the hive long black robber bees smeared with
like the sound of boiling water, but diverse discordant sounds of
hive. There is no longer the measured quiet sound of throbbing activity,
alarm with their abdomens raised, and ready to die in defense of the
with the smell of honey. There are no longer sentinels sounding the
whiffs of crowded life, comes an odor of emptiness and decay mingling
of the former spirituous fragrant smell of honey and venom, and the warm
different parts of the deserted hive. From the alighting board, instead
aerial living sound, the only reply is a disconnected buzzing from
compressed, and producing by the rapid vibration of their wings an
humming of tens of thousands of bees with their abdomens threateningly
wall of the sick hive, instead of the former instant unanimous
that meet the beekeeper are not the same. To the beekeeper's tap on the
life in it. The bees do not fly in the same way, the smell and the sound
has only to observe that hive to realize that there is no longer any
honey like the others, and bees fly in and out in the same way. But one
sun as gaily as around the living hives; from a distance it smells of
The bees circle round a queenless hive in the hot beams of the midday

seems as much alive as other hives.
In a queenless hive no life is left though to a superficial glance it

It was empty in the sense that a dying queenless hive is empty.
fiftieth part of its former inhabitants had remained, but it was empty.
Meanwhile Moscow was empty. There were still people in it, perhaps a


CHAPTER XX





the deputation.
horse, paced for a long time by the Kammer-Kollezski rampart, awaiting
the Dorogomilov gate, but there again stopped and, dismounting from his
Drawn on by the movement of his troops Napoleon rode with them as far as

of mingling shouts.
clouds of dust they raised and making the air ring with a deafening roar
one another, they moved at the double or at a trot, vanishing amid the
Tver, Kaluga, and Dorogomilov gates. Faster and faster, vying with
spread out on different sides of Moscow, moved into the city through
report of a signaling gun followed, and the troops, who were already
was beginning to lose its sublimity, gave a sign with his hand. A single
suggesting to him that the sublime moment having been too long drawn out
At last the Emperor, tired of futile expectation, his actor's instinct

ridicule...
their shoulders but not venturing to utter the implied word--le
"But it's impossible..." declared the gentlemen of the suite, shrugging

his lifted hand with a bright and proud smile.
outspread map, occasionally glancing along the road to Moscow from under
his magnanimous plans, was pacing patiently up and down before the
The position was the more awkward because the Emperor, meditating upon

suite. "But, gentlemen..."
"He will have to be told, all the same," said some gentlemen of the

told the truth.
the Emperor should first be carefully and skillfully prepared, and then
be scraped together, others disputed that opinion and maintained that
in Moscow but no one else. Some said that a deputation of some sort must
awaiting the boyars so long in vain: that there were drunken mobs left
him in the terrible position of appearing ridiculous--that he had been
seemed), but by the question how to tell the Emperor--without putting
that Moscow had been abandoned by its inhabitants (grave as that fact
together were pale and perturbed. They were not alarmed by the fact
that everyone had left it. The faces of those who were not conferring
fetch the deputation had returned with the news that Moscow was empty,
among his generals and marshals at the rear of his suite. Those sent to
Meanwhile an agitated consultation was being carried on in whispers


     * (2) "House of my Mother."

     * "My dear, my tender, my poor mother."


city so long in appearing?" he wondered.
Moscow? Yes, here it lies before me, but why is the deputation from the
be simply: Maison de ma Mere, *(2) he concluded. "But am I really in
"This establishment is dedicated to my dear mother." Or no, it should
place an inscription on all these establishments in large letters:
to ma chere, ma tendre, ma pauvre mere * --he decided that he would
all Frenchmen unable to imagine anything sentimental without a reference
And in order finally to touch the hearts of the Russians--and being like
and sit in a mosque, so in Moscow he must be beneficent like the Tsars.
on them all. He thought that, as in Africa he had to put on a burnoose
institutions in Moscow he mentally decided that he would shower favors
hearts of the people. Having learned that there were many charitable
mingle. He mentally appointed a governor, one who would win the
at the palace of the Tsars, at which Russian notables and his own would
adopt toward Moscow. In his imagination he appointed days for assemblies
He was himself carried away by the tone of magnanimity he intended to

speech was full of dignity and greatness as Napoleon understood it.
the boyars had already taken definite shape in his imagination. That
same place on the Poklonny Hill awaiting the deputation. His speech to
Two hours passed. Napoleon had lunched and was again standing in the

boyars.
A general with a brilliant suite galloped off at once to fetch the


    * "Bring the boyars to me."


"Qu'on m'amene les boyars," * said he to his suite.

Moscow? Yes, there she lies."
clearly, impressively, and majestically. But can it be true that I am in
presence will inspire me, and I shall speak to them as I always do:
the peace and welfare of all my subjects.' However, I know their
monarch. 'Boyars,' I will say to them, 'I do not desire war, I desire
I do not wish to utilize the fortunes of war to humiliate an honored
Moscow I will accept terms of peace worthy of myself and of my people.
policy of their court; that I love and respect Alexander and that in
and do not, desire war, that I have waged war only against the false
their conqueror with love. I will tell the deputation that I did not,
meaning of true civilization, I will make generations of boyars remember
is the Kremlin, yes--I will give them just laws; I will teach them the
himself and Alexander.) "From the height of the Kremlin--yes, there
import of what was taking place lay in the personal struggle between
feel most painfully, I know him." (It seemed to Napoleon that the chief
words of justice and mercy.... It is just this which Alexander will
the ancient monuments of barbarism and despotism I will inscribe great
scintillating and twinkling in the sunshine. But I shall spare her. On
"Yet here she is lying at my feet, with her golden domes and crosses
no, it can't be true that I am in Moscow," he suddenly thought.
descend upon the vanquished. I must be magnanimous and truly great. But
capital of the Tsars would perish. But my clemency is always ready to
forming up. "One word from me, one movement of my hand, and that ancient
glancing at those near him and at the troops who were approaching and
"Here she is, the reward for all those fainthearted men," he reflected,
light must I appear to them!" thought he, thinking of his troops.
beautiful, and majestic city; and a strange and majestic moment! In what
feet. Where is Alexander now, and of what is he thinking? A strange,
"But could it be otherwise?" he thought. "Here is this capital at my

of possessing it agitated and awed him.
the city and now at the plan, considering its details, and the assurance
had at last been realized. In the clear morning light he gazed now at
strange to him that his long-felt wish, which had seemed unattainable,
view he gazed at the Oriental beauty he had not seen before. It seemed
thought he (he had said so to Tuchkov at Smolensk). From that point of
"A town captured by the enemy is like a maid who has lost her honor,"


     high time."
     Moscow! Here it is then at last, that famous city. It was
     * "That Asiatic city of the innumerable churches, holy


summoned Lelorgne d'Ideville, the interpreter.
dismounting he ordered a plan of Moscow to be spread out before him, and
voila done enfin, cette fameuse ville! Il etait temps," * said he, and
"Cette ville asiatique aux innombrables eglises, Moscou la sainte. La

mother city, must feel her feminine character, and Napoleon felt it.
foreigner who sees her, even if ignorant of her significance as the
Every Russian looking at Moscow feels her to be a mother; every

breathing of that great and beautiful body.
Hill perceived the throb of life in the town and felt, as it were, the
distinguish a living body from a dead one, Napoleon from the Poklonny
of its own life. By the indefinite signs which, even at a distance,
no knowledge of them. This city was evidently living with the full force
uneasy curiosity men feel when they see an alien form of life that has
he had never seen before, filled Napoleon with the rather envious and
The view of the strange city with its peculiar architecture, such as

glittering like stars in the sunlight.
churches, and she seemed to be living her usual life, her cupolas
Hill lay spaciously spread out with her river, her gardens, and her
The brightness of the morning was magical. Moscow seen from the Poklonny

held.
At ten in the morning of the second of September this weather still

delight us continually by falling from the sky.
are warm, and when in those dark warm nights, golden stars startle and
refreshed by inhaling the aromatic autumn air, when even the nights
atmosphere that the eyes smart, when the lungs are strengthened and
than in spring, when everything shines so brightly in the rare clear
always comes as a surprise, when the sun hangs low and gives more heat
memorable week, there had been the extraordinary autumn weather that
entry of the French into Moscow, during the whole of that agitating,
to the second of September, that is from the battle of Borodino to the
the panorama spread out before him. From the twenty-sixth of August
Napoleon was standing among his troops on the Poklonny Hill looking at
At that very time, at ten in the morning of the second of September,

main army was on the other side of Moscow or beyond it.
guard remained in the Dorogomilov suburb, where they had ample room. The
By ten o'clock in the morning of the second of September, only the rear

streets to the other side of Moscow.
to the fords and the boats. Kutuzov himself had driven round by side
overcame them. They all rushed forward to the bridge, onto it, and
bearing down on them from behind, and an unreasoning hurry and alarm
and blocking the streets and alleys, while endless masses of troops were
crowding and hurrying across the bridge, ascending on the opposite side
the town at the Dorogomilov bridge saw ahead of them masses of soldiers
slowly and steadily without hurry. At daybreak, however, those nearing
The first troops started at once, and during the night they marched

at night on the first of September.
Kutuzov's order to retreat through Moscow to the Ryazan road was issued


CHAPTER XIX





met the Rostovs.
way with the old man to buy the pistol at the Sukharev market that he
Gerasim had procured for him and had disinfected by steam) was on his
and hurried away. It was when Pierre (wearing the coachman's coat which
wrapped his dressing gown around him with a shamefaced and angry look
ingratiatingly at Pierre. But as soon as Pierre turned toward him he
along in his galoshes as far as the door and stopped and looked
the pistol next day. Makar Alexeevich came twice that evening shuffling
procured a coachman's coat and cap for Pierre, and promised to get him
evening--without even asking himself what they were wanted for--he
surprise, and seemed pleased to have someone to wait on. That same
accepted Pierre's taking up his residence in the house without
Gerasim, being a servant who in his time had seen many strange things,

there.
talking to himself. And he spent the night on a bed made up for him
and Gerasim heard him pacing restlessly from one corner to another and
All the rest of that day Pierre spent alone in his benefactor's study,

"Yes, your excellency," said Gerasim after thinking for a moment.

said Pierre, unexpectedly blushing.
"No, but I want something else. I want peasant clothes and a pistol,"

eat?"
"Yes, your excellency," replied Gerasim. "Will you have something to

"I beg you not to tell anyone who I am, and to do what I ask you."

"We heard so," replied the man.

know that there is going to be a battle tomorrow?"
at the old man with moist, shining, and ecstatic eyes, "I say, do you
here," he added, taking Gerasim by a button of his coat and looking down
"Oh yes!" said Pierre, rousing himself and rising hurriedly. "Look

"Is the cabman to be discharged, your honor?"

hear him.
slight noise at the door to attract his attention, but Pierre did not
More than two hours passed and Gerasim took the liberty of making a

always sitting in the same attitude.
Gerasim looked cautiously into the study several times and saw Pierre

sank into meditation.
closed them, finally pushed them away, and resting his head on his hand
table, and, having laid the manuscripts before him, opened them out,
with Bazdeev's notes and explanations. He sat down at the dusty writing
the holy of holies of the order. This was the authentic Scotch Acts
were kept, and took out what had once been one of the most important,
went round the study, approached the cupboard in which the manuscripts
Gerasim opened one of the shutters and left the room on tiptoe. Pierre

since the death of Joseph Bazdeev was now even gloomier.
trepidation in his benefactor's lifetime. The room, dusty and untouched
Pierre went into that gloomy study which he had entered with such

that if anyone should come from you they were to have the books."
it was sealed up so it has remained, but Sophia Danilovna gave orders
sees," said Gerasim. "Will you step into the study?" Pierre nodded. "As
"He was a very clever man but has now grown quite feeble, as your honor

he muttered something angrily and went away along the passage.
with galoshes on his bare feet, stood in the anteroom. On seeing Pierre
A tall, bald-headed old man with a red nose, wearing a dressing gown and

"Yes, yes, I know. Let us go in..." said Pierre and entered the house.

brother and a hard drinker.
Pierre knew that Makar Alexeevich was Joseph Bazdeev's half-insane

in a weak state as you know," said the old servant.
master--may the kingdom of heaven be his--has remained here, but he is
"Be so good as to step in. Makar Alexeevich, the brother of my late

Pierre.
"I will come in all the same, I have to look through the books," said

Torzhok estate with the children, your excellency."
"Owing to the present state of things Sophia Danilovna has gone to the

"At home?" asked Pierre.

years before with Joseph Bazdeev, came out in answer to his knock.
Gerasim, that sallow beardless old man Pierre had seen at Torzhok five
where he had not been for a long time past. He went up to the gate.
Having reached the Patriarch's Ponds Pierre found the Bazdeevs' house,

gates and a great battle would be fought there.
and that tomorrow everyone would be sent out beyond the Three Hills
The man told him that arms were being distributed today at the Kremlin

talk to his driver.
experiencing the joyful feeling of a boy escaping from school, began to
body so as not to slip out of the ramshackle old vehicle, Pierre,
making their way from all sides out of Moscow, and balancing his bulky
Continually turning round to look at the rows of loaded carts that were

Patriarch's Ponds, where the widow Bazdeev's house was.
He hired the first cab he met and told the driver to go to the

Bazdeev's books and papers appeared to him the most necessary.
Of all the affairs awaiting Pierre that day the sorting of Joseph

and quickening his pace went down the street.
which hides its head in a bush in order not to be seen: he hung his head
him. When he felt he was being looked at he behaved like an ostrich
the coachmen and the yard porter noticed him and raised their caps to
some carriages waiting, and as soon as Pierre stepped out of the gate
staircase and out into the yard. No one had seen him. But there were
was a second staircase leading to the back entrance. He went down that
standing at the front door. From the landing where Pierre stood there
both hands, went down as far as the first landing. The hall porter was
passage to the stairs and, frowning and rubbing his forehead with
There was no one in the passage. He went along the whole length of this
was lying on the table and went out of his study by the other door.
But as soon as the man had left the room Pierre took up his hat which

come directly," Pierre replied to the major-domo.
"Oh, yes, in a minute; wait... or no! No, of course... go and say I will

books, as she herself was leaving for the country.
Bazdeev's widow had called to ask Pierre to take charge of her husband's
was very anxious to see him if only for a minute, and that someone from
say that the Frenchman who had brought the letter from the countess
his arms, and took up a book. His major-domo came in a second time to
of the reception room and peeped through the crack, returned flourishing
down on the sofa in an attitude of despair, then rose, went to the door
position. Smiling unnaturally and muttering to himself, he first sat
wrong, the future held nothing, and there was no escape from this
was in confusion and crumbling to pieces, that nobody was right or
he was apt to succumb. He felt that everything was now at an end, all
suddenly overcome by that sense of confusion and hopelessness to which
who had brought a letter from his wife, the Countess Helene, he felt
among others awaiting him in his reception room there was a Frenchman
where he was and what was expected of him. When he was informed that
interview with Count Rostopchin, he could not for some time make out
When he woke up on the morning after his return to Moscow and his

happened.
in the empty house of his deceased benefactor, Bazdeev. This is how it
For the last two days, ever since leaving home, Pierre had been living


CHAPTER XVIII





him with her kindly, slightly quizzical, happy smile.
Natasha continued to lean out of the window for a long time, beaming at

behind the carriage he stepped onto the pavement.
no! Good-by, good-by!" he muttered. "It's an awful time!" and dropping
"Oh, don't ask me, don't ask me! I don't know myself. Tomorrow... But

"But what is the matter with you, Count? You are not like yourself...."

tomorrow..." he began, but Natasha interrupted him.
"Yes, I was," Pierre answered. "There will be another battle

"You were at the battle, we heard."

the countess interrupted him.
Pierre glanced absently at Natasha and was about to say something, but

said Natasha. "Mamma, if you'll let me, I'll stay!"
"Ah, if only I were a man? I'd certainly stay with you. How splendid!"

"In Moscow?" he said in a questioning tone. "Yes, in Moscow. Good-by!"

Pierre hesitated.

"Are you remaining in Moscow, then?"

without looking at her--filled him with enchantment.
Natasha whose radiant, happy expression--of which he was conscious
"What? What? Why? Don't ask me," said Pierre, and looked round at

commiserating tone.
"What is the matter, Count?" asked the countess in a surprised and

along beside her while the coach still moved on.
Pierre took her outstretched hand and kissed it awkwardly as he walked

Why are you like this?"
wonderful!" she cried, holding out her hand to him. "What are you doing?
"Peter Kirilovich, come here! We have recognized you! This is

kindliness.
Natasha's face, leaning out of the window, beamed with quizzical

having taken a dozen steps he seemed to remember something and stopped.
his first impulse stepped instantly and rapidly toward the coach. But
direction the old man indicated, he recognized Natasha, and following
first understand him. At length when he had understood and looked in the
to the carriage. Pierre, evidently engrossed in thought, could not at
respectfully touching Pierre's elbow said something to him and pointed
noticed a face thrust out of the carriage window gazing at them, and
small, beardless old man who looked like a footman. That old man
coat, going down the street with head bent and a serious face beside a
all saw Pierre--or someone extraordinarily like him--in a coachman's
In fact, however, though now much farther off than before, the Rostovs

on and not block the way.
more carts and carriages, and the Rostovs were being shouted at to move
But the coachman could not stop, for from the Meshchanski Street came

Stop, stop!" she cried to the coachman.
"Mamma," screamed Natasha, "I'll stake my head it's he! I assure you!

"No, it's not he. How can you talk such nonsense?"

old boy. Really," said Natasha, "look, look!"
"Yes, it really is Bezukhov in a coachman's coat, with a queer-looking

in a frieze coat.
Sukharev tower accompanied by a small, sallow-faced, beardless old man
a gentleman in disguise, and who was passing under the arch of the
long coat, who from his manner of walking and moving was evidently
out of the carriage and staring at a tall, stout man in a coachman's
"Look! Yes, on my word, it's Bezukhov!" said Natasha, putting her head

"Who? Who?"

"Dear me! Mamma, Sonya, look, it's he!"

past, suddenly cried out in joyful surprise:
inquisitively and alertly scrutinizing the people driving or walking
As they were going round the Sukharev water tower Natasha, who was

abreast.
passed along the Sadovaya Street the carriages and carts formed two rows
several other trains of vehicles similar to the Rostovs', and as they
In Kudrino, from the Nikitski, Presnya, and Podnovinsk Streets came

caleche. She knew it was right in front.
in it, but each time she looked at the procession her eyes sought that
the raised hood of Prince Andrew's caleche. She did not know who was
wounded in front of them. Almost at the head of the line she could see
carriage window and looked back and then forward at the long train of
walls of forsaken, agitated Moscow. Occasionally she leaned out of the
the carriage beside the countess and gazing at the slowly receding
Rarely had Natasha experienced so joyful a feeling as now, sitting in

walked on either side of the vehicles seeing the travelers off.
passed the church opposite the house. Those who were to remain in Moscow
carriages, the caleche, and the phaeton, all crossed themselves as they
their turn, and the procession of carriages moved up the street. In the
of the yard onto the uneven roadway; the other vehicles jolted in
sprang onto the box of the moving coach which jolted as it passed out
the high springs creaked, and the body of the coach swayed. The footman
postilion started the horses, the off pole horse tugged at his collar,
same. "Off, in God's name!" said Efim, putting on his hat. "Start!" The
began crossing himself. The postilion and all the other servants did the
and said what she had to say. Then Efim deliberately doffed his hat and
somebody was sent for a traveling case, and the countess leaned out
seated, the carriage steps were folded and pulled up, the door was shut,
who was pawing the ground and champing his bit. At last all were
patience than the horses, especially the near one, the chestnut Falcon,
all this and therefore waited calmly for what would happen, with more
him for the love of heaven to drive carefully down the hill. He knew
be stopped and the countess herself would lean out of the window and beg
something that had been forgotten, and even after that he would again
he would be stopped once or twice more while they sent back to fetch
name!" would be given him: and he knew that even when it was said
he knew it would be some time yet before the order, "Be off, in God's
round at what was going on behind him. From thirty years' experience
drive her, sat perched up high on the box and did not so much as glance
Efim, the old coachman, who was the only one the countess trusted to

"Oh, those servants!" said the count, swaying his head.

seat.
aggrieved look on her face, hastily got into the coach to rearrange the
And Dunyasha, with clenched teeth, without replying but with an

I can't sit like that?"
"They always will forget everything!" said the countess. "Don't you know

to the carriages, the caleche, the phaeton, and back again.
countess in, while maids rushed with cushions and bundles from the house
each side of the open door and the carriage steps waiting to help the
the wrong place, and for a long time two menservants stood one on
As is always the case at a departure, much had been forgotten or put in

and girdles tightened, were taking leave of those remaining behind.
and daggers, with trousers tucked inside their high boots and with belts
In the porch and in the yard the men whom Petya had armed with swords

were being taken with them.)
(The most precious ones, with which some family tradition was connected,
before the icons that had been left here and there hanging on the wall.
countess went into the oratory and there Sonya found her on her knees
lightly with some vaguely affectionate and comforting words. The
they caught at his hand and kissed his shoulder he patted their backs
Mavra Kuzminichna and Vasilich, who were to remain in Moscow, and while
before the icon. All the others did the same. Then the count embraced
The count was the first to rise, and with a loud sigh crossed himself

seated without looking at one another.
the doors, they all sat down and remained for some moments silently
Kuzminichna, and Vasilich came into the drawing room and, having closed
Sonya sighed and made no reply. The count, Petya, Madame Schoss, Mavra

her quick intuition.
"Is it something very bad for me? What is it?" persisted Natasha with

"Nothing... No..."

"What is it? What has happened?"

Natasha looked at her inquiringly.

embraced Natasha and kissed her.
And the countess bent over her reticule to hide her agitated face. Sonya

"Nothing," answered the countess. "If everything is ready let us start."

with animated face she ran into the room.
"Well, Mamma? Everything is ready. What's the matter?" asked Natasha, as

now taking place.
Almighty Hand, hitherto unseen, was becoming manifest in all that was
"The ways of God are past finding out!" she thought, feeling that the

The countess put her arms around Sonya and began to cry.

Sonya nodded.

"You say he is dying?"

"Natasha does not know yet, but he is going with us," said Sonya.

this news stifled all sympathy for the man they both liked.
They knew their Natasha, and alarm as to what would happen if she heard
At that moment this news had only one significance for both of them.

"Natasha?" she murmured.

around.
The countess opened her eyes in dismay and, seizing Sonya's arm, glanced

going with us."
"Mamma," said Sonya, "Prince Andrew is here, mortally wounded. He is

Natasha was not in the room.
assemble for the usual silent prayer with closed doors before starting.
was pacing up and down the drawing room, waiting for the household to
tired out and already dressed in shawl and bonnet for her journey,
Sonya jumped out of the coach and ran to the countess. The countess,

dying," replied the maid with a sigh.
"It's our intended that was--Prince Bolkonski himself! They say he is

"But who is it? What's his name?"

spent the night in our house and is going with us."
"Why, didn't you know, Miss?" replied the maid. "The wounded prince: he

window.
"Whose caleche is that?" she inquired, leaning out of the carriage

the entrance.
arranging a seat for the countess in the huge high coach that stood at
attention as it passed the front porch. With the help of a maid she was
The caleche in which Prince Andrew was being taken attracted Sonya's

the carts with the wounded had moved out of the yard.
full and with the horses harnessed, stood at the front door. One by one
Before two o'clock in the afternoon the Rostovs' four carriages, packed


CHAPTER XVII





tried to get as much taken away with them as possible.
be left behind and making a list of them as the countess wished, and she
different from Natasha's. She was putting away the things that had to
Sonya too was busy all this time, but the aim of her efforts was quite

"On the box. You'll sit on the box, won't you, Petya?" cried Natasha.

Peter could sit.
The phaeton was full of people and there was a doubt as to where Count

"Leave it, Vasilich will put it away. It's not wanted."

"The count's books."

"What's in it?" asked Natasha.

one cart."
trunk on the narrow footboard behind a carriage. "We must keep at least
"What could we fasten this onto?" asked the servants, trying to fix a

had not known for a long time.
and animated. Natasha was in a state of rapturous excitement such as she
house two doors off. The whole household, servants included, was bright
They unloaded the wardrobe cart and sent it to take wounded men from a

with me in the carriage."
"Let them have my wardrobe cart," said the countess. "Dunyasha can go

or else what is to become of them?"
"We can take four more men," said the steward. "They can have my trap,

letting the wounded have another and yet another cart.
searching for and finding possibilities of unloading this or that and
packed the night before now lay about the yard, and still they went on
china, bronzes, pictures, and mirrors that had been so carefully
whether all or only half the things were left behind. Cases full of
unloading, once started, could not be arrested. It seemed not to matter
but only to let them sit on the top of the things. But the work of
Rostovs' yard. Many of the wounded asked them not to unload the carts
to the neighboring houses, from which wounded men began to come into the
happy faces round the carts. The news that carts were to be had spread
wounded dragged themselves out of their rooms and stood with pale but
eagerly to work at the new task of placing the wounded in the carts. The
The whole household, as if to atone for not having done it sooner, set

away but that had seemed the only thing to do.
to anyone that the wounded should be left behind and the goods carted
be done, just as a quarter of an hour before it had not seemed strange
strange to them but on the contrary it seemed the only thing that could
set to work at this new task with pleasure and zeal. It no longer seemed
trunks to the storerooms. When they understood that order the servants
confirmed the order to give up all the carts to the wounded and take the
order she brought them until the count himself, in his wife's name,
The servants gathered round Natasha, but could not believe the strange

anteroom and downstairs into the yard.
she used to run when playing at tag, ran through the ballroom to the
The count nodded affirmatively, and Natasha, at the rapid pace at which

take all the most necessary things."
"Papa! Mamma! May I see to it? May I?..." asked Natasha. "We will still

shame on his breast.
tears of joy, and he embraced his wife who was glad to hide her look of
"The eggs... the eggs are teaching the hen," muttered the count through

it," said she, dropping her eyes shamefacedly.
"My dear, you order what is right.... You know I don't understand about

But the countess pushed her daughter away and went up to her husband.

"Mamma, darling, forgive me!"

at once.
"Oh, do as you like! Am I hindering anyone?" she said, not surrendering

to look at her now, and she glanced round quite disconcerted.
mother, saw her agitation, and understood why her husband did not turn
The countess glanced at her daughter, saw her face full of shame for her

Suddenly he sniffed and put his face closer to the window.
The count stood by the window and listened without turning round.

yard... Mamma!... It's impossible!"
does it matter what we take away? Only look what is going on in the
darling, it's not the thing. Please forgive me, darling.... Mamma, what
"Why, the wounded! It's impossible, Mamma. It's monstrous!... No, Mamma

"What's the matter with you? Who are 'they'? What do you want?"

"They will be left!..."
"Mamma, it's impossible: see what is going on in the yard!" she cried.

stood still at the window and listened.
Berg and the countess looked at her, perplexed and frightened. The count

ordered it!"
"It's horrid! It's abominable!" she screamed. "You can't possibly have

tempest and approached her mother with rapid steps.
the room, when Natasha, her face distorted by anger, burst in like a
attention of a relative. The count, pipe in hand, was pacing up and down
Berg was sitting beside the countess consoling her with the respectful

headlong up the stairs.
letting the force of her anger run to waste, she turned and rushed
Her throat quivered with convulsive sobs and, afraid of weakening and

Are we despicable Germans?"
Petya, "I consider it so horrid, so abominable, so... I don't know what.
"I consider," Natasha suddenly almost shouted, turning her angry face to

Petya. "Vasilich told me. I consider..."
"It's because Papa wanted to give up all the carts to the wounded," said

She did not answer.
She understood that he meant what were their parents quarreling about.

"Do you know what it's about?" Petya asked Natasha.

into one of them helped by an orderly.
yard. Two of them had been uncorded and a wounded officer was climbing
who were to leave Moscow. The loaded carts were still standing in the
Petya was in the porch, engaged in giving out weapons to the servants

reach some decision, first followed him and then ran downstairs.
Natasha left the room with her father and, as if finding it difficult to

"Yes, Mamma! Yes, these are very hard times!" said Berg.

And he left the room. The countess began to cry.

cried the old count. "My head's in a whirl!"
"Oh, go to the devil, all of you! To the devil, the devil, the devil..."

for dear Vera's sake."
"If it's inconvenient, please don't," said Berg. "Only I so wanted it,

"Ask the countess, I don't give orders."

The count frowned and coughed.

have one, I will pay the man well, and..."
see. I saw so many of those peasant carts in your yard. Please let me
And dear Vera has long wanted one. I wish to give her a surprise, you
such a beauty! It pulls out and has a secret English drawer, you know!
to one of pleasure at his admirable domestic arrangements.) "And it's
of the chiffonier and dressing table Berg involuntarily changed his tone
chiffonier like that and how we had a dispute about it." (At the mention
small chiffonier and a dressing table. You know how dear Vera wanted a
buy something. I went in out of curiosity, you know, and there is a
"when the steward, a man I know, ran out and asked me whether I wouldn't
"I was driving past Yusupov's house just now," said Berg with a laugh,

"Hm..." said the count, and stopped.

"And I have a great favor to ask of you, Papa," said he.

significantly.
and, seeing the knot in it, pondered, shaking his head sadly and
At that moment Berg drew out his handkerchief as if to blow his nose

He got up from his chair and went to the door.
The count was about to say something, but evidently restrained himself.

There won't be any end to it."
Somebody after all must see to things. One misses Mitenka at such times.
to her husband. "I have just been told that nothing is ready yet.
"I can't think what the servants are about," said the countess, turning

away...."
every Russian. But why are you so anxious? You have still time to get
"Yes, Mamma, I tell you sincerely that these are hard and sad times for

express sympathy, remained standing beside her.
asked about her health, and, swaying his head from side to side to
dissatisfied expression. Berg hurriedly jumped up, kissed her hand,
Just then the countess came in from the sitting room with a weary and

her sons!' Isn't it so, Papa?" said he.
look with a smile. "'Russia is not in Moscow, she lives in the hearts of
at Natasha, and as if anxious to conciliate her, replying to her intent
cannot be imagined or adequately praised!" said Berg, glancing round
"Altogether such heroism as was displayed by the Russian warriors

question.
him, as if she were trying to find in his face the answer to some
heard those days. Natasha watched him with an intent gaze that confused
And Berg related all that he remembered of the various tales he had

stationed on a hillside. You can imagine!"
everywhere at the head of the troops, I can assure you. Our corps was
valor," he went on rapidly. "General Barclay de Tolly risked his life
could hardly restrain those... those... yes, those exploits of antique
commanders, far from having to urge the men on or anything of that kind,
breast at the words "Russian army"), "I tell you frankly that we, the
had done, but Berg did it a trifle late for he should have struck his
Papa" (he smote himself on the breast as a general he had heard speaking
twenty-sixth--there are no words worthy to do it justice! I tell you,
corrected himself) "has shown or displayed in the battle of the
antique valor of the Russian army, which they--which it" (he
in general I can tell you, Papa, that such a heroic spirit, the truly
to say, have now assembled in council. No one knows what is coming. But
Berg. "The army is burning with a spirit of heroism and the leaders, so
"God Almighty alone can decide the fate of our fatherland, Papa," said

Is the army retreating or will there be another battle?"
"Health, at a time like this?" said the count. "Come, tell us the news!

and Sonya, and hastened to inquire after "Mamma's" health.
drawing room, where he embraced the count, kissed the hands of Natasha
From the anteroom Berg ran with smooth though impatient steps into the

porch took out a clean pocket handkerchief and tied a knot in it.
looked attentively at the carts in the yard and while going up to the
with a pair of sleek roans, exactly like those of a certain prince. He
Berg drove up to his father-in-law's house in his spruce little trap

domestic reasons.
So he considered it necessary to ask for leave of absence for family and
army was asking for leave to visit Moscow and had something to do there.
He had nothing to do in Moscow, but he had noticed that everyone in the

On the first of September he had come to Moscow from the army.

first division of the Second Army.
of assistant to the head of the staff of the assistant commander of the
of Vladimir and Anna, and he still filled the quiet and agreeable post
Berg, the Rostovs' son-in-law, was already a colonel wearing the orders


CHAPTER XVI





window.
"Papa! Here's Berg coming to see us," said she, looking out of the

Natasha stepped up to the window and pondered.

"What business is it of yours?" cried the count.

"But I heard," said Natasha. "Why does Mamma object?"

"Nothing! What business is it of yours?" muttered the count angrily.

into her mother's room.
"Papa, what are you doing that for?" asked Natasha, who had followed him

replying.
Flourishing his arms in despair the count left the room without

children."
we who are such fools. If you have no pity on me, have some for the
out everything two days ago. That's what other people do. It's only
wounded; they know that. Look at the Lopukhins opposite, they cleared
Do as you please! It's the government's business to look after the
rubles' worth of things in the house. I don't consent, my dear, I don't!
children's property! You said yourself that we have a hundred thousand
nothing for the house, and now you wish to throw away all our--all the
"Listen to me, Count, you have managed matters so that we are getting
She assumed her dolefully submissive manner and said to her husband:

in that timid tone and considered it her duty to do so.
or an orchestra. She was accustomed always to oppose anything announced
of a new gallery or conservatory, the inauguration of a private theater
something detrimental to the children's interests, such as the building
The countess was accustomed to this tone as a precursor of news of
The count spoke timidly, as he always did when talking of money matters.

be taken... where's the hurry?"
there are officers among them.... You know, I think, my dear... let them
them!... Really now, in our own yard--we asked them in ourselves and
things that can be bought but think what being left behind means to
came to me to ask for a few carts for the wounded. After all, ours are
"You know, love, I wanted to tell you... Countess dear... an officer

"What is this, my dear? I hear that the luggage is being unloaded."

that they should take with them. The countess sent for her husband.
wounded men whom the count in the simplicity of his heart had ordered
being uncorded and the luggage taken out of the carts to make room for
her trunk had been taken down from its cart, and all the loads were
On inquiry, the countess learned that Madame Schoss was offended because
offended and the young ladies' summer dresses could not be left behind.
chief gendarme's duty for her, came to say that Madame Schoss was much
been her lady's maid before her marriage and now performed a sort of
At nine o'clock the countess woke up, and Matrena Timofeevna, who had

soft, confidential voice, as though afraid of being overheard.
"Well, never mind, some of the things can be unloaded," he added in a

refuse the wounded who asked for a lift.
The count went into the house with him, repeating his order not to

"What are your orders about the pictures?"
"Please step into the gallery, your excellency," said the major-domo.

moving toward the porch.
their orderlies were to be seen. They were all looking at the count and
yard, at the gates, at the window of the wings, wounded officers and
face had already sealed the order. The count looked around him. In the
But at the same moment an expression of warm gratitude on the officer's

some indefinite order.
Well, what of it... do what's necessary..." said the count, muttering
very pleased. Vasilich, you'll see to it. Just unload one or two carts.
"Oh, yes, yes, yes!" said the count hastily. "I shall be very pleased,

request on behalf of his master.
Before the officer had finished speaking the orderly made the same

all right on a loaded cart..."
corner of one of your carts! I have nothing here with me.... I shall be
"Count, be so good as to allow me... for God's sake, to get into some

The officer came nearer and suddenly his face flushed crimson.

you staying in my house?"
willing! What is it, gentlemen?" he added, turning to the officer. "Are
"Well, that's right. As soon as the countess wakes we'll be off, God

"We can harness at once, your excellency."

nodded to them. (He liked to see new faces.)
bald head he looked good-naturedly at the officer and the orderly and
"Well, Vasilich, is everything ready?" asked the count, and stroking his

major-domo made a significant and stern gesture to them both to go away.
a pale young officer with a bandaged arm. On seeing the count the
The major-domo stood at the porch talking to an elderly orderly and to
stood the carts ready corded. The carriages were at the front porch.
and came out to the porch in his lilac silk dressing gown. In the yard
as not to wake the countess who had fallen asleep only toward morning,
On waking up that morning Count Ilya Rostov left his bedroom softly, so

own family. So thought the major-domo on his master's behalf.
and in the general catastrophe one could not disregard oneself and one's
one's own carriages as well. Thirty carts could not save all the wounded
cart there would be no reason to refuse another, or all the carts and
wounded men as one might, it was evident that if they were given one
saying that he dare not even mention the matter to the count. Pity these
addressed, though he was sorry for the wounded, resolutely refused,
a lift out of Moscow. The major-domo to whom these entreaties were
they were accommodated, entreating the servants to try to get them
themselves there from the Rostovs' and from neighboring houses where
sent by wounded officers came to the Rostovs' and wounded men dragged
early in the morning of the first of September, orderlies and servants
sums offered for the horses and carts, but on the previous evening and
they were offered enormous sums of money for them. Not only were huge
estates and which many people envied proved to be extremely valuable and
possessions, the thirty peasant carts that had come in from their
during the night, but nothing was stolen; and as to the value of their
indication was that three out of their huge retinue disappeared
conditions of life was but little noticeable. As to the serfs the only
In the Rostovs' staid old-fashioned house the dissolution of former

given away for nothing.
hundred rubles each, and furniture, mirrors, and bronzes were being
a half of what they carted, while peasant horses were fetching five
carters removing valuable goods, such as cloth, and receiving in payment
city articles kept falling, so that by midday there were instances of
gold, of carts and horses, kept rising, but the value of paper money and
too that day indicated the state of affairs. The price of weapons, of
dispersed all about the town to the public houses and cookshops. Prices
up, they became convinced that Moscow would be surrendered, and then
the Three Hills. Having waited there for Rostopchin who did not turn
seminarists, and gentry were mingled, had gone early that morning to
of factory hands, house serfs, and peasants, with whom some officials,
that is the poor people, and the price of commodities. An enormous crowd
Only two things indicated the social condition of Moscow--the rabble,

Sundays. Nobody seemed yet to realize what awaited the city.
The church bells everywhere were ringing for service, just as usual on
Moscow's last day had come. It was a clear bright autumn day, a Sunday.


CHAPTER XV





This wounded man was Prince Andrew Bolkonski.

into the wing and put him in the room that had been Madame Schoss'.
But they had to avoid carrying the man upstairs, and so they took him

"The masters won't object..." she said.

She invited them to take the wounded man into the house.

"O, Lord Jesus Christ!" she murmured.

beside Mavra Kuzminichna.
head disconsolately, told the driver to turn into the yard, and stopped
The old servant returned to the caleche, looked into it, shook his

"All right!" said the doctor.

And the old servant got down from the box and went up to the cart.

"We don't expect to get him home! We must ask the doctor."

The attendant made a hopeless gesture.

asked.
master's house. Come in," said Mavra Kuzminichna. "Is he very ill?" she
"Do us the honor to come in, there's plenty of everything in the

here, and there's nobody living in it."
alive! We have a house of our own in Moscow, but it's a long way from
"Well, perhaps," said he with a sigh. "We don't expect to get him home

will be empty," said the old woman to the old attendant.
"Please come in here. The masters are going away and the whole house

cart.
old attendant. A doctor and two soldiers followed the carriage in a
quite covered by an apron. On the box beside the driver sat a venerable
man. He was being conveyed in a caleche with a raised hood, and was
Rostovs' yard. Mavra Kuzminichna concluded that he was a very important
Kuzminichna, who was standing at the gate, had him brought into the
That night another wounded man was driven down the Povarskaya, and Mavra

Sonya and Natasha slept in the sitting room without undressing.

having put off their departure till next morning, went to bed.
get everything packed. The countess had fallen asleep and the count,
But hard as they all worked till quite late that night, they could not

packed as compactly as possible.
expeditiously, unnecessary things were left, and the most valuable
be corded up. Thanks to Natasha's directions the work now went on
to ask whether a cart was sufficiently loaded, and whether it might
had countermanded an order of his, and the servants now came to her
completely. The count was not angry even when they told him that Natasha
lasted a moment. She at once set to work afresh and they now trusted her
screamed with delight and tears fell from her eyes. But this only
The carpets yielded and the lid closed; Natasha, clapping her hands,

carpets. "Now press, Petya! Press, Vasilich, press hard!" she cried.
over her perspiring face, while with the other she pressed down the
"I won't!" cried Natasha, with one hand holding back the hair that hung

take out the top one."
"That's enough, Natasha," said Sonya. "I see you were right, but just

lid, and made desperate efforts herself.
and Petya--whom she had drawn into the business of packing--press on the
her own way. She packed, repacked, pressed, made the butler's assistant
more things might have been taken out, but Natasha insisted on having
the lid of the case containing the carpets would not shut down. A few
rejected, the valuable ones really did all go into the two cases. Only
out that when the cheaper things not worth taking had nearly all been
been taken out of the cases, they recommenced packing, and it turned
unnecessary crockery should not be taken at all. When everything had
quickly repacking, deciding that the inferior Russian carpets and
But Natasha would not give in. She turned everything out and began

"What a young lady she is!" remarked the major-domo.

reproachfully.
"Don't, Natasha! Leave it alone! We'll get it all packed," urged Sonya

referring to the Saxony china dishes.
Kiev ware. "These--yes, these must go among the carpets," she said,
things. "These aren't needed," said she, putting aside some plates of
"Oh, wait, please!" And Natasha began rapidly and deftly sorting out the

said the butler's assistant.
"Why, it's a mercy if we can get the carpets alone into three cases,"

"The dishes must go in here among the carpets," said she.

wrapped in paper.
And Natasha began rapidly taking out of the case dishes and plates

"No, wait a minute, please."

"You can't, Miss, we have tried to," said the butler's assistant.

"Sonya, wait a bit--we'll pack everything into these," said Natasha.

storeroom. A third case was needed and servants had gone to fetch it.
standing on the tables, and still more was being brought in from the
up with crockery, the other with carpets. There was also much china
to work two cases were standing open in the ballroom, one almost full
Gobelin tapestries and Persian carpets in the house. When Natasha set
authority, was the packing of the carpets. The count had valuable
Her first exploit, which cost her immense effort and established her
they did not heed her, and at last succeeded in making them believe her.
and passionately demanded obedience, grew angry and nearly cried because
some prank from her and did not wish to obey her; but she resolutely
the business of packing was received skeptically. Everybody expected
of all she did suddenly set to work too. At first her intervention in
and yard, shouting and disputing. Natasha, with the ardor characteristic
and did not know what to do. The servants ran noisily about the house
yard. Sonya, owing to the count's contradictory orders, lost her head
people, and flurrying them still more. Petya directed things in the
house and back again, shouting confused instructions to the hurrying
old count, suddenly setting to work, kept passing from the yard to the
haste packing their belongings and preparing for their departure. The
After dinner the whole Rostov household set to work with enthusiastic

the drink store, having received orders to do so.
cabman had told her that the people were breaking open the barrels at
the shop. She had taken a cab and driven home by a side street and the
been unable to pass because of a drunken crowd rioting in front of
dealer's in Myasnitski Street. When returning by that street she had
countess' fears still more by telling what she had seen at a spirit
Madame Schoss, who had been out to visit her daughter, increased the


CHAPTER XIV





was now afraid of everything.
fright if they did not leave that very night. Without any pretense she
she, who till then had not shown any alarm, said that she would die of
that very night if possible. With a woman's involuntary loving cunning
the count aside and implored him with tears to take her away quickly,
protector and defender, she did not answer him, but after dinner called
hoping to arrange to leave before then and take Petya with her as their
would be no contradicting, and her plans would be spoiled; and so,
fatherland--something senseless, masculine, and obstinate which there
engagement) he would say something about men, honor, and the
going to the battle (she knew he enjoyed the thought of the impending
as he said this. She realized that if she said a word about his not
The countess looked with timid horror at her son's eager, excited face

battle there.
to go armed to the Three Hills tomorrow, and that there would be a big
days in advance, the order had certainly already been given for everyone
Rostopchin's broadsheet had said that he would sound a call two or three
He said the people had been getting arms in the Kremlin, and that though
At dinner Petya having returned home told them the news he had heard.

And the count gave a similar order to the major-domo and the servants.

must go, go, go!...."
you not to indulge in trifles now, but to help to pack, and tomorrow we
"Of course it is," he answered absently. "That's not the point. I beg

house?" said Natasha.
"Papa, is it all right--I've invited some of the wounded into the

Club is closed and the police are leaving."
"We've stayed too long!" said the count with involuntary vexation. "The

In the hall she met her father, who had returned with bad news.

her mother, Natasha got up and went to the door.
"I knew you'd give permission... so I'll tell them," and, having kissed

Natasha laughed, and the countess too smiled slightly.

about it," said the countess.
"What officers? Whom have they brought? I don't understand anything

to go. I knew you'd let them come!" she said quickly all in one breath.
some wounded here--officers. Will you let them come? They have nowhere
again; I woke you up! Mavra Kuzminichna has sent me: they have brought
face close to her mother's, "I am sorry, forgive me, I'll never do it
"Mamma darling!" said Natasha, kneeling by her mother and bringing her

into a doze.
"Oh, what sleep-?" said the countess, waking up just as she was dropping

"Are you asleep, Mamma?"

drops.
into the sitting room, where there was a smell of vinegar and Hoffman's
Natasha ran into the house and went on tiptoe through the half-open door

"Well, I'll ask."

permission."
put them into the wing, the men's room, or the nurse's room, we must ask
"There now, young lady, you do take things into your head! Even if we

into the drawing room. They can have all our half of the house."
"Never mind, never mind, what does it matter? For one day we can move

"Your Papa must be told, though," said Mavra Kuzminichna.

yard.
Kuzminichna tried to get as many of the wounded as possible into their
with new people outside the ordinary routine of her life. She and Mavra
houses in Povarskaya Street. Natasha was evidently pleased to be dealing
townsfolk to turn into the yards and to draw up at the entrances of the
and dozens of carts with wounded men began at the invitation of the
The cart in which the officer lay was turned into the Rostovs' yard,

"They may. He says they may!" whispered Natasha.

Mavra Kuzminichna, who stood talking compassionately to the officer.
With a slight inclination of her head, Natasha stepped back quickly to

"Oh yes, why not? They may," he said.

in the affirmative.
reflection--as if considering in how far the thing was possible--replied
her handkerchief, that the major ceased smiling and after some
manner were so serious, though she was still holding the ends of
Natasha quietly repeated her question, and her face and whole

smiling.
"Which one do you want, Ma'am'selle?" said he, screwing up his eyes and

The major raised his hand to his cap with a smile.

"May the wounded men stay in our house?" she asked.

and at once went to meet the major.
Natasha glanced with frightened eyes at the face of the wounded officer

stout major who was walking back along the street past the row of carts.
voice. "Here is our commanding officer... ask him," and he pointed to a
"I don't know if it would be allowed," replied the officer in a weak

are leaving."
comfortable somewhere in a house... in ours, for instance... the family
"Then you have nobody in Moscow?" she was saying. "You would be more

handkerchief, and listened to what the housekeeper was saying.
Natasha moved a few steps forward and stopped shyly, still holding her
mats, and was speaking to a pale young officer who lay inside.
crowd by the gate, gone up to a cart with a hood constructed of bast
The former housekeeper, old Mavra Kuzminichna, had stepped out of the

an end of it in each hand, went out into the street.
Natasha, throwing a clean pocket handkerchief over her hair and holding

postilions, and scullions stood at the gate, staring at the wounded.
The housekeeper, the old nurse, the cooks, coachmen, maids, footmen,

wounded men had stopped in the street.
up and looked out of the window. An enormously long row of carts full of
sound of their hurried footsteps going to the back porch. Natasha got
by the talk of the maids in the next room (which was theirs) and by the
ought to have occupied her thoughts now. She was roused from her reverie
took her old ball dress, and fell into a reverie quite unrelated to what
willingly promised to do it all for her, Natasha sat down on the floor,
"Dunyasha, you pack! You will, won't you, dear?" And when Dunyasha

done and what was left had still to be packed, she found it dull.
amusing to give away dresses and ribbons to the maids, but when that was
it up and went to her room to pack her own things. At first she found it
Sonya while the china was being packed and tried to help, but soon gave
with all her heart and all her might. For a while she had stood beside
not in it, and she could not and did not know how to do anything except
several times that morning had tried to set to work, but her heart was
Natasha was ashamed of doing nothing when everyone else was so busy, and

she had worn at her first Petersburg ball.
holding in her hands the old ball dress (already out of fashion) which
and scarves strewn all about her, gazing fixedly at the floor and
was sitting on the floor of her dismantled room with dresses, ribbons,
the ballroom looking after the packing of the glass and china. Natasha
to obtain a transfer from the militia to the active army. Sonya was in
Petya was not at home, he had gone to visit a friend with whom he meant
lying down in the new sitting room with a vinegar compress on her head.
countess had a headache brought on by all the noise and turmoil and was
the yard and in the house. The count had been out since morning. The
had come with the carts resounded as they shouted to one another in
The voices and footsteps of the many servants and of the peasants who

others still empty.
crowded with peasant carts, some loaded high and already corded up,
the things were treading heavily on the parquet floors. The yard was
ropes were scattered about. The peasants and house serfs carrying out
taken down. There were trunks in the rooms, and hay, wrapping paper, and
being carried out or moved about, and the mirrors and pictures had been
house seemed topsy-turvy. All the doors were open, all the furniture was
On Saturday, the thirty-first of August, everything in the Rostovs'


CHAPTER XIII





exciting, especially to the young.
in general something extraordinary was happening, and that is always
being given out, everybody was escaping--going away somewhere, and
a war near Moscow, there would be fighting at the town gates, arms were
freely--and Petya adored her. Above all, they were gay because there was
was a lubricant the wheels of her machine needed to make them run
happy because she had someone to adore her: the adoration of others
the cause of her sadness, and because she was feeling well. She was also
gay because she had been sad too long and now nothing reminded her of
Natasha, whose lead he always followed, was in high spirits. Natasha was
Moscow where there was to be fighting in a few days, and chiefly because
where there was no hope of soon taking part in a battle and had come to
young man, because he was at home, because he had left Belaya Tserkov
having left home a boy he had returned (as everybody told him) a fine
for gaiety and laughter to them. Petya was in high spirits because
mirth were in their hearts and so everything that happened was a cause
gay not because there was any reason to laugh, but because gaiety and
feet, their cries, and their spontaneous laughter. They laughed and were
everyone. Almost all day long the house resounded with their running
helping their parents, were generally a nuisance and a hindrance to
had any orders to give. Petya and Natasha on the contrary, far from
was busy for whole days. The count and countess turned to her when they
difficult work of directing the storing and packing of their things and
her grief, or perhaps just because of it, she took on herself all the
princess was a good match. It was very bitter for her. But despite
the Rostovs' affairs was by Nicholas marrying a rich woman, and that the
Sonya felt that this was true: that the only possibility of retrieving

presentiment that it would happen. What a good thing it would be!"
countess, "but I always wanted Nicholas to marry the princess, and had a
"I was never pleased at Bolkonski's engagement to Natasha," said the

of Providence in this meeting of the princess and Nicholas.
her presence, joyous comments from the countess, who saw an intervention
Nicholas' letter in which he mentioned Princess Mary had elicited, in
things packed. But of late Sonya had been particularly sad and silent.
time. Sonya alone directed the practical side of matters by getting
away from her, and was jealous of Natasha with whom he spent all his
everything, was constantly in pursuit of Petya who was always running
The countess watched the things being packed, was dissatisfied with

at home about the preparations for their departure.
the current rumors from all sides and gave superficial and hasty orders
family, Count Ilya Rostov, continually drove about the city collecting
Rostov family was absorbed in various activities. The head of the
During the three days preceding the occupation of Moscow the whole

be completely upset.
conditions of life to which its people were accustomed to submit would
though it knew that the time of its destruction was near when the
awry on his head, so Moscow involuntarily continued its wonted life,
immediately, but yet looks about him and straightens the cap that is
As a criminal who is being led to execution knows that he must die
up and change, but up to the first of September nothing had done so.
save their belongings. It was felt that everything would suddenly break
be abandoned, and that they ought to get away as quickly as possible and
behind felt, though they did not show it, that Moscow would certainly
had not yet been held) both those who went away and those who remained
(though the Council of Fili, at which it was decided to abandon Moscow,
way from Moscow, and so on. But all this was only talk; in reality
been seized, that the peasants were rioting and robbing people on their
whispered that Augustin had been forbidden to leave, that traitors had
which, preceded by the clergy, would go to the Three Hills; others
Russian army had been destroyed. Some talked about the Moscow militia
French had been routed, while others on the contrary reported that the
Some said there had been another battle after Borodino at which the
been taken out of the churches and everybody was to be ordered to leave.
to leave the city, others on the contrary said that all the icons had
rumors were current in the town. Some said that no one was to be allowed
of them or independently of them, the strangest and most contradictory
out by the other gates. In spite of Rostopchin's broadsheets, or because
and thousands of carts conveyed the inhabitants and their possessions
brought in by the Dorogomilov gate and taken to various parts of Moscow,
and commotion. Every day thousands of men wounded at Borodino were
From the twenty-eighth till the thirty-first all Moscow was in a bustle

belongings did not arrive till the thirtieth.
come from their Ryazan and Moscow estates to remove their household
departure by the twenty-eighth of August and the carts that were to
Owing to the count's customary carelessness nothing was ready for their

brotherly tenderness, almost lover-like.
himself exclusively to Natasha for whom he had always had a particularly
treated her coldly, avoided her, and during his stay in Moscow attached
when with her--might "become womanish" as he termed it to himself--he
designs, and instinctively fearing that he might give way to emotion
him her intention of keeping him under her wing, Petya guessed her
did not please the sixteen-year-old officer. Though she concealed from
he arrived. The passionate tenderness with which his mother received him
her treasure, her adored Petya, returned. On the twenty-eighth of August
get away as quickly as possible, she would not hear of leaving before
had left Moscow, and though everybody tried to persuade the countess to
Though by the twentieth of August nearly all the Rostovs' acquaintances

one son was out of danger she became the more anxious about Petya.
remounts, but that letter did not set the countess at ease. Knowing that
He wrote from the province of Voronezh where he had been sent to procure
At the end of August the Rostovs received another letter from Nicholas.

Petya," she thought.
her husband irritated her. "What do I want with them? I want no one but
happiness. The presence of Sonya, of her beloved Natasha, or even of
grew the countess. She began to think she would never live to see such
children. The nearer the time came for Petya to return, the more uneasy
his mother thought she loved him more, much more, than all her other
somewhere about something and apparently finding pleasure in it--then
he was thrown amid those big, dreadful, cruel men who were fighting
and fresh rosy cheeks where soft down was just beginning to show--when
nuisance to everybody, that snub-nosed Petya with his merry black eyes
lessons, was always breaking things in the house and making himself a
for it; but when her youngest: the scapegrace who had been bad at
first-born more than all her other children and even reproached herself
Nicholas alone was in danger the countess imagined that she loved her
places where he could not possibly take part in a battle. As long as
Petya so as not to let him go again, but always get him appointed to
of her sons under her wing, and she hoped to arrange matters for her
transfer would give the countess the consolation of seeing at least one
in training near Moscow. Though Petya would remain in the service, this
got Petya transferred from Obolenski's regiment to Bezukhov's, which was
conversations, the count at last devised means to tranquillize her. He
dreamed that she saw her sons lying dead. After many consultations and
Mary. The countess did not sleep at night, or when she did fall asleep
in which he had given a detailed account of his meeting with Princess
somewhere with the army and had not sent a word since his last letter,
he was transferred to another regiment on active service. Nicholas was
possible. Petya could not return unless his regiment did so or unless
him an appointment somewhere in Petersburg, but neither of these proved
get Nicholas back and wished to go herself to join Petya, or to get
her that summer for the first time with cruel clearness. She tried to
might be killed like the three sons of one of her acquaintances, struck
gone from under her wing, that today or tomorrow either or both of them
with terror. The thought that both her sons were at the war, had both
Belaya Tserkov where that regiment was forming, the countess was seized
After Petya had joined Obolenski's regiment of Cossacks and left for

till the eve of the enemy's entry into the city.
The Rostovs remained in Moscow till the first of September, that is,


CHAPTER XII





or knew where he was.
Bezukhov's household, despite all the search they made, saw Pierre again
From that time till the end of the destruction of Moscow no one of

them, went to the back porch and out through the gate.
drawing room. Pierre dressed hurriedly and, instead of going to see
A dozen persons who had business with Pierre were awaiting him in the

know whether Count Bezukhov had left or was leaving the town.
special messenger, a police officer, had come from Count Rostopchin to
When he awoke next morning the major-domo came to inform him that a

it without undressing and immediately fell asleep.
must forget and understand..." And going to his bed he threw himself on
meaning of all... one must harness... my wife is getting married... One
man... Simplicity is submission to God. Suffering is necessary... the
"They, the soldiers at the battery, Prince Andrew killed... that old

at last he opened and read his wife's letter.
only answered them in order to get rid of these people. When left alone
did not understand and was not interested in any of these questions and
They all had business with Pierre and wanted decisions from him. Pierre
of his battalion, his steward, his major-domo, and various petitioners.
come to see him that evening: the secretary of a committee, the colonel
When he reached home it was already getting dark. Some eight people had

than he had ever before shown himself.
Pierre did not answer and left Rostopchin's room more sullen and angry

fathers of the Society of Jesus?"
"is it true that the countess has fallen into the clutches of the holy
fellow. Oh, by the by!" he shouted through the doorway after Pierre,
all I have to tell you. Happy he who has ears to hear. Good-by, my dear
"A word of friendly advice, mon cher. Be off as soon as you can, that's

The count frowned.

thoughtful expression of his face.
"Why, nothing," answered Pierre without raising his eyes or changing the

sometimes in a whirl. Well, mon cher, what are you doing personally?"
time to be polite to everybody who has business with me. My head is
friendly manner, "We are on the eve of a public disaster and I haven't
so far was not guilty of anything, he added, taking Pierre's hand in a
anybody"--but probably realizing that he was shouting at Bezukhov who
with such men as Klyucharev. And I will knock the nonsense out of
it. I beg you to leave the town and break off all communication
discuss my actions, but to give you advice--or an order if you prefer
people speak when recalling an insult. "But I did not summon you to
be punished as he deserves," said he with the vindictive heat with which
frowning suddenly. "Vereshchagin is a renegade and a traitor who will
"There we are!" Rostopchin shouted at Pierre louder than before,

Vereshchagin..."
proved that he did so," said Pierre without looking at Rostopchin, "and
"If he is accused of circulating Napoleon's proclamation it is not

"That is for me to know, but not for you to ask," shouted Rostopchin.

"But what did Klyucharev do wrong, Count?" asked Pierre.

possible."
all communication with men of that stamp and to leave here as soon as
you are only half my age--I advise you, as a father would, to cease
him for safe custody. I like you and don't wish you any harm and--as
for his removal from town, and that you have even accepted papers from
person. It has now come to my knowledge that you lent him your carriage
that I could not have exiled the Postmaster had he not been a harmful
their fatherland. You can understand that there are reasons for this and
building up the temple of Solomon have tried to destroy the temple of
been treated in the same way, and so have others who on the plea of
Magnitski have been deported to their proper place. Mr. Klyucharev has
"There, you see, mon cher! I expect you know that Messrs. Speranski and

"Yes, I am a Mason," Pierre replied.

ruin Russia."
that you are not one of those who on pretense of saving mankind wish to
informed, my friend, but I am aware that there are Masons and I hope
he nevertheless intended to pardon. Pierre remained silent. "I am well
went on severely, as though there were something wrong about it which
the point. Between ourselves, mon cher, do you belong to the Masons?" he
man had left the room. "We have heard of your prowess. But that's not
"Ah, how do you do, great warrior?" said Rostopchin as soon as the short

something, but when Pierre entered he stopped speaking and went out.
was rubbing his forehead and eyes with his hand. A short man was saying
When he entered the private room Count Rostopchin, puckering his face,

chief.
In the middle of this fresh tale Pierre was summoned to the commander in


CHAPTER XI





He found some scoundrel of a painter..."
Well, he took that icon home with him for a few days and what did he do?
Almighty painted with a scepter in one hand and an orb in the other.
here by the Stone Bridge, and you know there was a large icon of God
for him. That's the sort of fellow he is. His father keeps a cookshop
attended some lectures somewhere and imagines that the devil is no match
You know that sort of tradesman's son, a dandy and lady-killer. He
father has come to intercede for him. But he's a good-for-nothing lad!
He was sent for trial and condemned to hard labor, I believe. Now the
of it. The count had the father fetched, but the fellow stuck to it.
it.' 'I have seen no papers, I made it up myself.' And that was the end
and I'll have you tried, and you'll be hanged! Say from whom you had
read any papers, I made it up myself.' 'If that's so, you're a traitor
French, you fool.' And what do you think? 'No,' said he, 'I have not
translated it, and translated it abominably, because you don't even know
was lying on the table. 'Here it is! You did not write it yourself but
written it yourself?' said he, and he took up the Hamburg Gazette that
But the point is that the count was much annoyed. 'How could you have
sins to answer for without that and that is why he has been banished.
"Not at all," rejoined the adjutant in dismay. "Klyucharev had his own

understand!" said Pierre.
 "And the count wanted him to say it was from Klyucharev? I

lying, and obstinacy!"
"he flared up dreadfully--and just think of the fellow's audacity,
know the count," said the adjutant cheerfully, with a smile of pride,
'From whom did you get the proclamation?' 'I wrote it myself.' Well, you
up myself.' And so it was reported to the count, who sent for the man.
They threatened and questioned him, but he stuck to that: 'I made it
some understanding. He replied: 'From no one; I made it up myself.'
only have had it from the Postmaster. But evidently they had come to
it you?' And the point is that we knew whom he had it from. He could
pet of a trader,'" said the adjutant smiling. "They asked him, 'Who gave
on till he reached Vereshchagin, a half educated tradesman, you know, 'a
so-and-so.' He went to the next one. 'From whom did you get it?' and so
sixty-three hands. He asked one, 'From whom did you get it?' 'From
here made the inquiries. The proclamation had passed through exactly
it. He gave orders to investigate the matter. Gabriel Ivanovich
proclamation appeared about two months ago. The count was informed of
"It's a complicated story, you know," said the adjutant. "That

cross round his neck, approached the speaker.
An old gentleman wearing a star and another official, a German wearing a

expect it will go hard with him."
proclamation," said the adjutant. "The young man is in prison and I
"That's not he himself, that's the father of the fellow who wrote the

face of the old man and seeking any indication of his being a traitor.
"Oh, so that is Vereshchagin!" said Pierre, looking at the firm, calm

proclamation."
keeper, Vereshchagin. Perhaps you have heard of that affair with the
"He? That's a tradesman, that is to say, he's the restaurant

overcoat, with a big snow-white beard and eyebrows and a ruddy face.
is that?" he asked, indicating a short old man in a clean blue peasant
"Possibly," remarked Pierre, looking about him absent-mindedly. "And who

nonsense...."
the countess, your wife, is preparing to go abroad. I expect it's
"Well, they say," continued the adjutant with the same smile, "that

"But what did you hear?"

heard."
"Oh, well, you know people often invent things. I only say what I

heard?"
"I have heard nothing," Pierre replied unconcernedly. "But what have you

your wife..."
smile, "we heard that you have family troubles and that the countess,
him. By the by, Count," he added suddenly, addressing Pierre with a
upset when I told him people had come to ask what was the matter with
"The count had a sty," replied the adjutant smiling, "and was very much

lookout with both'?" asked Pierre.
"And what does he mean by 'One of my eyes was sore but now I am on the

speaker.
"Well, of course! That's what we were saying," replied the first

town," said Pierre, "and that the position..."
"But military men have told me that it is impossible to fight in the


with both.
too, am well now: one of my eyes was sore but now I am on the lookout
have some water blessed. That will help them to get well quicker. I,
the Mother of God to the wounded in the Catherine Hospital where we will
sheaf of rye. Tomorrow after dinner I shall take the Iberian icon of
three-pronged fork will be best of all: a Frenchman is no heavier than a
so I hold my peace. An ax will be useful, a hunting spear not bad, but a
will raise the cry a day or two beforehand, but they are not wanted yet
own way! When the time comes I shall want both town and peasant lads and
things have to be put in order, and we will deal with villains in our
the streets. Do not be upset, brothers, that the law courts are closed;
defend Moscow to the last drop of blood and is even ready to fight in
have been sent him from here, and his Serene Highness says he will
the enemy will not soon attack him. Forty eight guns with ammunition
the troops moving toward him and has taken up a strong position where
His Serene Highness has passed through Mozhaysk in order to join up with


Pierre took it and began reading.

"Oh, it's a fresh broadsheet."

"What is it?" asked Pierre.

first.
"That's another matter. That's necessary for the people," said the

sheet he held in his hand.
"But you see what he writes..." said another, pointing to a printed

but as things are now one can't answer for anything."
"If they're sent out and brought back again later on it will do no harm,

conversation.
men, one of whom he knew. After greeting Pierre they continued their
They all seemed dissatisfied and uneasy. Pierre went up to a group of
various officials, old and young, military and civilian, who were there.
While waiting in the reception room Pierre with weary eyes watched the

despairing gesture with his hand and passed through the room.
In answer to questions with which he was greeted, the courier made a

out of Rostopchin's private room.
As Pierre was entering the reception room a courier from the army came

departments.
come to the governor to ask how they were to deal with their various
himself knew it, and to escape personal responsibility they had all
that Moscow would soon be in the enemy's hands, just as Count Rostopchin
the officials--the heads of the various government departments--knew
surrendered. Though this news was being concealed from the inhabitants,
that it was impossible to defend Moscow and that it would have to be
Vasilchikov and Platov had already seen the count and explained to him
were full of officials who had been summoned or had come for orders.
villa at Sokolniki. The anteroom and reception room of his house
Count Rostopchin had only that morning returned to town from his summer

commander in chief.
Without going home, Pierre took a cab and drove to see the Moscow

very important matter."
wants to see you particularly. He asks you to come to him at once on a
"We have been looking for you everywhere," said the adjutant. "The count

the city he was met by Count Rostopchin's adjutant.
On the thirteenth of August Pierre reached Moscow. Close to the gates of


CHAPTER X





that of Prince Andrew.
way Pierre was told of the death of his brother-in-law Anatole and of
him, to a wounded general he knew, and drove with him to Moscow. On the
be heard. Pierre offered the use of his carriage, which had overtaken
were to take some of the wounded away, shouts, curses, and blows could
the streets were crowded with them. In the streets, around carts that
them. There were wounded in the yards, at the windows of the houses, and
The troops were moving on, leaving about ten thousand wounded behind

foot through the town.
Pierre got up and, having told them to harness and overtake him, went on

our men were leaving it.
had come with news that the French were already near Mozhaysk and that
The groom, the coachman, and the innkeeper told Pierre that an officer

meaning of all he had seen and thought in the dream had been destroyed.
but how can I harness everything?" and Pierre felt with horror that the
more and I should have understood it all! But what am I to do? Harness,
to understand what was revealing itself to me in my dream. One second
"No, I don't want that, I don't want to see and understand that. I want
repugnance, and closing his eyes quickly fell back on the carriage seat.
while carts were passing out of the gate. Pierre turned away with
middle of which soldiers were watering their lean horses at the pump
straight into Pierre's face. He glanced at the dirty innyard in the
It was the voice of the groom, trying to wake him. The sun shone

some voice was repeating. "We must harness, it is time to harness...."
"Time to harness, time to harness, your excellency! Your excellency!"

"Yes, one must harness, it is time to harness."

question that tormented him.
words and they alone expressed what he wanted to say and solved the
them!" he repeated to himself with inward rapture, feeling that these
together is what we need! Yes, one must harness them, must harness
to unite. Thoughts cannot be united, but to harness all these thoughts
unite the meaning of all. To unite all?" he asked himself. "No, not
on thinking, or hearing, in his dream) is to be able in your soul to
his limitations, would not know himself. The hardest thing (Pierre went
fear it possesses all. If there were no suffering, man would not know
Man can be master of nothing while he fears death, but he who does not
not talk, but act. The spoken word is silver but the unspoken is golden.
will of God; you cannot escape from Him. And they are simple. They do
the law of God," the voice had said. "Simplicity is submission to the
"To endure war is the most difficult subordination of man's freedom to

and express his thoughts like that when awake.
day had evoked them. He had never, it seemed to him, been able to think
someone outside himself had spoken them, though the impressions of that
Afterwards when he recalled those thoughts Pierre was convinced that

someone was uttering or that he himself was formulating.
There were only thoughts clearly expressed in words, thoughts that
with his cloak, but now neither the lodge nor his benefactor was there.
hear and understand my benefactor's words." Again he covered himself up
"It is dawn," thought Pierre. "But that's not what I want. I want to

now they were all bluish, lit up, and glittering with frost or dew.
opened his eyes and saw the same penthouse roofs, posts, and yard, but
had in fact slipped. For a moment as he was rearranging his cloak Pierre
He felt ashamed, and with one arm covered his legs from which his cloak

legs grew cold and bare.
speak and to attract their attention, he got up, but at that moment his
kindly they did not look at Pierre and did not know him. Wishing to
firm faces surrounded his benefactor on all sides. But though they were
possibility of being what they were. And they with their simple, kind,
distinct in his dream) that he was talking of goodness and the
was saying, but he knew (the categories of thoughts were also quite
pleasant and comforting. Pierre did not understand what his benefactor
was as weighty and uninterrupted as the booming on the battlefield, but
benefactor was heard speaking all the time and the sound of his words
shouting and singing loudly; yet through their shouting the voice of his
those he termed they), and he heard those people, Anatole and Dolokhov,
men belonged was as clearly defined in his mind as the category of
Denisov, and others like them (in his dream the category to which these
again!" On one side of the table sat Anatole, Dolokhov, Nesvitski,
alive. How sorry I am that he died, and how glad I am that he is alive
But he died!" thought Pierre. "Yes, he died, and I did not know he was
sat at the end of the table. "Yes, that is he! It is my benefactor.
It was taking place at the English Club and someone near and dear to him
a picture of a solemn meeting of the lodge presented itself to his mind.
Pierre's mind, and then he remembered his benefactor at Torzhok. And now
at the English Club when he had challenged Dolokhov flashed through
as a soldier after the duel with Dolokhov." And the memory of the dinner
away from my father, as I wanted to. Or I might have been sent to serve
outer man? There was a time when I could have done it. I could have run
they are. But how cast off all the superfluous, devilish burden of my
"to enter communal life completely, to be imbued by what makes them what
"To be a soldier, just a soldier!" thought Pierre as he fell asleep,

clearly and sharply from everyone else.
the icon. They, those strange men he had not previously known, stood out
battery, those who had given him food, and those who had prayed before
They, in Pierre's mind, were the soldiers, those who had been at the

end..." thought he.
to it! But they... they were steady and calm all the time, to the
again. "Oh, what a terrible thing is fear, and how shamefully I yielded
"Thank God, there is no more of that!" he thought, covering up his head

the clear starry sky between the dark roofs of two penthouses.
smell of stable yards, delightful to Pierre at that moment. He could see
of the penthouse. The whole courtyard was permeated by a strong peaceful
by the movement he had made in sitting up, fluttered under the dark roof
and talked to the innkeeper. Above Pierre's head some pigeons, disturbed
someone's orderly passed through the gateway, splashing through the mud,
lifted his head from under his cloak. All was tranquil in the yard. Only
dread of death seized him. Filled with fright he opened his eyes and
and cries, and smelled blood and powder, and a feeling of horror and
he heard the boom, boom, boom of firing, the thud of projectiles, groans
falling asleep, but suddenly, almost with the distinctness of reality,
Scarcely had Pierre laid his head on the pillow before he felt himself


CHAPTER IX





down in his carriage.
Pierre went out into the yard and, covering himself up head and all, lay
There was not a room to be had at the inn, they were all occupied.

"No, better not!" said another, inner voice.
"I ought to give them something!" he thought, and felt in his pocket.

"Good-by!" he said and turned with his groom toward the inn.

"Good-by, Peter Kirilych!" Pierre heard the other voices repeat.

Kirilych--isn't it?"
"So you've found your folk?" said one of them. "Well, good-by, Peter

The soldiers stopped.

"Oh, yes!" said Pierre.

it you are on foot? And where are you going, please?"
"Your excellency!" he said. "Why, we were beginning to despair! How is

darkness by his white hat.
town and was returning to the inn. The groom recognized Pierre in the
hill stumbled upon his groom, who had been to look for him in the
this, such was his state of forgetfulness, had he not halfway up the
and that he had already passed it. He would not soon have remembered
soldiers, quite forgetting that his inn was at the bottom of the hill
into the town, the cocks were already crowing. Pierre went on with the
By the time they got near Mozhaysk and began ascending the steep hill

In the total darkness the soldiers walked with Pierre to Mozhaysk.

"Well then, Peter Kirilych, come along with us, we'll take you there."

"Peter Kirilych."

"And what's your name?"

"Yes."

"You're a gentleman, aren't you?"

"To Mozhaysk."

"Where have you to go to? Tell us!" said one of them.

the fire and the soldiers looked at him in silence.
to large spoonfuls and chewing one after another, his face was lit up by
he had ever tasted. As he sat bending greedily over it, helping himself
the food in the cauldron, and he thought it more delicious than any food
Pierre sat down by the fire and began eating the mash, as they called

Pierre a wooden spoon after licking it clean.
"Would you like a little mash?" the first soldier asked, and handed

Another shook his head.

"There now!" said one of the soldiers.

are not here. I came to the battle and have lost them."
better understood by them. "By rights I am a militia officer, but my men
position as much as possible so as to be nearer to the soldiers and
"I, I..." said Pierre, feeling it necessary to minimize his social

man."
we'll give you some food, only let us know whether you are an honest
meaning what Pierre himself had in mind, namely: "If you want to eat
"And who may you be?" one of them suddenly asked Pierre, evidently

eating and talking among themselves, taking no notice of him.
the smell of smoke. Pierre sat up and sighed. The three soldiers were
put a little dripping. The pleasant odor of greasy viands mingled with
and placed an iron pot on it into which they broke some dried bread and
The soldiers, who threw sidelong glances at Pierre, got the fire to burn

lighting a fire.
soldiers, having brought some firewood, settled down near him and began
had no idea how long he had been there. In the middle of the night three
toward him with a terrific whizz, and then he shuddered and sat up. He
the darkness. He was continually imagining that a cannon ball was flying
his elbow for a long time, gazing at the shadows that moved past him in
Dusk had fallen, and the roar of guns died away. Pierre lay leaning on

by the roadside.
Having gone a couple of miles along the Mozhaysk road, Pierre sat down

aroused terror, and besides this there were the foul air and the dust.
overcoats, the same sounds of firing which, though distant now, still
strangely indifferent faces, the same blood, the same soldiers'
of battle. There were still the same suffering, exhausted, and sometimes
was going, still on all sides there was what there had been on the field
Though shells and bullets did not whistle over the road along which he

ordinary conditions of life were nowhere to be found.
be able to understand himself and all he had seen and felt. But such
bed. He felt that only in the ordinary conditions of life would he
to ordinary conditions of life and sleep quietly in a room in his own
from the terrible sensations amid which he had lived that day and return
The one thing he now desired with his whole soul was to get away quickly

the crowds of soldiers.
seeing blood and hearing cries and groans hurried on, still entangled in
Knyazkovo with a crowd of soldiers, reached the dressing station, and
from Raevski's battery a second time, made his way through a gully to
Toward the end of the battle of Borodino, Pierre, having run down


CHAPTER VIII





Borodino.
This letter was brought to Pierre's house when he was on the field of


keeping--Your friend Helene.
And so I pray God to have you, my friend, in His holy and powerful


the bearer of the letter.
formalities necessary for a divorce, which would be explained to him by
embraced the one true faith, and asking him to carry out all the
much--informing him of her intention to marry N.N. and of her having
she wrote a letter to her husband--who, as she imagined, loved her very
By the beginning of August Helene's affairs were clearly defined and


simple," she thought as she got into her carriage.
is it that we in our irrecoverable youth did not know it? Yet it is so
dissipated by the appearance of His Highness. "She is right, but how
"Yes, she is right," thought the old princess, all her convictions

sidled out of the room.
entered took no notice of her. The princess nodded to her daughter and
The old princess rose respectfully and curtsied. The young man who had


    * "Countess, there is mercy for every sin."


with a long face and nose, as he entered the room.
"Comtesse, a tout peche misericorde," * said a fair-haired young man


     him for not keeping his word to me."
     * "No, tell him I don't wish to see him, I am furious with


lui, parce qu'il m'a manque parole." *
"Non, dites-lui que je ne veux pas le voir, que je suis furieuse contre

that His Highness was in the ballroom and wished to see her.
Just then the lady companion who lived with Helene came in to announce

the right to grant dispensations..."
"Oh, Mamma, how is it you don't understand that the Holy Father, who has

"But, my dear...."


     anything. In my position I have obligations."
     * "Oh, Mamma, don't talk nonsense! You don't understand


into French which suited it better.
which language she always felt that her case did not sound quite clear,
position j'ai des devoirs," * said Helene changing from Russian, in
"Ah, Maman, ne dites pas de betises. Vous ne comprenez rien. Dans ma

said the old princess.
"But it says plainly: 'Whosoever shall marry her that is divorced...'"

ironically.
Having listened to her mother's objections, Helene smiled blandly and

drove to her daughter's early one morning so as to find her alone.
Armed with these arguments, which appeared to her unanswerable, she

is alive.
which (as it seemed to him) plainly forbids remarriage while the husband
it was impossible, and to her delight showed her a text in the Gospel
and remarriage during a husband's lifetime, and the priest told her that
idea. She consulted a Russian priest as to the possibility of divorce
a subject near to her own heart, she could not reconcile herself to the
tormented by jealousy of her daughter, and now that jealousy concerned
marriage was Helene's mother, Princess Kuragina. She was continually
Among those who ventured to doubt the justifiability of the proposed

Helene laughed.

"Even divorce you?" said he.

Bilibin puckered his skin in preparation for something witty.

Pierre too loved her. "He will do anything for me."
"Oh, he loves me so!" said Helene, who for some reason imagined that

naive a question. "Will he agree?"
his reputation being so well established that he did not fear to ask so
"But tell me, how will your husband look at the matter?" Bilibin asked,


    * A masterly woman.


She would like to be married to all three at the same time," thought he.
"Une maitresse-femme! * That's what is called putting things squarely.

help in that difficulty.
Bilibin shrugged his shoulders, as much as to say that not even he could

either of them. I would give my life for the happiness of them both."
Bilibin's sleeve. "But I love them, you know, and don't want to distress
"That's a true friend!" said Helene beaming, and again touching

a mesalliance by marrying you," and Bilibin smoothed out his forehead.
happy, and as widow of the Grand... the prince would no longer be making
connection.) But if you marry the old count you will make his last days
displease the court besides. (You know there is some kind of
"you forever lose the chance of marrying the other, and you will
marry the prince"--he meant the younger man--and he crooked one finger,
I have thought and thought again about your affair. You see, if you
"You are not taking me unawares, you know," said he. "As a true friend,

smile on his lips.
Bilibin wrinkled up the skin over his eyebrows and pondered, with a

Which of the two?"
beringed fingers. "Tell me, as you would a sister, what I ought to do.
by their surnames), and she touched his coat sleeve with her white,
"Listen, Bilibin," said Helene (she always called friends of that sort

gave her his view of the matter at a small and intimate gathering.
Helene always has--men friends who can never change into lovers--once
and who was one of the disinterested friends so brilliant a woman as
Bilibin, who had not lost his reputation of an exceedingly clever man,

daughter's and move away.
concealing his unvarying emotion he would press his cheek against his
dear child, consult only your own heart. That is all I have to say," and
heart rejoices to know that you... You have suffered so much.... But, my
concerning... you know. Well my dear child, you know how your father's
aside, drawing her hand downward. "I have heard of certain projects
"Helene, I have a word to say to you," and he would lead her

daughter whenever he chanced to see her:
repeated one and the same thing a hundred times, remarked to his
Prince Vasili, who of late very often forgot what he had said and

the whole sting of her remark to lie in that word.
and repeated in a whisper, the one coarse word she had used, supposing
Petersburg as a buffoon, and so of what she had said they only noticed,
Though people were afraid of Marya Dmitrievna she was regarded in

moved across the room.
sleeves with her usual threatening gesture and glancing sternly round,
brothels," and with these words Marya Dmitrievna, turning up her wide
forestalled, my dear! It was thought of long ago. It is done in all the
again! Perhaps you think you have invented a novelty? You have been
in her gruff voice: "So wives of living men have started marrying
stopped her in the middle of the room and, amid general silence, said
an opinion contrary to the general one. Meeting Helene at a ball she
summer to see one of her sons, allowed herself plainly to express
Only Marya Dmitrievna Akhrosimova, who had come to Petersburg that

live in society.
decision would be to risk exposing one's stupidity and incapacity to
than you or me," as they said, and to doubt the correctness of that
discuss, for that question had evidently been settled by people "wiser
right or wrong to remarry while one had a husband living they did not
question which match would be the more advantageous. Whether it was
while the majority were interested in Helene's good fortune and in the
of marriage, but there were not many such and they remained silent,
such a question, who saw in the project a desecration of the sacrament
were, it is true, some rigid individuals unable to rise to the height of
the better match and how the matter would be regarded at court. There
The question was no longer whether this was possible, but only which was
interesting Helene was in doubt which of the two men she should marry.
opposed so illegal an intention) but simply that the unfortunate and
be divorced from her husband (had such a report spread many would have
A rumor immediately spread in Petersburg, not that Helene wanted to

afraid of grieving either.
and the magnate had proposed to her and that she loved both and was
intimate friends (and these were all Petersburg) that both the prince
or shame, on the contrary, with good-natured naivete she told her
certainly have been lost; but not only did she show no signs of secrecy
the least sign of hesitation, shame, or secrecy, her cause would
marrying a maiden had its effect on him too. Had Helene herself shown
Helene's imperturbable conviction that it was as simple and natural as
with a woman whose husband was alive, as the younger man had been, but
magnate was at first as much taken aback by this suggestion of marriage
way for him to obtain a right over her was to marry her. The elderly
had told her other suitor; that is, she put the matter so that the only
She provoked the jealousy of the elderly magnate and told him what she
So she decided that it was necessary to prepare the opinion of society.

would be regarded by the secular authorities.
difficulties only because they were apprehensive as to how the matter
the ecclesiastical point of view, and that her directors were making
Helene understood that the question was very simple and easy from


CHAPTER VII





began refuting his spiritual daughter's arguments.
"Let us understand one another, Countess," said he with a smile, and

not abandon the edifice of argument he had laboriously constructed.
delighted at the unexpected rapidity of his pupil's progress, but could
presented to him thus with the simplicity of Columbus' egg. He was
The director of her conscience was astounded at having the case

cannot be bound by what a false religion laid upon me."
bewitching smiles: "But I think that having espoused the true religion I
But suddenly Helene, who was getting bored, said with one of her

question is again a twofold one: firstly..."
with the object of bearing children, your sin might be forgiven. But the
sin, for you acted without evil intention. If now you married again
What did you commit by so acting? A venial, or a mortal, sin? A venial
had. Yet in spite of this your vow was binding. You swerved from it.
sacrilege. That marriage lacked the dual significance it should have
faith in the religious significance of marriage, committed an act of
fidelity to a man who on his part, by entering the married state without
of the import of what you were undertaking, you made a vow of conjugal
The course of the Father Confessor's arguments ran as follows: "Ignorant

matter.
enjoyed the beauty of his companion, was absorbed in his mastery of the
conversation to take a fresh turn. But the abbe, though he evidently
plump, clean-shaven, blackish cheeks and every moment expected the
subject. Helene with an uneasy smile looked at his curly hair and his
occasionally glanced at her face as he explained his opinion on the
subtle smile on his lips and a peaceful look of delight at her beauty,
hands meekly folded on his knees, sat close to Helene and, with a
man with a plump, clean-shaven chin, a pleasant firm mouth, and white
dress, transparent over her shoulders and bosom. The abbe, a well-fed
The scent of flowers came in at the window. Helene was wearing a white
They were sitting in the twilight by a window in the drawing room.

bound by her marriage?
Confessor, she insisted on an answer to the question, in how far was she
human desires. And with this aim, in one of her talks with her Father
to preserve certain proprieties while affording satisfaction to
should be performed. In her view the aim of every religion was merely
that the various operations necessary to free her from her husband
which she received indications)-before parting with her money insisted
to Catholicism, to obtain money from her for Jesuit institutions (as to
object of all these words and all this trouble was, after converting her
the better of cleverer ones, Helene--having realized that the main
as it always happens in contests of cunning that a stupid person gets
but her pleasure did not cause her for a moment to forget her aim. And
only white dresses and white ribbons all that time) gave her pleasure,
refined ways, and the state of dove-like purity she was now in (she wore
devoted to her by so many clever men and expressed in such pleasant,
All that was done around her and to her at this time, all the attention

Pope himself would hear of her and would send her a certain document.
now been admitted to the true Catholic Church and that in a few days the
partake of. A few days later Helene learned with pleasure that she had
containing the Sacred Host, which was left at her house for her to
him, and he absolved her from her sins. Next day she received a box
After that a long-frocked abbe was brought to her. She confessed to

soul. It was explained to her that this was la grace.
described it, she felt something like a fresh breeze wafted into her
Frenchman laid his hands on her head and, as she herself afterward
down before the altar to which she was led. The enchanting, middle-aged
One day he took the countess to a Roman Catholic church, where she knelt


    * Lay member of the Society of Jesus.


again.
Jobert came to see Helene when she was alone, and after that often came
her future directeur de conscience, but the next evening Monsieur de
for which her partner came to seek her, put an end to her discourse with
and to those of Monsieur de Jobert and their voices trembled. A dance,
the next. Helene was touched, and more than once tears rose to her eyes
consolations the one true Catholic religion affords in this world and
long time of the love of God, of Christ, of the Sacred Heart, and of the
light of the illuminations and to the sound of music talked to her for a
a Jesuit a robe courte * was presented to her, and in the garden by the
a man no longer young, with snow white hair and brilliant black eyes,
her country house on the Stone Island, the charming Monsieur de Jobert,
A few days later at one of those enchanting fetes which Helene gave at

with whom he was on intimate terms.
and he applied for advice to the holy brethren of the Society of Jesus,
The prince was surprised that so simple an idea had not occurred to him,

arrange that?" said Helene.
"The law, religion... What have they been invented for if they can't

"But the law, religion..." said the prince, already yielding.

never been her husband's wife, and that she had been sacrificed.
she mentioned Napoleon and some other exalted personages), that she had
that there were precedents (there were up to that time very few, but
said through her tears that there was nothing to prevent her marrying,
The prince tried to comfort her, but Helene, as if quite distraught,

beginning to cry.
"You won't deign to demean yourself by marrying me, you..." said Helene,

"But that's impossible."

"Marry me, and I will be your slave!"

"But for heaven's sake listen to me!"

heaven.
her hand on her beautiful, fully expanded bosom and looking up to
render account only to God and to my conscience," she concluded, laying
Know, monseigneur, that in all that relates to my intimate feelings I
on him. I am not a man, that I should repay kindness with ingratitude!
than those of a father, but that is not a reason for me to shut my door
"Well, yes," said she, "it may be that he has other sentiments for me

prince was about to say something, but Helene interrupted him.
friendships? He is a man who has been more than a father to me!" The
right have you, monseigneur, to demand an account of my attachments and
sacrifices herself for you, she suffers, and this is her reward! What
just like a man--selfish and cruel! I expected nothing else. A woman
lifted her beautiful head and, half turning to him, said firmly: "That's
The first time the young foreigner allowed himself to reproach her, she

sincerely believed it to be, and that everyone else was to blame.
he pleases, at once assumed her own position to be correct, as she
guilty. But Helene, like a really great man who can do whatever
by cunning, she would have spoiled her case by acknowledging herself
concealment, or tried to extricate herself from her awkward position
deserved her reputation of being a very clever woman. Had she attempted
not cause the least embarrassment to Countess Bezukhova, who evidently
What would have seemed difficult or even impossible to another woman did

with both without offending either.
rights. Helene was faced by a new problem--how to preserve her intimacy
both the magnate and the prince were there, and both claimed their
an intimacy with a young foreign prince. When she returned to Petersburg
occupied one of the highest posts in the Empire. In Vilna she had formed
In Petersburg she had enjoyed the special protection of a grandee who

herself in a difficult position.
Helene, having returned with the court from Vilna to Petersburg, found


CHAPTER VI





him along with it.
hand now to speed and now to stay the enormous, popular tide that bore
event--the abandonment and burning of Moscow--and tried with his puny
feat; and like a child he made sport of the momentous, and unavoidable
that would astonish people, to perform some patriotically heroic
meaning of what was happening but merely wanted to do something himself
concerning his share in the affair--this man did not understand the
not survive the fall of Moscow, and now wrote French verses in albums
and himself drove away by a back gate; now declared that he would
and now, to get rid of them, handed over to them a man to be killed
offense; now assembled the people at the Three Hills to fight the French
postmaster Klyucharev to be arrested and exiled for no particular
French colony in Moscow) to remain, but ordered the venerable old
Moscow, and now allowed Madame Aubert-Chalme (the center of the whole
reproached them for doing so; now expelled all the French residents from
now ordered the people to catch all spies and bring them to him, and now
having hinted that he would burn Moscow and now repudiated the deed;
them for having destroyed his Orphanage; now claimed the glory of
own house; now wrote a proclamation to the French solemnly upbraiding
hinted that he would burn Moscow and related how he had set fire to his
of them removed the balloon that was being constructed by Leppich; now
seized all the private carts in Moscow and on one hundred and thirty-six
forbade Father Augustin to remove icons or the relics of saints; now
the drunken rabble; now had processions displaying the icons, and now
government offices removed; now distributed quite useless weapons to
Count Rostopchin, who now taunted those who left Moscow and now had the
simply, and truly carrying out the great work which saved Russia. But
a vague consciousness that she was not Bonaparte's servant, was really,
Negroes and her women jesters from Moscow to her Saratov estate, with
stopped by Count Rostopchin's orders, had already in June moved with her
greatest glory of the Russian people. The lady who, afraid of being
that the momentous event was accomplished that will always remain the
own account, and yet it was only in consequence of their going away
abandoned by its inhabitants to be burned. They went away each on his
destruction, for a great city with wooden buildings was certain when
significance of that immense and wealthy city being given over to
to destruction. They went away without thinking of the tremendous
they must go away, sorry as they were to abandon their property
serfs to the Three Hills quarter of Moscow to fight Napoleon, and that
if it could not succeed it would not do to take young ladies and house
his broadsheets. They knew that it was for the army to fight, and that
to destroy the French, and despite all the nonsense Rostopchin wrote in
the Iberian Mother of God and go to fight, or of the balloons that were
or the announcement of his intention to take the wonder-working icon of
still more rapidly after it, despite Rostopchin's calls to defend Moscow
that could happen. They went away even before the battle of Borodino and
out of the question to be under French rule, it would be the worst thing
whether things would go well or ill under French rule in Moscow. It was
They went away because for Russians there could be no question as to

much.
whom the Russians, and especially the Russian ladies, then liked so
had spent their time pleasantly in the company of the charming Frenchmen
remained intact and that during Napoleon's occupation the inhabitants
rich educated people who knew quite well that Vienna and Berlin had
committed in conquered countries. The first people to go away were the
Rostopchin had scared them by his accounts of horrors Napoleon had
it had to be done. Why did they go? It is impossible to suppose that
to be called cowards, ashamed to leave, but still they left, knowing
impressed on them that to leave Moscow was shameful. They were ashamed
away from Moscow," they were told. In his broadsheets Rostopchin
"It is disgraceful to run away from danger; only cowards are running

and therefore in the way that always produces the most powerful results.
and similar unnatural exploits, but unobtrusively, simply, organically,
itself not by phrases or by giving one's children to save the fatherland
their belongings, did so from the latent patriotism which expresses
went away, taking what they could and abandoning their houses and half
and at the beginning of August showed that they expected this. Those who
Moscow society in 1812. Those who had quitted Moscow already in July
and a foreboding that Moscow would be taken, was present in Russian
is present in the heart of every Russian. And a consciousness of this,
The consciousness that this would be so and would always be so was and

while the poorer remained and burned and destroyed what was left.
enemy drew near the wealthy classes went away abandoning their property,
find what it should do at that most difficult moment. And as soon as the
anyone to pieces, but faced its fate, feeling within it the strength to
awaited the enemy unconcernedly, did not riot or become excited or tear
participation of Count Rostopchin and his broadsheets. The people
and villages on Russian soil beginning with Smolensk, without the
The same thing that took place in Moscow had happened in all the towns

feeling implanted in each of us and in our fathers.
Every Russian might have predicted it, not by reasoning but by the

as inevitable as the retreat of the army beyond Moscow without fighting.
After the battle of Borodino the abandonment and burning of Moscow was

event, acted in an altogether different manner from Kutuzov.
Rostopchin, who is usually represented as being the instigator of that
without a battle, namely the evacuation and burning of Moscow,
At that very time, in circumstances even more important than retreating


CHAPTER V





shall too, if only..."
Kutuzov without replying, striking the table with his podgy fist. "They
"But no! They shall eat horseflesh yet, like the Turks!" exclaimed

"You should take some rest, your Serene Highness," replied Schneider.

this would happen."
latter came in late that night. "I did not expect this! I did not think
"I did not expect this," said he to his adjutant Schneider when the

that done which settled the matter? And who was to blame for it?"
"When, when did the abandonment of Moscow become inevitable? When was
elbows on the table, thinking always of the same terrible question:
When he had dismissed the generals Kutuzov sat a long time with his

out of the room.
projections, and slipping between the legs of the generals she darted
backwards down from the oven, her bare little feet catching at its
Malasha, who had long been expected for supper, climbed carefully

their commander in chief.
the way they had spoken during the council, communicated something to
Some of the generals, in low tones and in a strain very different from

circumspect silence of people who are leaving, after a funeral.
After that the generals began to disperse with the solemnity and

order a retreat."
paused, "by the authority entrusted to me by my Sovereign and country,
I have heard your views. Some of you will not agree with me. But I," he
crockery," said he, and rising slowly he moved to the table. "Gentlemen,
"Well, gentlemen, I see that it is I who will have to pay for the broken

speak. They all looked at him.
During one of these pauses Kutuzov heaved a deep sigh as if preparing to

felt that there was no more to be said.
The discussion recommenced, but pauses frequently occurred and they all

There followed a momentary pause, which seemed very long to them all.

troops were rearranged too near the enemy..."
well remembers, and which was... not fully successful, only because our
added: "Oh yes; take the battle of Friedland, which I think the count
searching for an example, then with a clear, naive look at Bennigsen he
history supports that view. For instance..." Kutuzov seemed to reflect,
troops in close proximity to an enemy is always dangerous, and military
"Gentlemen," said Kutuzov, "I cannot approve of the count's plan. Moving

attack the French right wing.
proposal to move troops by night from the right to the left flank to
and quiet comment on the advantage or disadvantage of Bennigsen's
angrily up and down the room. What so affected him was Kutuzov's calm
"Long-coat" which settled him. Bennigsen suddenly reddened and paced
glance, and then to her joys he saw that "Granddad" said something to
the conversation she noticed "Granddad" give Bennigsen a quick, subtle
one another, and in her heart she sided with "Granddad." In the midst of
she termed Bennigsen. She saw that they grew spiteful when they spoke to
it was only a personal struggle between "Granddad" and "Long-coat" as
understood the meaning of the council differently. It seemed to her that
Malasha, who kept her eyes fixed on what was going on before her,
Moscow, spoke of the direction the army should take in its retreat.
generals, however, understood it and, leaving aside the question of
of events and that Moscow was in effect already abandoned. The other
to understand that this council could not alter the inevitable course
or guided by other, personal considerations, these generals seemed not
feeling it necessary to make a sacrifice before abandoning the capital
project. Ermolov, Dokhturov, and Raevski agreed with Bennigsen. Whether
Opinions were divided, and arguments were advanced for and against that
during the night and attack the French right flank the following day.
of Moscow, he proposed to move troops from the right to the left flank
Fili was impossible, but imbued with Russian patriotism and the love
Admitting the view of Barclay and others that a defensive battle at
The discussion began. Bennigsen did not yet consider his game lost.

sank back in his chair.
as Moscow? That is the question on which I want your opinion," and he
without a battle, or by accepting battle to risk losing the army as well
The question is that of saving Russia. Is it better to give up Moscow
I have asked these gentlemen to meet to discuss is a military one.
forward.) "Such a question cannot be put; it is senseless! The question
question has no meaning for a Russian." (He lurched his heavy body
false note in them. "Allow me to tell you, your excellency, that that
Bennigsen's words in an angry voice and thereby drawing attention to the
"Russia's ancient and sacred capital!" he suddenly said, repeating

seemed about to cry, but this did not last long.
"Granddad." She was nearest to him and saw how his face puckered; he
broke the silence. All eyes were gazing at him. Malasha too looked at
on every face and only Kutuzov's angry grunts and occasional cough
defend it?" A prolonged and general silence followed. There was a frown
Russia's ancient and sacred capital without a struggle, or are we to
Bennigsen opened the council with the question: "Are we to abandon

placed there to light up his face.
draw toward the table, but not near enough for the candles that had been
Only when Bennigsen had entered the hut did Kutuzov leave his corner and

time but talked in low tones of other matters.
four till six o'clock and did not begin their deliberations all that
the position was finishing his savory dinner. They waited for him from
They were all waiting for Bennigsen, who on the pretext of inspecting

eyes caused the little girl to smile.
a tender, sly smile. His glance met Malasha's, and the expression of his
impatience. Konovnitsyn's firm, handsome, and kindly face was lit up by
habit, glanced now at Kutuzov and now at the door with a look of
Raevski, twitching forward the black hair on his temples as was his
head with its bold features and glittering eyes was resting on his hand.
Ostermann-Tolstoy, seemingly absorbed in his own thoughts. His broad
raised and arms folded on his stomach. On the other side sat Count
Chubby little Dokhturov was listening attentively with eyebrows
giving him some information, speaking in low tones as they all did.
and in pain. Beside him sat Uvarov, who with rapid gesticulations was
pale and ill. He had been feverish for two days and was now shivering
his bald crown. He had a St. George's Cross round his neck and looked
under the icons, sat Barclay de Tolly, his high forehead merging into
just arrived, sat down on this bench. In the foremost place, immediately
bench and put it beside the table. Ermolov, Kaysarov, and Toll, who had
papers, so many people gathered that the orderlies brought in another
Round the peasant's deal table, on which lay maps, plans, pencils, and

that his Serene Highness did not wish his face to be seen.
Kutuzov, but the latter moved his hand angrily and Kaysarov understood
Kaysarov was about to draw back the curtain of the window facing
marshal; he pressed the hands of some and nodded to others. His adjutant
to pinch his neck. Those who entered went up one by one to the field
the collar of his coat which, though it was unbuttoned, still seemed
in a folding armchair, and continually cleared his throat and pulled at
Kutuzov, sat apart in a dark corner behind the oven. He sat, sunk deep
under the icons. "Granddad" himself, as Malasha in her own mind called
came into the room and sat down on the broad benches in the corner
faces, uniforms, and decorations of the generals, who one after another
larger room. Malasha looked down from the oven with shy delight at the
while drinking his tea, remained on the top of the brick oven in the
his Serene Highness had petted and to whom he had given a lump of sugar
the passage. Only Malasha, Andrew's six-year-old granddaughter whom
children of the large peasant family crowded into the back room across
better and roomier part of Andrew Savostyanov's hut. The men, women, and
The Council of War began to assemble at two in the afternoon in the


CHAPTER IV





from the bench, and he rode to Fili where his carriages were waiting.
"My head, be it good or bad, must depend on itself," said he, rising

He called the most important generals to him.

were assuming too free a character must be stopped.
something had to be decided, and these conversations around him which
and he was horrified at the thought of the order he had to issue. But
the world he alone could encounter the invincible Napoleon without fear,
command of the army in these difficult circumstances, and that in all
commander in chief. He was convinced that he alone could maintain
the Emperor's wish and by the will of the people, he had been chosen
that he was destined to save Russia and that that was why, against
under whom he had served in Turkey, galled him), but he was convinced
which he was accustomed (the honours awarded to Prince Prozorovski,
resigning the command of the army. And not only did he love power to
be given." To give that terrible order seemed to him equivalent to
must be abandoned. The army must retreat and the order to do so must
earlier still?... When, when was this terrible affair decided? Moscow
before, when I had a nap and told Bennigsen to issue orders? Or was it
yesterday when I ordered Platov to retreat, or was it the evening
Moscow, and when did I do so? When was it decided? Can it have been
question for him now was: "Have I really allowed Napoleon to reach
absorbed him and to that question he heard no reply from anyone. The
intrigue did not now occupy the old man's mind. One terrible question
given, to clear himself of the crime of abandoning Moscow. But this
it succeeded, to claim the success as his own; or if battle were not
brought the army as far as the Sparrow Hills without giving battle; if
to Kutuzov: if the defense failed, to throw the blame on Kutuzov who had
insisting that Moscow must be defended. His aim was as clear as daylight
patriotism (Kutuzov could not listen to this without wincing) by
Bennigsen, who had chosen the position, warmly displayed his Russian

This Kutuzov knew well.
important in itself but only as a pretext for disputes and intrigue.
defended and others still discussed it, the question was no longer
as they were of defeat. If Bennigsen insisted on the position being
position impossible and therefore could not go to fight, fully convinced
officers and even the soldiers (who too reason) also considered the
a field of battle they considered impossible to hold? The lower-grade
inevitable abandonment. How could the commanders lead their troops to
in their conversations were only discussing what would happen after its
commanders not merely all recognized the position to be impossible, but
battle would still not take place. It would not take place because the
commander were to give orders to fight, confusion would result but the
those words, that is to say, so utterly impossible that if any senseless
to defend Moscow was a physical impossibility in the full meaning of
preoccupied and gloomy. From all this talk he saw only one thing: that
was talking absolute nonsense. Kutuzov's expression grew more and more
discussed the direction the troops would now have to take. A sixth group
fifth group, displaying the profundity of their strategic perceptions,
that had he known it sooner things would have been different.... A
help regretting having been left in ignorance of what was happening, and
train bands under the walls of the capital, but that he still could not
was telling a fourth group that he was prepared to die with the city
possibility of defending Moscow in a similar manner.) Count Rostopchin
army were discussing the siege of Saragossa and considering the
(This Frenchman and one of the German princes serving with the Russian
described by Crosart, a newly arrived Frenchman in a Spanish uniform.
before. Others again spoke of the battle of Salamanca, which was
been made earlier and that a battle should have been fought two days
capacity of those who had chosen it. Others argued that a mistake had
chosen, criticizing not the position itself so much as the mental
anything he wished to hear. Some discussed the position that had been
away with an air of disappointment, as though they were not speaking of
what was being said by one or other of these groups he generally turned
take part in the conversations or express any opinion. After hearing
and sometimes asked them to repeat their remarks, but did not himself
overhear them. The commander in chief listened to what was being said
bench formed the center of the gathering) and to speak so that he might
among themselves, tried to keep near the commander in chief (whose
height the situation demanded. And all these groups, while talking
these men. They evidently all made an effort to hold themselves at the
matters. No jokes, or laughter, or smiles even, were seen among all
news, it was done in a whisper and they immediately reverted to general
dealt with public questions. If anyone gave or asked for personal
all felt that this was really a council of war. The conversations all
not been summoned for the purpose, and though it was not so called, they
situation of Moscow, and military questions generally. Though they had
of the position, the state of the army, the plans suggested, the
into several groups who all discussed the advantages and disadvantages
had come out from Moscow, joined them. This brilliant company separated
A great crowd of generals gathered round him, and Count Rostopchin, who
Kutuzov got out of his carriage and sat down on a bench by the roadside.
On the Poklonny Hill, four miles from the Dorogomilov gate of Moscow,

without a battle.
Kutuzov could not yet admit the possibility of retreating beyond Moscow

saying!"
pulse, added: "You are not well, my dear fellow. Think what you are
"Give me your hand," said he and, turning it over so as to feel the

and that they must retreat, Kutuzov looked at him in silence.
the field marshal that it was impossible to fight there before Moscow
When Ermolov, having been sent by Kutuzov to inspect the position, told


CHAPTER III





retreat from Borodino to Fili.
the twenty-sixth at Borodino, and each day and hour and minute of the
palpably of all on the twenty-fourth of August at Shevardino and on
that question been settled? At Drissa and at Smolensk and most
less than four miles from Moscow, no such question existed. When had
whether to abandon Moscow or defend it; whereas, with the Russian army
commander in chief could, on the first of September, quite freely decide
us, for instance, the position of the army at Fili and assume that the
inevitable conditions of a commander in chief's actions describe to
differently. People accustomed to misunderstand or to forget these
on reconnaissance, all describe the position of the enemy's army
previously sent; and a spy, a prisoner, and a general who has been
gives a report quite contrary to what was said by the officer
be defended, and an officer sent to inspect the locality comes in and
rewards comes to complain, and the inhabitants of the district pray to
a respectable general who has been overlooked in the distribution of
chief himself needs sleep and refreshment to maintain his energy and
opposed to that of turning to the Kaluga road, and the commander in
not merely one but several such), presents a new project diametrically
chief's rival, the man who is undermining him (and there are always
not admit of the possibility of abandoning Moscow, and the commander in
courier from Petersburg brings a letter from the sovereign which does
and the chief of the hospitals asks where the wounded are to go, and a
comes the commissary general asking where the stores are to be taken,
carries us past the turn to the Kaluga road. And after the adjutant
order must be given him at once, that instant. And the order to retreat
Miloradovich asking whether he is to engage the French or retire. An
cross to the Kaluga road, but just then an adjutant gallops up from
wait. For instance, on the twenty-eighth it is suggested to him to
of these projects. But even that he cannot do. Events and time do not
A commander in chief's business, it would seem, is simply to choose one

on strategics and tactics, contradict each other.
one proposal but dozens simultaneously. And all these proposals, based
in chief, especially at a difficult moment, has always before him not
that somebody actually submitted such a proposal to him. But a commander
have moved his army to the Kaluga road long before reaching Fili, and
Learned military authorities quite seriously tell us that Kutuzov should

which constantly conflict with one another.
continually obliged to reply to innumerable questions addressed to him,
authorities, projects, counsels, threats, and deceptions and is
midst of a most complex play of intrigues, worries, contingencies,
uninterrupted shaping of events the commander in chief is in the
is imperceptibly shaping itself, and at every moment of this continuous,
whole import of an event that is occurring. Moment by moment the event
series of shifting events and so he never can at any moment consider the
contemplate it. The commander in chief is always in the midst of a
with the beginning of any event--the position from which we always
plans from some given moment. A commander in chief is never dealing
troops on this and that side in a certain known locality, and begin our
our studies examining some campaign on the map, with a certain number of
resemble the activity we imagine to ourselves when we sit at ease in
commander in chief. The activity of a commander in chief does not at all
the inevitable conditions which always limit the activities of any
so on. People accustomed to think in that way forget, or do not know,
Why did he not retire at once by the Kaluga road, abandoning Moscow? and
this or that? Why did he not take up a position before reaching Fili?
questions present themselves: Why did Kutuzov during the retreat not do
imagine how he would have arranged things in this or that battle--the
made by generals--as any one of us sitting over a map in his study may
For people accustomed to think that plans of campaign and battles are

abandoned Moscow to the enemy.
beyond Moscow. And the troops retired one more, last, day's march, and
arisen in all ranks--the force of circumstances compelled it to retire
the army drew near Moscow--despite the strength of the feeling that had
and a third day's march, and at last, on the first of September when
march, and then in the same way it was impossible not to retreat another
possibility did not exist. It was impossible not to retreat a day's
sufficient, there must also be a possibility of doing it, and that
army desired to do so. But to make an attack the wish to do so is not
from its aim. Kutuzov's wish was to attack next day, and the whole
seemingly increased in inverse proportion to the square of the distance
upon the Russians, carried forward by the force of its own momentum now
very next morning after the battle, the French army advanced of itself
killed, and before the men had had food and sleep. And meanwhile, the
slain reckoned up, new officers appointed to replace those who had been
the wounded gathered in, the supplies of ammunition replenished, the
It was impossible to give battle before information had been collected,

proved physically impossible.
of unheard-of losses, of the loss of half the army, and a fresh battle
But all that evening and next day reports came in one after another

part in the battle knew it.
but because he knew that the enemy was beaten, as everyone who had taken
fresh conflict to finish the enemy and did this not to deceive anyone,
Kutuzov reported so to the Emperor. He gave orders to prepare for a
Russian army were convinced that the battle of Borodino was a victory.
On the evening of the twenty-sixth of August, Kutuzov and the whole

farther still.
to Smolensk, beyond Smolensk, beyond the Berezina, beyond Vilna, and
undertaking a single serious battle, they fled still more rapidly back
Malo-Yaroslavets the field of conflict again remained theirs) without
they made a dash for the Kaluga road, and (after a victory--for at
for five weeks, and then suddenly, with no fresh reason, fled back:
mortally wounded animal licks its wounds, they remained inert in Moscow
there was not a single battle. The French did not move. As a bleeding,
reached Moscow and there came to a standstill. For five weeks after that
The Russians retreated eighty miles--to beyond Moscow--and the French

distance, though the collision had deprived it of all its force.
of invasion that had advanced with such momentum rolled on for some
having a greater momentum, and with equal inevitability the ball
collision as inevitably as a ball recoils after colliding with another
broken up, but the Russian army retreated immediately after the
consolidated. At Borodino a collision took place. Neither army was
of the enemy flared up, and while it retreated the army increased and
The more the Russian army retreated the more fiercely a spirit of hatred

Napoleon's army felt this and the invasion moved on by its own momentum.
were a few dozen miles separating it from its goal. Every soldier in
it were seven hundred miles of hunger-stricken, hostile country; ahead
velocity of a falling body increases as it approaches the earth. Behind
goal, its impetus ever increasing as it neared its aim, just as the
from Smolensk to Borodino. The French army pushed on to Moscow, its
army and people avoided a collision till Smolensk was reached, and again
The forces of a dozen European nations burst into Russia. The Russian


CHAPTER II





these actions.
and ministers and propounding the historians' own reflections concerning
been devoted to describing the actions of various kings, commanders,
mental effort has been applied in this direction by historians as has
the laws of history lie, and that as yet not a millionth part as much
evident that only along that path does the possibility of discovering
in this way toward an understanding of the laws of history; but it is
moved. No one can say in how far it is possible for man to advance
study the common, infinitesimally small elements by which the masses are
our observation, must leave aside kings, ministers, and generals, and
To study the laws of history we must completely change the subject of

direction have already been made.
bells, and of the wind. History must do the same. And attempts in this
point of view and study the laws of the movement of steam, of the
moving, or of the winds of spring. To that I must entirely change my
oak, I shall not discover the cause of the bells ringing, the engine
hands of the watch, and the valves and wheels of the engine, and the
life, and I see that however much and however carefully I observe the
coincidence of occurrences such as happens with all the phenomena of
force of the wind is beyond the influence of the buds. I see only a
unfolding of the oak buds is the cause of the cold wind, for the
when the oak buds unfold, I cannot agree with the peasants that the
is budding. But though I do not know what causes the cold winds to blow
are budding, and really every spring cold winds do blow when the oak
The peasants say that a cold wind blows in late spring because the oaks

movement of the engine.
that the whistling and the turning of wheels are the cause of the
the valves opening and wheels turning; but I have no right to conclude
Whenever I see the movement of a locomotive I hear the whistle and see

caused by the position of the hands of the watch.
reach ten, I have no right to assume that the movement of the bells is
church; but because the bells begin to ring when the hands of the clock
watch and its hands point to ten, I hear the bells of the neighboring
a war in the personal activity of a single man. Whenever I look at my
conquerors caused the wars and that it is possible to find the laws of
conquerors appear there have been wars, but this does not prove that the
great men," says history. And, indeed, human reason replies: every time
every time there has been a revolution in any state there have been
"But every time there have been conquests there have been conquerors;

those wills first tolerated and then destroyed them.
human wills produced the Revolution and Napoleon, and only the sum of
it a weaker phenomenon is taken as the cause of a stronger. The sum of
plainly says that this method of explanation is fallacious, because in
But the mind of man not only refuses to believe this explanation, but

is why this movement took place and those are its laws.
tell of the influence some of these people had on others, and say: that
biography of Napoleon and of certain people favorable or hostile to him;
these sayings and doings "the Revolution"; then they give a detailed
doings of a few dozen men in a building in the city of Paris, calling
The historians, replying to this question, lay before us the sayings and

this movement, by what laws was it governed? asks the mind of man.
movement which first increases and then slackens. What was the cause of
years the whole course of life is altered and presents an intensive
slaughter one another, triumph and are plunged in despair, and for some
pursuits, hasten from one side of Europe to the other, plunder and
extraordinary movement of millions of people. Men leave their customary
The first fifteen years of the nineteenth century in Europe present an

these infinitesimals) can we hope to arrive at the laws of history.
attaining to the art of integrating them (that is, finding the sum of
differential of history, that is, the individual tendencies of men) and
Only by taking infinitesimally small units for observation (the

arbitrarily selected.
right to do, seeing that whatever unit history observes must always be
smaller unit as the subject of observation--as criticism has every
drawn from history. It is merely necessary to select some larger or
It needs no critical exertion to reduce utterly to dust any deductions

in itself false.
many men is expressed by the actions of any one historic personage, is
or to assume a beginning of any phenomenon, or to say that the will of
units it takes, we feel that to take any unit disconnected from others,
takes smaller and smaller units for examination. But however small the
Historical science in its endeavor to draw nearer to truth continually

single historic personage.
the sum of individual wills is never expressed by the activity of a
a commander--as equivalent to the sum of many individual wills; whereas
The second method is to consider the actions of some one man--a king or

flows uninterruptedly from another.
there is and can be no beginning to any event, for one event always
series of continuous events and examine it apart from others, though
units. The first method of history is to take an arbitrarily selected
those human wills, man's mind postulates arbitrary and disconnected
history. But to arrive at these laws, resulting from the sum of all
To understand the laws of this continuous movement is the aim of

human wills, is continuous.
The movement of humanity, arising as it does from innumerable arbitrary
In seeking the laws of historical movement just the same thing happens.

examining continuous motion.
avoid when it deals with separate elements of motion instead of
and thereby corrects the inevitable error which the human mind cannot
and so conforms to the chief condition of motion (absolute continuity)
with problems of motion admits the conception of the infinitely small,
This modern branch of mathematics, unknown to the ancients, when dealing

problems of motion which used to appear insoluble.
the infinitely small can now yield solutions in other more complex
A modern branch of mathematics having achieved the art of dealing with

this progression to infinity, do we reach a solution of the problem.
progression with a common ratio of one tenth, and have found the sum of
the conception of the infinitely small, and the resulting geometrical
solution of the problem, but never reach it. Only when we have admitted
By adopting smaller and smaller elements of motion we only approach a

and of the tortoise was continuous.
divided into discontinuous elements, whereas the motion both of Achilles
overtake the tortoise) resulted from this: that motion was arbitrarily
the ancients insoluble. The absurd answer (that Achilles could never
another one hundredth, and so on forever. This problem seemed to
of him: when Achilles has covered that tenth, the tortoise has covered
tortoise, the tortoise has covered one tenth of that distance ahead
the time Achilles has covered the distance that separated him from the
of the fact that he traveled ten times as fast as the tortoise. By
Achilles could never catch up with a tortoise he was following, in spite
well known, so-called sophism of the ancients consisting in this, that
division of continuous motion into discontinuous elements. There is a
same time, a large proportion of human error comes from the arbitrary
examines arbitrarily selected elements of that motion; but at the
Laws of motion of any kind become comprehensible to man only when he
Absolute continuity of motion is not comprehensible to the human mind.


CHAPTER I





BOOK ELEVEN: 1812





spirit had been laid.
which at Borodino for the first time the hand of an opponent of stronger
five hundred thousand men, and the downfall of Napoleonic France, on
along the old Smolensk road, the destruction of the invading army of
of Borodino was Napoleon's senseless flight from Moscow, his retreat
wound it had received at Borodino. The direct consequence of the battle
on the part of the Russians, it had to perish, bleeding from the mortal
still able to roll forward to Moscow, but there, without further effort
by one half, could help swerving. By impetus gained, the French army was
perishing, but could not stop, any more than the Russian army, weaker
that has in its onslaught received a mortal wound, felt that they were
Russians at Borodino. The French invaders, like an infuriated animal
superiority of his opponent and of his own impotence was gained by the
standing, but a moral victory that convinces the enemy of the moral
standards, and of the ground on which the troops had stood and were
defined by the capture of pieces of material fastened to sticks, called
attacking French army was exhausted. Not that sort of victory which is
at the end as at the beginning of the battle. The moral force of the
before an enemy who, after losing HALF his men, stood as threateningly
such efforts the enemy had fled--experienced a similar feeling of terror
after all their experience of previous battles--when after one tenth of
soldiers of his army whether they had taken part in the battle or not,
of the mighty arm being stricken powerless, but all the generals and
It was not Napoleon alone who had experienced that nightmare feeling

flagging spirit of the troops would not permit it.
and soldiers of the French army knew it could not be done, because the
want to, but because it could not be done. All the generals, officers,
could not be. Napoleon did not give his Guards, not because he did not
Guards is like talking of what would happen if autumn became spring. It
been won. To speak of what would have happened had Napoleon sent his
have used his Old Guards, who were intact, and the battle would have
did not make that effort. Some historians say that Napoleon need only
attained and all their efforts and losses were in vain. But the French
block the road to Moscow as before, the aim of the French had not been
ought to have made that effort, for as long as the Russians continued to
who had attacked the Russian army in order to drive it from its position
twenty thousand strong, might easily have made that effort. The French
lost only a quarter of their men and still had their Guards intact,
consciousness that they had captured part of the battlefield and had
fifteen years, with the assurance of Napoleon's invincibility, with the
The French, with the memory of all their former victories during

positions they had lost ONE HALF of their army.
army that had not suffered in the battle, and though still holding their
the Russian troops had been broken up, there was no part of the Russian
from their positions, they could not have made this last effort, for all
beginning. But even had the aim of the Russians been to drive the French
way to Moscow and they still did so at the end of the battle as at the
the French. At the beginning of the battle they stood blocking the
The Russians did not make that effort because they were not attacking

that effort, and the flame of battle burned slowly out.
French would be destroyed. But neither the French nor the Russians made
said that the Russians need only make one more slight effort and the
disappear; and anyone looking at the rear of the French army would have
said that, if only the French made one more slight effort, it would
Anyone looking at the disorganized rear of the Russian army would have

continued.
by the will of a man but at the will of Him who governs men and worlds
sides, crushing human bodies, and that terrible work which was not done
and powder. The cannon balls flew just as swiftly and cruelly from both
they stumbled and panted with fatigue, perspiring and stained with blood
though only one artilleryman survived out of every three, and though
they still brought up the charges, loaded, aimed, and applied the match,
some incomprehensible, mysterious power continued to control them, and
what they were doing, though they would have been glad to leave off,
But though toward the end of the battle the men felt all the horror of

doing and might have thrown up everything and run away anywhere.
moment these men might have been seized with horror at what they were
so anymore!" By evening this thought had ripened in every soul. At any
killed?... You may go and kill whom you please, but I don't want to do
question arose in every soul: "For what, for whom, must I kill and be
slaughter one another; all the faces expressed hesitation, and the
it began equally to appear doubtful whether they should continue to
To the men of both sides alike, worn out by want of food and rest,

men! Enough! Cease... bethink yourselves! What are you doing?"
on the frightened, exhausted, and hesitating men, as if to say: "Enough,
Clouds gathered and drops of rain began to fall on the dead and wounded,
mist of damp and smoke and a strange acid smell of saltpeter and blood.
bayonets and cloudlets of smoke in the morning sun, there now spread a
Over the whole field, previously so gaily beautiful with the glitter of

their ground and continued to fire.
exhausted and hungry, went forward led by their officers. Others held
from the one army and back to Valuevo from the other. Other crowds,
unwounded, with frightened faces, dragged themselves back to Mozhaysk
of some three acres around. Crowds of men of various arms, wounded and
dressing stations the grass and earth were soaked with blood for a space
Semenovsk had reaped their harvests and pastured their cattle. At the
hundreds of years the peasants of Borodino, Gorki, Shevardino, and
family and to the crown serfs--those fields and meadows where for
various uniforms on the fields and meadows belonging to the Davydov
Several tens of thousands of the slain lay in diverse postures and


CHAPTER XXXIX





perished there were fewer Frenchmen than Hessians and Bavarians.
justification in the belief that among the hundreds of thousands who
whole responsibility for what happened, and his darkened mind found
horrors that occurred did not stagger his soul. He boldly took the
He imagined that the war with Russia came about by his will, and the


than eighteen thousand."
it reached Vilna it numbered only fifty thousand, and at Kalisch less
army also suffered from the severity of the season; so that by the time
in the woods; finally, in its march from Moscow to the Oder the Russian
cost the lives of a hundred thousand Russians who died of cold and want
battles four times more men than the French army; the burning of Moscow
the Russian army in its retreat from Vilna to Moscow lost in the various
Russian expedition actually cost France less than fifty thousand men;
included scarcely a hundred and forty thousand who spoke French. The
Thirty-second Military Division, of Bremen, of Hamburg, and so on: it
Piedmontese, Swiss, Genevese, Tuscans, Romans, inhabitants of the
composed of Dutch, Belgians, men from the borders of the Rhine,
Neapolitans. The Imperial army, strictly speaking, was one third
Bavarians, Wurttembergers, Mecklenburgers, Spaniards, Italians, and
of the Russian war, "half were Austrians, Prussians, Saxons, Poles,
"Of four hundred thousand who crossed the Vistula," he wrote further


the employment of power confer benefactions.
peoples' welfare and that he could control the fate of millions and by
of the peoples, assured himself that the aim of his actions had been the
Napoleon, predestined by Providence for the gloomy role of executioner


everywhere.
and scattering public buildings and benefactions on all sides and
every corner of the Empire, receiving complaints, redressing wrongs,
leisurely visiting, with our own horses and like a true country couple,
with the Empress and during the royal apprenticeship of my son, to
My leisure then, and my old age, would have been devoted, in company

of the nations!
Paris would have been the capital of the world, and the French the envy

reign would have begun.
Empire; my dictatorship would have been finished, and his constitutional
aggrandizement antinational. I should have associated my son in the
her frontiers immutable; all future wars purely defensive, all
peaceful, and glorious fatherland, I should have proclaimed
On returning to France, to the bosom of the great, strong, magnificent,

for the sovereigns.
the great standing armies should be reduced henceforth to mere guards
rivers for everybody, that the seas should be common to all, and that
common fatherland. I should have demanded the freedom of all navigable
anyone who traveled anywhere would have found himself always in the
Europe would in this way soon have been, in fact, but one people, and

the peoples as clerk to master.
discussed our interests like one family, and have rendered account to
stolen from me. In that reunion of great sovereigns we should have
too should have had my Congress and my Holy Alliance. Those ideas were
Satisfied on these great points and with tranquility everywhere, I

already founded; all that remained was to organize it.
full of well-being and prosperity for all. The European system was
beginning of security. A new horizon and new labors were opening out,
It was a war for a great cause, the end of uncertainties and the

security of all; it was purely pacific and conservative.
it was a war of good sense, for real interests, for the tranquillity and
The Russian war should have been the most popular war of modern times:


leisure to an account of the great deeds he had done, he wrote:
Helena in the peaceful solitude where he said he intended to devote his
because fifty thousand corpses lay there, but even on the island of St.
did he write in a letter to Paris that "the battle field was superb,"
there were five Russians for every Frenchman. Not on that day alone
deceiving himself, find reason for rejoicing in the calculation that
looked at them how many Russians there were for each Frenchman and,
killed and maimed (by his will as he believed), did he reckon as he
Not only on that day, as he rode over the battlefield strewn with men

all humanity.
were by half the world, and so he had to repudiate truth, goodness, and
grasp their meaning. He could not disavow his actions, belauded as they
truth, too remote from everything human, for him ever to be able to
significance of his actions which were too contrary to goodness and
of his life could he understand goodness, beauty, or truth, or the
lay more than on all the others who took part in it. Never to the end
darkened of this man on whom the responsibility for what was happening
And not for that day and hour alone were the mind and conscience

and inhuman role predestined for him.
something for itself--he submissively fulfilled the cruel, sad, gloomy,
greatness, and again--as a horse walking a treadmill thinks it is doing
was being done. And he fell back into that artificial realm of imaginary
which he gave the order only because he thought it was expected of him,
Even before he gave that order the thing he did not desire, and for

"They want more!" croaked Napoleon frowning. "Let them have it!"

"Sire?" asked the adjutant who had not heard the remark.

"They want more!..." said Napoleon in a hoarse voice.

adjutant.
"Our fire is mowing them down by rows, but still they hold on," said the

still held their ground.
had been concentrated on the Russians, as he had ordered, but that they
An adjutant came now to inform him that the fire of two hundred guns

to him of the effect those batteries produced.
Napoleon had assented and had given orders that news should be brought
strengthen the fire on the Russian troops crowded in front of Knyazkovo.
to him to bring several batteries of artillery up to those heights to
had been on the Semenovsk heights the artillery commander had proposed
one thing he wished for was rest, tranquillity, and freedom. But when he
Moscow, or victory, or glory (what need had he for any more glory?). The
of suffering and death for himself. At that moment he did not desire
The heaviness of his head and chest reminded him of the possibility
person the sufferings and death he had witnessed on the battlefield.
artificial phantasm of life he had served so long. He felt in his own
A personal, human feeling for a brief moment got the better of the
regarded himself as a participant and which he was unable to arrest.
With painful dejection he awaited the end of this action, in which he
involuntarily listening, with downcast eyes, to the sounds of firing.
swollen and heavy, his eyes dim, his nose red, and his voice hoarse,
Shevardino knoll, where he sat on his campstool, his sallow face
greatness. He rode hurriedly from the battlefield and returned to the
that strength of mind which he thought constituted his merit and his
mind. This day the horrible appearance of the battlefield overcame
killed and wounded, thereby, he considered, testing his strength of
unexpected impression on Napoleon who usually liked to look at the
consciousness of the impotence of his once mighty arm, produced an
generals he knew personally had been killed or wounded, and the
together with the heaviness of his head and the news that some twenty
The terrible spectacle of the battlefield covered with dead and wounded,


CHAPTER XXXVIII





had I lived. But now it is too late. I know it!"
is what made me sorry to part with life, that is what remained for me
earth and which Princess Mary taught me and I did not understand--that
who hate us, love of our enemies; yes, that love which God preached on
"Compassion, love of our brothers, for those who love us and for those

tears for his fellow men, for himself, and for his own and their errors.
Prince Andrew could no longer restrain himself and wept tender loving

heart.
everything, and ecstatic pity and love for that man overflowed his happy
gazing at him through tears that filled his swollen eyes. He remembered
connection that existed between himself and this man who was dimly
and more vivid than ever, awoke in his soul. He now remembered the
face ready for rapture, and love and tenderness for her, stronger
ball in 1810, with her slender neck and arms and with a frightened happy
him. He remembered Natasha as he had seen her for the first time at the
memory from that realm of pure and loving childhood presented itself to
asked himself without finding an answer. And suddenly a new unexpected
"What is the connection of that man with my childhood and life?" he
thought Prince Andrew, not yet clearly grasping what he saw before him.
he! Yes, that man is somehow closely and painfully connected with me,"
lips could not grasp its rim. Anatole was sobbing painfully. "Yes, it is
their arms and offering him a glass of water, but his trembling, swollen
amputated, he recognized Anatole Kuragin. Men were supporting him in
In the miserable, sobbing, enfeebled man whose leg had just been

"My God! What is this? Why is he here?" said Prince Andrew to himself.

from seeing his face, moved away.
The doctor who had been standing beside him, preventing Prince Andrew

"Oh! Oh, ooh!" he sobbed, like a woman.

and with the boot still on.
The wounded man was shown his amputated leg stained with clotted blood

almost happy tears.
was groaning so piteously--he felt like weeping childlike, kindly, and
because he was suffering and others were suffering and that man near him
or because of those memories of a childhood that could not return, or
was dying without glory, or because he was sorry to part with life,
Hearing those moans Prince Andrew wanted to weep. Whether because he

be heard, subdued by suffering and broken by sobs.
"Show it to me.... Oh, ooh... Oh! Oh, ooh!" his frightened moans could

trying to quiet him.
head seemed familiar to Prince Andrew: they were lifting him up and
The doctors were busily engaged with the wounded man the shape of whose

memory, not merely as something past but as something present.
pillow, felt happy in the mere consciousness of life--returned to his
over him his nurse sang him to sleep and he, burying his head in the
childhood, when he used to be undressed and put to bed, and when leaning
the best and happiest moments of his life--especially his earliest
blissful feeling such as he had not experienced for a long time. All
After the sufferings he had been enduring, Prince Andrew enjoyed a

lips, and hurried away.
Andrew opened his eyes, the doctor bent over, kissed him silently on the
wound bandaged. Water was being sprinkled on his face. As soon as Prince
his thighbone had been extracted, the torn flesh cut away, and the
lose consciousness. When he came to himself the splintered portions of
someone, and the torturing pain in his abdomen caused Prince Andrew to
down over the wound, felt it, and sighed deeply. Then he made a sign to
undo the buttons of his clothes and undressed him. The doctor bent
Andrew's mind when the dresser with sleeves rolled up began hastily to
His very first, remotest recollections of childhood came back to Prince

dressers.
"Undress him! What are you waiting for?" he cried angrily to the

He glanced at Prince Andrew's face and quickly turned away.

spectacled doctor came up to Prince Andrew, wiping his hands.
finished with the Tartar, whom they covered with an overcoat, the
silently doing something to this man's other, gory leg. When he had
convulsively. Two doctors--one of whom was pale and trembling--were
the time with a feverish tremor. The man was sobbing and choking
to hold him down. One large, white, plump leg twitched rapidly all
familiar to Prince Andrew. Several dressers were pressing on his chest
His curly hair, its color, and the shape of his head seemed strangely
crowding, a tall well-fed man lay on his back with his head thrown back.
and prolonged yells. On the other table, round which many people were
he began to wriggle and twitch his body and utter piercing, ringing,
snub-nosed face with its high cheekbones, and baring his white teeth,
"Ooh, ooh, ooh!" grunted the Tartar, and suddenly lifting up his swarthy

a spectacled doctor was cutting into his muscular brown back.
the uniform thrown down beside him. Four soldiers were holding him, and
tables. On the nearest one sat a Tartar, probably a Cossack, judging by
alone and involuntarily witnessed what was taking place on the other two
on the third they placed Prince Andrew. For a little while he was left
There were three operating tables in the tent. Two were occupied, and

horror, as by a presentiment.
the same chair a canon, the sight of which had even then filled him with
the dirty pond beside the Smolensk road. Yes, it was the same flesh,
a few weeks previously, on that hot August day, such bodies had filled
bleeding human bodies that seemed to fill the whole of the low tent, as
him. All he saw about him merged into a general impression of naked,
sides and the torturing pain in his thigh, stomach, and back distracted
make out distinctly what was in that tent. The pitiful groans from all
cleared and which a dresser was washing down. Prince Andrew could not
Prince Andrew was carried in and laid on a table that had only just been

chance!" remarked one.
"It seems that even in the next world only the gentry are to have a

Murmurs arose among the wounded who were waiting.

Andrew out to him, and he told them to carry him into the tent.
"All right, immediately," he replied to a dresser who pointed Prince

he sighed and looked down.
little respite. After turning his head from right to left for some time,
about him, but above the level of the wounded men. He evidently wanted a
bloodstained hands, so as not to smear it. He raised his head and looked
holding a cigar between the thumb and little finger of one of his small
One of the doctors came out of the tent in a bloodstained apron,


CHAPTER XXXVII





this life I did not and do not understand."
here? Why was I so reluctant to part with life? There was something in
same now?" thought he. "And what will be there, and what has there been
shining eyes and experienced a sense of comfort. "But isn't it all the
Like all the others near the speaker, Prince Andrew looked at him with

wouldn't have been nothing left of him! I tell you surely..."
with fever. "If only reserves had come up just then, lads, there
the King himself!" cried he, looking around him with eyes that glittered
"We kicked him out from there so that he chucked everything, we grabbed

crowd of wounded and stretcher-bearers was gathered.
head and leg by bullets. Around him, eagerly listening to his talk, a
noncommissioned officer with a bandaged head. He had been wounded in the
attracting general attention, stood a tall, handsome, black-haired
Two steps from him, leaning against a branch and talking loudly and
whirling black ball, and his sudden rush of passionate love of life.
on around him. He remembered the meadow, the wormwood, the field, the
opened his eyes and for a long time could not make out what was going
one of the tents and there stopped, awaiting instructions. Prince Andrew
not yet been bandaged, took him, as a regimental commander, close up to
delirious. Prince Andrew's bearers, stepping over the wounded who had
groaned, sighed, wept, screamed, swore, or asked for vodka. Some were
brought in next. The wounded men awaiting their turn outside the tents
dressers ran out to fetch water, or to point out those who were to be
tents came now loud angry cries and now plaintive groans. Occasionally
the difficult problem of what was taking place before them. From the
against their stretchers and gazing intently, as if trying to comprehend
spot. Disregarding the officers' orders, the soldiers stood leaning
faces, whom the officers keeping order tried in vain to drive from the
stood crowds of soldier stretcher-bearers with dismal and attentive
bloodstained men in various garbs stood, sat, or lay. Around the wounded
trees cawing impatiently. Around the tents, over more than five acres,
grains that fell. Some crows, scenting blood, flew among the birch
oats from their movable troughs and sparrows flew down and pecked the
In the wood, wagons and horses were standing. The horses were eating
three tents with flaps turned back, pitched at the edge of a birch wood.
wood, where wagons were stationed. The dressing station consisted of
The militiamen carried Prince Andrew to the dressing station by the


drooped.
stretcher into which his head had sunk deep and again his eyelids
Prince Andrew opened his eyes and looked up at the speaker from the

had run up and was looking down on the stretcher.
"Your excellency! Eh, Prince!" said the trembling voice of Timokhin, who

step.
"Now that's right!" said the one behind joyfully, when he had got into

"Get into step, Fedor... I say, Fedor!" said the foremost peasant.

jolting the stretcher.
their shoulders and checking the peasants, who were walking unevenly and
"Keep in step! Ah... those peasants!" shouted an officer, seizing by

hurriedly along the path they had trodden down, to the dressing station.
The peasants, adjusting the stretcher to their shoulders, started

"It flew a hair's breadth past my ear," said the adjutant.

God!"--voices among the officers were heard saying.
"Ah, God! My God! What is it? The stomach? That means death! My

They again took him by the shoulders and laid him on the stretcher.

"Pick him up, lift him, it's all the same!" cried someone.

moaned piteously and, exchanging looks, they set him down again.
The peasants went up and took him by his shoulders and legs, but he

"What are you waiting for? Come along!"

breathing heavily and noisily.
officers. Prince Andrew lay on his chest with his face in the grass,
The militiamen with stretchers who were called up stood behind the

stain on the grass.
From the right side of his abdomen, blood was welling out making a large
raising his arm, and fell on his chest. Several officers ran up to him.
a suffocating smell of powder, and Prince Andrew started to one side,
an explosion, a whistle of splinters as from a breaking window frame,
He did not finish speaking. At one and the same moment came the sound of

"It's shameful, sir!" he said to the adjutant. "What..."

at him.
thought this, and at the same time remembered that people were looking
to die. I love life--I love this grass, this earth, this air...." He
that curled up from the rotating black ball. "I cannot, I do not wish
envious glance at the grass, the wormwood, and the streamlet of smoke
"Can this be death?" thought Prince Andrew, looking with a quite new,

the meadow.
and the prostrate adjutant, near a wormwood plant between the field and
Prince Andrew hesitated. The smoking shell spun like a top between him

"Lie down!" cried the adjutant, throwing himself flat on the ground.

major, and galloped aside. The horse's terror infected the men.
was right or wrong to show fear, snorted, reared almost throwing the
battalion commander's horse. The horse first, regardless of whether it
with little noise within two steps of Prince Andrew and close to the
whirring in rapid flight and alighting on the ground, a shell dropped
"Look out!" came a frightened cry from a soldier and, like a bird

From the other side a battalion commander rode up.
The adjutant, having obeyed this instruction, approached Prince Andrew.

"Adjutant!" he shouted. "Order them not to crowd together."

had been hit--a large crowd had gathered near the second battalion.
chill ran down his back. Again he glanced at the ranks. Probably many
paces from him, a cannon ball tore up the dry earth and disappeared. A
to reach the boundary strip in sixteen paces. A whizz and a thud! Five
it has gone over. But this one has hit!" And again he started trying
another! Again! It has hit...." He stopped and looked at the ranks. "No,
listening to an approaching whistle in the hidden region of smoke. "One,
waited. "Here it comes... this one is coming our way again!" he thought,
tiresomely familiar faces of the men of the first battalion, and
of flying projectiles from the booming of the reports, glanced at the
weary ears to the ever-recurring sounds, distinguishing the whistle
of the previous day's thoughts. He thought of nothing. He listened with
palms, and smelled their pungent, sweetly bitter scent. Nothing remained
from the wormwood that grew along a boundary rut, rubbed them in his
from one strip to another to walk a mile, then he stripped the flowers
mowers, then he counted his steps, calculating how often he must walk
strides trying to keep to the footprints left on the meadow by the
grass, and gazing at the dust that covered his boots; now he took big
situation. He walked along the meadow, dragging his feet, rustling the
unconsciously bent on avoiding the contemplation of the horrors of their
them. All the powers of his soul, as of every soldier there, were
that this was unnecessary and that there was nothing he could teach
an example, walked about among the ranks, but he soon became convinced
considering it his duty to rouse the courage of the men and to set them
rear they returned immediately and hastily. At first Prince Andrew,
carried away, and the ranks closed up. If any soldiers ran to the
went on of itself. The killed were dragged from the front, the wounded
There was nothing for him to do and no orders to be given. Everything
meadow beside an oatfield, with head bowed and arms behind his back.
and down from the border of one patch to another, at the edge of the
Prince Andrew, pale and gloomy like everyone in the regiment, paced up

and gloomy faces grew ever paler and gloomier.
been inactive, without food, in constant fear of death, and their pale
such distractions lasted only a moment, and for eight hours the men had
aside. Yells and shrieks of laughter rose from the whole regiment. But
close by, when it yelped, tucked its tail between its legs, and darted
in front of the ranks with tail stiffly erect till suddenly a shell fell
dog, coming heaven knows whence, which trotted in a preoccupied manner
regiment. Another time, general attention was attracted by a small brown
they don't see it!" came identical shouts from the ranks all along the
"Hey, look at the trace horse!... Get her leg out! She'll fall.... Ah,
the regiment. The horse of an ammunition cart put its leg over a trace.
commonplace occurrences. A battery of artillery was passing in front of
as if the minds of these morally exhausted men found relief in everyday,
occurrences quite apart from, and unconnected with, the battle. It was
were heard on all sides. But the liveliest attention was attracted by
some of our infantry were seen to move forward, words of approval
attention to these things. But when our artillery or cavalry advanced or
masses of the enemy came into view through the smoke, no one paid any
rows of stretchers went past, when some troops retreated, and when great
fully absorbed in these pursuits. When men were killed or wounded, when
ground, or plaited baskets from the straw in the cornfield. All seemed
his boots on again. Some built little houses of the tufts in the plowed
bandolier, while another smoothed and refolded his leg bands and put
his bayonet; another fingered the strap and pulled the buckle of his
again; another, rubbing some dry clay between his palms, polished
shako, carefully loosened the gathers of its lining and drew them tight
officers' order, the men sat on the ground. One, having taken off his
shot and the cry of "stretchers!" was heard. Most of the time, by their
ranks, and it ceased altogether every time the thud of a successful
mood. All alike were taciturn and morose. Talk was rarely heard in the
paces apart, but nevertheless the men were always in one and the same
yet killed. The regiment stood in columns of battalion, three hundred
With each fresh blow less and less chance of life remained for those not

being dragged away and the wounded carried off.
were torn from the regiment in a minute and the slain were continually
the cannon balls and shells all flew overhead, but sometimes several men
if to allow them a respite, a quarter of an hour passed during which
cannon balls and slow whistling shells flew unceasingly. At times, as
domain of smoke that overlay the whole space in front, quick hissing
right, in the unlifting smoke the guns boomed, and out of the mysterious
lost another third of its men. From in front and especially from the
Without moving from that spot or firing a single shot the regiment here

enemy guns was directed between one and two o'clock.
that day and on which an intense, concentrated fire from several hundred
between Semenovsk and the Knoll Battery, where thousands of men perished
two hundred men, was moved forward into a trampled oatfield in the gap
fire. Toward two o'clock the regiment, having already lost more than
o'clock were stationed inactive behind Semenovsk, under heavy artillery
Prince Andrew's regiment was among the reserves which till after one


CHAPTER XXXVI





the exhausted, wavering men felt comforted and inspirited.
from the highest quarters a confirmation of what they wanted to believe,
And on learning that tomorrow they were to attack the enemy, and hearing

the commander in chief's soul as in that of every Russian.
not the outcome of cunning calculations, but of a feeling that lay in
but the sense of his words spread everywhere because what he said was
different ends of the army did not even resemble what Kutuzov had said,
farthest links of that chain. The tales passing from mouth to mouth at
It was far from being the same words or the same order that reached the

the army to the other.
order for a battle next day, immediately became known from one end of
the army," and which constitutes the sinew of war, Kutuzov's words, his
throughout an army one and the same temper, known as "the spirit of
And by means of that mysterious indefinable bond which maintains

responsibility, very judiciously wished to receive.
be written out which the former commander in chief, to avoid personal
Kutuzov, without looking at Wolzogen, gave directions for the order to

have written confirmation of the order the field marshal had given.
Wolzogen returned from Barclay and said that General Barclay wished to
While Kutuzov was talking to Raevski and dictating the order of the day,

another, "ride along the line and announce that tomorrow we attack."
the order of the day for tomorrow. And you," he continued, addressing
"Kaysarov!" Kutuzov called to his adjutant. "Sit down and write out

opinion..."
the most stubborn who remain victors," replied Raevski, "and in my
"On the contrary, your Highness, in indecisive actions it is always

"Then you do not think, like some others, that we must retreat?"

After hearing him, Kutuzov said in French:

that the French no longer ventured to attack.
Raevski reported that the troops were firmly holding their ground and

of the field of Borodino.
This was Raevski, who had spent the whole day at the most important part

dark-haired general who was just ascending the knoll.
"Ah, here he is, my hero!" said Kutuzov to a portly, handsome,

aside, marveling at "the old gentleman's" conceited stupidity.
Wolzogen, shrugging his shoulders and curling his lips, stepped silently

as his eyes filled with tears.
soil of Russia," said Kutuzov crossing himself, and he suddenly sobbed
The enemy is beaten, and tomorrow we shall drive him from the sacred
"They are repulsed everywhere, for which I thank God and our brave army!

the panting old general.
All were silent, and the only sound audible was the heavy breathing of

sternly.
him of my firm intention to attack the enemy tomorrow," said Kutuzov
you don't know! Be so good as to ride to General Barclay and inform
flank. If you have seen amiss, sir, do not allow yourself to say what
"The enemy has been repulsed on the left and defeated on the right

Wolzogen was about to make a rejoinder, but Kutuzov interrupted him.

me, the commander in chief, than to him."
is incorrect and that the real course of the battle is better known to
know nothing about it. Tell General Barclay from me that his information
gesture with his trembling arms: "How dare you, sir, say that to me? You
"How... how dare you!..." he shouted, choking and making a threatening

quickly he went up to Wolzogen.
"You have seen? You have seen?..." Kutuzov shouted frowning, and rising

what I have seen. The troops are in complete disorder..."
"I have not considered it right to conceal from your Serene Highness

gentleman's" agitation, said with a smile:
if not understanding what was said to him. Wolzogen, noticing "the old
Kutuzov ceased chewing and fixed an astonished gaze on Wolzogen, as

impossible to stop them," he reported.
dislodge them for lack of troops, the men are running away and it is
"All the points of our position are in the enemy's hands and we cannot

it.
as Barclay had ordered him to and as he himself had seen and understood
report to "the old gentleman" the position of affairs on the left flank
and looking severely at the dishes in front of Kutuzov he began to
called Kutuzov) "is making himself very comfortable," thought Wolzogen,
he was dealing with. "Der alte Herr" (as in their own set the Germans
Russians to make an idol of this useless old man, but that he knew whom
intended to show that, as a highly trained military man, he left it to
He treated his Serene Highness with a somewhat affected nonchalance

cap.
half-contemptuous smile on his lips, scarcely touching the peak of his
Wolzogen, nonchalantly stretching his legs, approached Kutuzov with a

at Wolzogen with eyes that brightened under their puckering lids.
Kutuzov was chewing a piece of roast chicken with difficulty and glanced

commander in chief with that news.
concluded that the battle was lost, and sent his favorite officer to the
back and the disordered rear of the army, weighed all the circumstances,
The sagacious Barclay de Tolly, seeing crowds of wounded men running
Barclay de Tolly to report on the progress of affairs on the left flank.
detested, rode up while Kutuzov was at dinner. Wolzogen had come from
had said, "the war should be extended widely," and whom Bagration so
Adjutant General Wolzogen, the man who when riding past Prince Andrew

it were falling and he dozed off. Dinner was brought him.
man's strength was failing him. Several times his head dropped low as if
the day's success--a success exceeding his expectations, but the old
Kutuzov noticed an expression of extreme tension. He was satisfied with
who came from the field of battle, and of those who stood around him,
Toward three o'clock the French attacks ceased. On the faces of all

and on their left flank Uvarov's cavalry had put the French to flight.
times repulsed. In the center the French had not got beyond Borodino,
attack directed by Napoleon against our left flank had been several
Kutuzov was in Gorki, near the center of the Russian position. The

can't be done."
"Go, my dear fellow," he said to Ermolov, "and see whether something

arm, led him aside.
news was bad, rose as if to stretch his legs and, taking Scherbinin's
guessing by the sounds of the battle and by Scherbinin's looks that the
French had captured the fleches and the village of Semenovsk, Kutuzov,
When Scherbinin came galloping from the left flank with news that the

But he sent an adjutant to take the news round the army.

wait before we rejoice."
nothing extraordinary in the capture of Murat. Still, it is better to
"Wait a little, gentlemen," said he. "The battle is won, and there is

officers congratulated him, Kutuzov smiled.
they brought him news that Murat had been taken prisoner, and the staff
could not spare at such an important moment--to return to him. When
command of the first army, and a request to the duke--whom he said he
Kutuzov made a grimace and sent an order to Dokhturov to take over the

duke asked for more troops.
Semenovsk--his adjutant came back from him and told Kutuzov that the
Soon after the duke's departure--before he could possibly have reached

"Will Your Highness please take command of the first army?"

who was standing behind him.
said to one of his adjutants, and then turned to the Duke of Wurttemberg
"Ride over to Prince Peter Ivanovich and find out about it exactly," he

groaned and swayed his head.
French had been retaken, but that Prince Bagration was wounded. Kutuzov
At eleven o'clock they brought him news that the fleches captured by the

the fatigue of his old and feeble body.
and his face wore a strained look as if he found it difficult to master
Kutuzov's general expression was one of concentrated quiet attention,

in as far as that was in his power.
called the spirit of the army, and he watched this force and guided it
the number of cannon or of slaughtered men, but by that intangible force
commander in chief, nor the place where the troops are stationed, nor by
knew that the result of a battle is decided not by the orders of a
direct hundreds of thousands of others struggling with death, and he
the wisdom of age understood, that it is impossible for one man to
were reporting. By long years of military experience he knew, and with
something else--in the expression of face and tone of voice of those who
were not interested in the import of the words spoken, but rather in
that of him; but when listening to the reports it seemed as if he
that were brought him and gave directions when his subordinates demanded
about him; or, "No, don't, we'd better wait!" He listened to the reports
dear boy, and have a look," he would say to one or another of those
"Yes, yes, do that," he replied to various proposals. "Yes, yes: go,

orders, but only assented to or dissented from what others suggested.
Kutuzov, his gray head hanging, his heavy body relaxed. He gave no
On the rug-covered bench where Pierre had seen him in the morning sat


CHAPTER XXXV





destroyed!" he said, and turning his horse rode back to Shevardino.
"At eight hundred leagues from France, I will not have my Guard

Napoleon bowed his head and remained silent a long time.

offer.
exchanged looks and smiled contemptuously at this general's senseless
the Old Guard into action. Ney and Berthier, standing near Napoleon,
One of the generals rode up to Napoleon and ventured to offer to lead

time, seemed to him unnecessary and horrible.
depend on him, and from its lack of success this affair, for the first
before him and around him and was supposed to be directed by him and to
from which Berthier had aroused him. He could not stop what was going on
Russians. Napoleon stopped his horse and again fell into the reverie
slaughter which could be of no avail either to the French or the
forth clouds of smoke. It was no longer a battle: it was a continuous
knoll, and their guns boomed incessantly along their line and sent
The Russians stood in serried ranks behind Semenovsk village and its

were Russians.
smoke saw ranks of men in uniforms of a color unfamiliar to him. They
vivants. Napoleon rode up the high ground at Semenovsk, and through the
a peculiar significance to the spectacle, as music does to tableaux
guns, that had not ceased for ten hours, wearied the ear and gave
seen such horrors or so many slain in such a small area. The roar of
or in heaps. Neither Napoleon nor any of his generals had ever before
which Napoleon rode, horses and men were lying in pools of blood, singly
Amid the powder smoke, slowly dispersing over the whole space through

He mounted and rode toward Semenovsk.

horse."
"What? What do you say?" asked Napoleon. "Yes, tell them to bring me my

ascertain the position of affairs.
approached and suggested that they should ride along the line to
below the knoll, with head bowed and elbows on his knees. Berthier
army aroused that horror in Napoleon. He sat silently on a campstool
The news that the Russians were attacking the left flank of the French

his helplessness.
limp like a rag, and the horror of unavoidable destruction seizes him in
should annihilate him, but then feels that his arm drops powerless and
and raises his arm to strike that ruffian a terrible blow which he knows
a dream in which a man fancies that a ruffian is coming to attack him,
chances presented themselves, and he expected them all. Yes, it was like
considered the possibilities of success, but now innumerable unlucky
cannon ball. All this was possible. In former battles he had only
might break through his center, he himself might be killed by a stray
him occurred to his mind. The Russians might fall on his left wing,
took possession of him, and all the unlucky accidents that might destroy
Russians still holding their ground--a terrible feeling like a nightmare
concealed depression on the faces around him and heard reports of the
or army corps had been captured in two months, when he looked at the
which not one battle had been won, and in which not a flag, or cannon,
When he ran his mind over the whole of this strange Russian campaign in

center--destroy him and his army.
the least accident might now--with the fight balanced on such a strained
efforts had been expended. He knew that it was a lost battle and that
a battle not gained by the attacking side in eight hours, after all
But Napoleon with his long experience of war well knew the meaning of

grasp the meaning of what was happening.
they all shunned one another's eyes--only a de Beausset could fail to
him experienced in the art of war. All their faces looked dejected, and
battles. He saw that what he was feeling was felt by all the men about
not the same, not at all the same, as what had happened in his former
Despite news of the capture of the fleches, Napoleon saw that this was

to his troops.
Austerlitz, Wagram, and so on. But now something strange was happening
in the baggage wagons. So it had been at Lodi, Marengo, Arcola, Jena,
stores, and Murat had only begged leave to loose the cavalry to gather
corps of prisoners, bundles of enemy eagles and standards, cannon and
congratulations and happy faces, announcing the trophies taken, the
few phrases, marshals and adjutants had come galloping up with
Formerly, after he had given two or three orders and uttered a

Russians, and of disorganization among his own troops.
of reinforcements needed, of the impossibility of driving back the
but from all sides came the same news of generals killed and wounded,
methods had already been employed, yet not only was there no victory,
the enemy's line, and a cavalry attack by "the men of iron," all these
concentration of batteries on one point, an attack by reserves to break
All the old methods that had been unfailingly crowned with success: the

stroke of his arm had supernaturally become impotent.
enemy was the same as at Austerlitz and Friedland--yet the terrible
he was now even more experienced and skillful than before. Even the
et energique, he himself was still the same: he knew that and knew that
had been made, the same dispositions, and the same proclamation courte
His troops were the same, his generals the same, the same preparations

loses.
game, finds that the more he considers his play the more surely he
winning, suddenly just when he has calculated all the chances of the
ever-lucky gambler who, after recklessly flinging money about and always
Napoleon was experiencing a feeling of depression like that of an

Beausset's face and he glided away to the other generals.
A beatific smile of regret, repentance, and ecstasy beamed on M. de

"Go away..." exclaimed Napoleon suddenly and morosely, and turned aside.

having lunch when one can get it.
with respectful jocularity to remark that there is no reason for not
refer only to the victory and not to the lunch, M. de Beausset ventured
Napoleon silently shook his head in negation. Assuming the negation to

"I hope I may now congratulate Your Majesty on a victory?" said he.

Majesty.
came up to the Emperor and ventured respectfully to suggest lunch to His
M. de Beausset, the man so fond of travel, having fasted since morning,

Napoleon sat on a campstool, wrapped in thought.

melting away.
positions and maintaining a hellish fire under which the French army was
for reinforcements and all said that the Russians were holding their
gallop and as if by agreement all said the same thing. They all asked
of the battlefield. From all sides adjutants continued to arrive at a
Friant's division disappeared as the others had done into the smoke

understood and condemned.
part of a doctor who hinders by his medicines--a role he so justly
Napoleon did not notice that in regard to his army he was playing the
Claparede and sending Friant now, the order was carried out exactly.
Claparede's, and even in obvious inconvenience and delay in stopping
Though there was no advantage in sending Friant's division instead of

Friant's division."
"No!" he suddenly said to Berthier. "I can't send Claparede. Send

gazed silently in that direction.
the Young Guards stationed behind the knoll moved forward. Napoleon
The adjutant galloped to Claparede's division and a few minutes later

Napoleon nodded assent.

divisions regiments, and battalions by heart.
"Send Claparede's division, sire," replied Berthier, who knew all the

subsequently termed "that gosling I have made an eagle").
"Who do you think should be sent there?" he asked of Berthier (whom he
"We must give reserves," he said, moving his arms slightly apart.

called Berthier.
Emperor turned from him, took a couple of steps, stopped, came back, and
The adjutant bent his head affirmatively and began to report, but the

"Asks for reinforcements?" said Napoleon with an angry gesture.

"Sire, the prince..." began the adjutant.

irritated at being continually disturbed.
"Now then, what do you want?" asked Napoleon in the tone of a man

battlefield galloped up.
Before Belliard was out of sight, a messenger from another part of the

and have another look and then come back to me."
the general. "In the heat of a battle it is easy to make a mistake. Go
"You are very fiery, Belliard," said Napoleon, when he again came up to

generals of the suite around him.
without replying. Belliard began talking loudly and eagerly to the
Napoleon shrugged his shoulders and continued to pace up and down

Emperor would give another division.
reinforcements. He swore on his honor that the Russians were lost if the
a loud voice began boldly demonstrating the necessity of sending
Having dismounted he went up to the Emperor with rapid strides and in
was galloping toward the knoll on a lathering horse. It was Belliard.
Napoleon, Berthier's eyes turned to look at a general with a suite, who
In the midst of this conversation, which was beginning to interest

talking to them about matters unconnected with the battle.
Napoleon rose and having summoned Caulaincourt and Berthier began

slaughtered.
removing his hand from his hat and galloped back to where men were being
The handsome boy adjutant with the long hair sighed deeply without

and I don't yet see my chessboard clearly. Go!..."
"Tell the King of Naples," said he sternly, "that it is not noon yet,

weak, unentrenched Russian wing?"
reinforcements when they already have half the army directed against a
"Reinforcements!" thought Napoleon to himself. "How can they need

own--as though he did not understand his words.
the adjutant--a handsome lad with long black curls arranged like Murat's
"Reinforcements?" said Napoleon in a tone of stern surprise, looking at

if His Majesty would let him have another division.
adjutant galloped up with an assurance that the Russians would be routed
Napoleon sat at the foot of the knoll, drinking punch, when Murat's

to Napoleon to demand reinforcements.
constantly decreased. In the middle of the day Murat sent his adjutant
and terrified mobs. The generals re-formed them, but their numbers
enemy's flight, these orderly masses returned thence as disorganized
in their former battles, instead of the news they expected of the
masses of well-ordered troops. But contrary to what had always happened
of fire and sometimes even entered it--repeatedly led into it huge
Napoleon's generals--Davout, Ney, and Murat, who were near that region


CHAPTER XXXIV





promptings of the throng.
they lost their discipline and rushed about according to the chance
back to the zone of fire, where under the influence of fear of death
under discipline and under the influence of that discipline led them
superiors, located in the background, re-formed them and brought them
left the place where the balls and bullets were flying about, their
the fields on which these men were floundering about. As soon as they
disablement and death was caused by the balls and bullets that flew over
their rushing and galloping at one another did little harm, the harm of
and backward did not improve or alter the position of the troops. All
the mood of the moment. In reality, however, all these movements forward
these men who were right in the heat of the battle acted according to
that safety lies in running back, sometimes in running forward; and
stake is what is dearest to man--his own life--and it sometimes seems
orders or for acting on their own initiative, for in battle what is at
Napoleon. They did not fear getting into trouble for not fulfilling
units concerned, without asking either Ney, Davout, or Murat, much less
such orders were given by the officers on the spot nearest to the
infantry to shoot or horsemen to ride down the Russian infantry--all
go to. All orders as to where and when to move the guns, when to send
sometimes running to quite other places than those they were ordered to
galloped full speed back again. The infantry moved in the same way,
and as soon as they reached the top of the incline turned round and
In this way two cavalry regiments galloped through the Semenovsk hollow
and the cavalry dashed without orders in pursuit of the flying Russians.
unexpectedly before them, sometimes rushed back and sometimes forward,
ordered to remain where they were, suddenly, seeing Russians
Soldiers ordered to advance ran back on meeting grapeshot; soldiers
partially. For the most part things happened contrary to their orders.
their orders, like Napoleon's, were seldom carried out, and then but
fire and where cavalry should gallop and infantry should run. But even
without asking Napoleon and issued orders where and in what direction to
occasionally went within musket range, made their own arrangements
but, like Napoleon, did not take part in the actual fighting and only
The marshals and generals, who were nearer to the field of battle

he gave them or could not be and were not executed.
reports Napoleon gave his orders, which had either been executed before
slightly bruised. On the basis of these necessarily untrustworthy
recaptured by other French troops, and Davout was alive and only
told that the French had been repulsed, the fleches had in fact been
wounded, and Davout killed; yet at the very time the adjutant had been
and reported to Napoleon that their attack had been repulsed, Campan
An adjutant galloped up from the fleches with a pale and frightened face

had been present at the beginning of the battle.
retaken by the Russians and burned, in the very skirmish at which Pierre
as soon in fact as the adjutant had left Borodino--the bridge had been
on the farther side and wait. But before that order was given--almost
troops to cross it? Napoleon gave orders that the troops should form up
hands of the French. The adjutant asked whether Napoleon wished the
Borodino had been occupied and the bridge over the Kolocha was in the
false. Thus an adjutant galloped up from Murat with tidings that
circumstances changed and the news he brought was already becoming
because while an adjutant was riding more than a mile to Napoleon
of conflict but reported what they had heard from others; and also
moment and because many of the adjutants did not go to the actual place
impossible in the heat of battle to say what was happening at any given
of the action, but all these reports were false, both because it was
marshals, kept galloping up to Napoleon with reports of the progress
From the battlefield adjutants he had sent out, and orderlies from his

knowing what to do with one another, screamed, and ran back again.
infantry, and now cavalry: they appeared, fired, fell, collided, not
musketry fire, now Russians were seen alone, now Frenchmen alone, now
what was taking place. There for several hours amid incessant cannon and
maddened--even at those fleches themselves it was impossible to make out
alternately or together, dead, wounded, alive, frightened, or
which by this time there were now Russian and now French soldiers,
generals had taken their stand, but even from the fleches themselves--in
he was standing down below, or from the knoll above on which some of his
But not only was it impossible to make out what was happening from where

the battlefield.
Occasionally he stopped, listened to the firing, and gazed intently at

He descended the knoll and began walking up and down before it.

where what he had seen was.
Russians, but when he looked again with the naked eye, he could not tell
its small circlet saw smoke and men, sometimes his own and sometimes
Napoleon, standing on the knoll, looked through a field glass, and in

being done there.
were heard through the firing, but it was impossible to tell what was
the smoke were moving, at times as if the troops moved. Sometimes shouts
fleches. The smoke spread out before them, and at times it looked as if
Napoleon's face as, shading his eyes with his hand, he looked at the
The sun had risen brightly and its slanting rays struck straight into

French or Russian, could not be discovered from the Shevardino Redoubt.
bayonets. But whether they were moving or stationary, whether they were
be caught of something black--probably men--and at times the glint of
the whole approach on that side of it. Through the smoke glimpses could
of the guns and musketry on the fleches grew so dense that it covered
the fleches. As soon as they had descended into that hollow, the smoke
only be seen till they had entered the hollow that lay between them and
The soldiers of Dessaix's division advancing against the fleches could
especially as the smoke mingling with the mist hid the whole locality.
to Borodino, so that Napoleon could not see what was happening there,
two thirds of a mile away, and it was more than a mile as the crow flies
From the Shevardino Redoubt where Napoleon was standing the fleches were

troops advanced on Borodino from their left.
Campan's and Dessaix's, advanced from the French right, while Murat's
Then when the whole field was covered with smoke, two divisions,

guns.
The battle began on both sides with a cannonade from several hundred

from both sides and was fought in the simplest and most artless way.
wood, the chief action of the day took place on an open space visible
battlefield. On the field between Borodino and the fleches, beside the
feeble actions in comparison with what took place in the center of the
Poniatowski's collision with Tuchkov; but these two were detached and
with Uvarov's cavalry at midday, and on the other side, beyond Utitsa,
space there was, on the one side, a demonstration made by the Russians
thousand feet between Borodino and Bagration's fleches. Beyond that
The chief action of the battle of Borodino was fought within the seven


CHAPTER XXXIII





with all his remaining strength.
even increased to desperation like a man who, straining himself, shrieks
in the smoke, and the roar of cannon and musketry did not diminish, but
especially to the left, near Semenovsk, something seemed to be seething
But behind the veil of smoke the sun was still high, and in front and

moving from the battlefield.
done!" he thought, aimlessly going toward a crowd of stretcher bearers
"Now they will stop it, now they will be horrified at what they have

Pierre ran down the slope once more.

away.
wall. The red-faced man was still twitching, but they did not carry him
the same way, bent double, in a pool of blood at the edge of the earth
he did not know, but some he recognized. The young officer still sat in
him as a member he did not find a single one. There were many dead whom
he had spent over an hour, and of that family circle which had received
stretchers from the battery. Pierre again went up onto the knoll where
with faces distorted by suffering, walked, crawled, and were carried on
wounded--some known to Pierre and some unknown--Russians and French,
a wounded French general, whom the officers surrounded. Crowds of
The prisoners were brought down from the battery and among them was

to call them back.
"Hurrah!" pursued them so far beyond the battery that it was difficult
The French who had occupied the battery fled, and our troops shouting

take who got there.)
Crosses he had in his pocket into the battery for the first soldiers to
it was the attack in which he was said to have thrown some St. George's
declaring that only his courage and good luck made such a feat possible:
the battery. (This was the attack for which Ermolov claimed the credit,
stumbling, tripping up, and shouting, ran merrily and wildly toward
of the knoll he was met by a dense crowd of Russian soldiers who,
it seemed to him, caught at his feet. But before he reached the foot
and Pierre ran down the slope stumbling over the dead and wounded who,
as to who had taken whom prisoner, the Frenchman ran back to the battery
Pierre too bent his head and let his hands fall. Without further thought

ducked it.
that the French officer's head had been torn off, so swiftly had he
heads, terrible and low, a cannon ball whistled, and it seemed to Pierre
tighter. The Frenchman was about to say something, when just above their
hand, impelled by instinctive fear, squeezed his throat ever tighter and
inclined to think he had been taken prisoner because Pierre's strong
prisoner?" each was thinking. But the French officer was evidently more
what they were to do next. "Am I taken prisoner or have I taken him
unfamiliar faces and both were perplexed at what they had done and
For some seconds they gazed with frightened eyes at one another's

his collar.
throat with the other. The officer, dropping his sword, seized Pierre by
the man (a French officer) by the shoulder with one hand and by the
speed before they saw one another--Pierre put out his hands and seized
guarding against the shock--for they had been running together at full
uniform rushed on him sword in hand, shouting something. Instinctively
into the redoubt before a thin, sallow-faced, perspiring man in a blue
had been bayoneted in the back before his eyes, for hardly had he run
the soldier shouting "Brothers!" was a prisoner, and that another man
But he had not time to realize that the colonel had been killed, that

that was strange.
some men who were holding him by the arm. He also saw something else
struggling forward shouting "Brothers!" and trying to free himself from
down below and that one of the soldiers he had noticed before was
the earth wall with his back turned as if he were examining something
time to realize who these men were. He saw the senior officer lying on
there but that no shots were being fired from the battery. He had no
On entering the earthwork he noticed that there were men doing something

as to the only refuge from the horrors that surrounded him.
Beside himself with terror Pierre jumped up and ran back to the battery,


CHAPTER XXXII





piercing cries.
another horse lay, like Pierre, on the ground, uttering prolonged and
horse, dangling fragments of its shaft behind it, galloped past, while
only charred green boards and rags littered the scorched grass, and a
hands; the ammunition wagons he had been approaching no longer existed,
When he came to himself he was sitting on the ground leaning on his

deafening roar, crackling, and whistling made his ears tingle.
same instant he was dazzled by a great flash of flame, and immediately a
Suddenly a terrible concussion threw him backwards to the ground. At the
wagons. He halted irresolutely, not knowing whether to return or go on.
he suddenly asked himself when he was already near the green ammunition
beside, and behind him. Pierre ran down the slope. "Where am I going?"
One cannon ball, another, and a third flew over him, falling in front,

sitting.
Pierre ran after him, avoiding the spot where the young officer was

"Eh, sir, this is no place for you," said he, and ran down the slope.

Pierre.
The man who had been ordered to go for ammunition stumbled against

"Don't fire.... Wait!" he shouted.

The officer, without answering him, strode across to the opposite side.

"I'll go," said Pierre.

angrily avoiding Pierre with his eyes and speaking to his men.
"Run to the reserves and bring up the ammunition boxes!" he yelled,

his frowning brow.
The officer's face was red and perspiring and his eyes glittered under

Pierre.
"The scoundrels! What are they doing?" shouted the officer, turning to

some wine asked for) that there were no more charges.
him (as a butler at dinner informs his master that there is no more of
The sergeant ran up to the officer and in a frightened whisper informed

"All with grapeshot!" shouted the officer.

entering the battery ran back.
and at the same instant plumped into something. Some militiamen who were
standing, crumbling down the earth; a black ball flashed before his eyes
A cannon ball struck the very end of the earth work by which he was

"Hurrah!" were running not forwards but backwards, it seemed to Pierre.
now heard nothing else. On the right of the battery soldiers shouting
soldier, or a gun. Pierre, who had not noticed these sounds before,
One cannon ball after another whistled by and struck the earthwork, a

became strange, confused, and misty in Pierre's eyes.
double sat down on the ground like a bird shot on the wing. Everything
Suddenly something happened: the young officer gave a gasp and bending

over the wall of the trench.
"Grapeshot!" the senior shouted, without answering the question, looking

we to continue firing?" he asked.
"I have the honor to report, sir, that only eight rounds are left. Are

his superior.
commanding officer. The young officer, his hand to his shako, ran up to
Pierre had watched kindle burned up brightly. Pierre standing beside the
The stormcloud had come upon them, and in every face the fire which

though they were on springs.
with strained smartness. They gave little jumps as they walked, as
soldiers handed up the charges, turned, loaded, and did their business
still more flushed, commanded the men more scrupulously than ever. The
gun to another with a frowning face. The young officer, with his face
in the way. The senior officer moved with big, rapid strides from one
longer took notice of Pierre. Once or twice he was shouted at for being
the cannon the men moved still more briskly and busily. No one any
battery. Several men were lying about who had not been removed. Around
that direction. Projectiles began to fall still more frequently in the
minutes later crowds of wounded men and stretcher-bearers came back from
long-drawn shout and rapid musketry firing could still be heard. A few
The ranks of the infantry disappeared amid the smoke but their

backwards and kept glancing uneasily around.
by a pale young officer who, letting his sword hang down, was walking
Pierre looked over the wall of the trench and was particularly struck

moved forward.
of command, and from the battery one saw how those ranks of infantry
infantry to the right of the battery came the sound of a drum and shouts
so as to be less exposed to fire. After this from amid the ranks of
having ordered the infantry supports behind the battery to lie down,
speaking to the colonel gave Pierre an angry look and went away again
their muskets. A general with his suite came to the battery, and after
they could be seen running back past it carrying their wounded on
the battery and along the Kamenka streamlet retreated. From the battery
At ten o'clock the infantry that had been among the bushes in front of

same way in his own soul.
which burned ever more brightly and which he felt was flaming up in the
what was happening there; he was entirely absorbed in watching this fire
Pierre did not look out at the battlefield and was not concerned to know

more intense glowed in the faces of these men.
what was taking place, the lightning of hidden fire growing more and
rapidly from an approaching thundercloud, so, as if in opposition to
As the flames of the fire hidden within come more and more vividly and

every loss, the liveliness increased more and more.
Pierre noticed that after every ball that hit the redoubt, and after

at all!"
"There, lads... oh, oh!" they mimicked the peasants, "they don't like it

had been torn off.
shouted at the militiamen who stood hesitating before the man whose leg
"So this gruel isn't to your taste? Oh, you crows! You're scared!" they

stooping low, entered the battery to carry away the wounded man.
"Now then, you foxes!" said another, laughing at some militiamen who,

leg.
reproachfully to a cannon ball that struck a cannon wheel and a man's
humorist, showing his teeth chaffing Pierre. "Awkward baggage!" he added
"Oh, she nearly knocked our gentleman's hat off!" cried the red-faced

who were moving the gun.
"Now then, all together, like bargees!" rose the merry voices of those

"To the fifth gun, wheel it up!" came shouts from one side.

shove with his knee. This was followed by a burst of laughter.
And the sergeant, taking one of the men by the shoulders, gave him a

retired it's because there's work for them to do farther back."
"Mind your own business," an old sergeant shouted at them. "If they've

over the earthwork.
"They've withdrawn the front line, it has retired," said they, pointing

what was happening in front.
Several soldiers gathered by the wall of the trench, looking out to see

who ducked low as a cannon ball flew over.
"Are you bowing to a friend, eh?" remarked another, chaffing a peasant

seeing the shell fly past and fall into the ranks of the supports.
"Not this way! To the infantry!" added another with loud laughter,

"A live one!" shouted a man as a whistling shell approached.

and jokes were heard on all sides.
But the men in the battery seemed not to notice this, and merry voices
frequently on the battery and spent bullets buzzed and whistled around.
battery; two guns were smashed and cannon balls fell more and more
By ten o'clock some twenty men had already been carried away from the

observed the faces of those around him.
lying alone in the hayfield. Now, seated on the slope of the trench, he
was now replaced by another, especially since he had seen that soldier
of joyful animation produced by the sights and sounds of the battlefield
else--formed by the men in the battery. His first unconscious feeling
was engrossed by watching the family circle--separated from all
almost impossible to distinguish anything. Moreover, his whole attention
fleches were, but where Pierre was the smoke of the firing made it
intense over the whole field, especially to the left where Bagration's
The booming cannonade and the fusillade of musketry were growing more

great precision and formality.
second time and therefore treated both his superiors and the men with
The young officer was evidently exercising his duties for the first or

Pierre.
"To your places!" cried the young officer to the men gathered round

There's a gentleman for you!"
"It's the business of us soldiers. But in a gentleman it's wonderful!

discovery that he did so delighted them.
They seemed not to have expected him to talk like anybody else, and the
Several of the men, with bright kindly faces, stopped beside Pierre.

help being afraid," he said laughing.
know! When she comes spluttering down, out go your innards. One can't
"What else do you expect?" answered the soldier. "She has no mercy, you

"Are you afraid, then?" said Pierre.

of sound, white teeth.
broad-shouldered soldier asked Pierre, with a grin that disclosed a set
"And how's it you're not afraid, sir, really now?" a red-faced,

with a smile as he brushed from his clothes some earth it had thrown up.
A shell tore up the earth two paces from Pierre and he looked around

themselves.
gave him a nickname ("our gentleman"), and made kindly fun of him among
regiment. The men soon accepted Pierre into their family, adopted him,
cocks, goats, and in general for the animals that live with the
kindly and bantering sympathy, such as soldiers feel for their dogs,
their feeling of hostile distrust gradually began to change into a
and down the battery under fire as calmly as if he were on a boulevard,
with a shy smile or, politely making way for the soldiers, paced up
was doing no harm, but either sat quietly on the slope of the trench
But when they had convinced themselves that this man in the white hat
The soldiers shook their heads disapprovingly as they looked at Pierre.

here."
"Sir," he said, "permit me to ask you to stand aside. You must not be

entrusted to him, addressed Pierre sternly.
out of the Cadet College, who was zealously commanding the two guns
A young round-faced officer, quite a boy still and evidently only just

to see the action of the farthest gun and looked at him with curiosity.
officer, a tall, long-legged, pockmarked man, moved over to Pierre as if
surprise and even alarm as they went past him. The senior artillery
unpleasant impression at first. The soldiers looked askance at him with
The intrusion of Pierre's nonmilitary figure in a white hat made an

as it were family feeling of animation.
separated from the rest by a trench, everyone experienced a common and
here in the battery where a small number of men busy at their work were
In contrast with the dread felt by the infantrymen placed in support,

whole neighborhood in powder smoke.
continually one after another with a deafening roar, enveloping the
him with bags and charges. The guns of that battery were being fired
who were loading, hauling the guns, and continually running past
battery still with that same smile, trying not to obstruct the soldiers
an unconsciously happy smile. Occasionally he rose and walked about the
surrounding the battery and gazed at what was going on around him with
Having reached the knoll, Pierre sat down at one end of a trench

of the least significant parts of the field.
On the contrary, just because he happened to be there he thought it one

important point of the battle.
had been dug and from which a few guns were firing, was the most
that knoll Pierre had no notion that this spot, on which small trenches
incessantly. A little behind the guns stood infantry. When ascending
In line with the knoll on both sides stood other guns which also fired

through openings in the earthwork.
been dug. Within the entrenchment stood ten guns that were being fired
This redoubt consisted of a knoll, on three sides of which trenches had

the key to the whole position.
around which tens of thousands fell, and which the French regarded as
French as la grande redoute, la fatale redoute, la redoute du centre,
to the Russians as the Knoll Battery or Raevski's Redoubt, and to the
The knoll to which Pierre ascended was that famous one afterwards known

day.
again, and only much later did Pierre learn that he lost an arm that
Pierre went to the battery and the adjutant rode on. They did not meet

I'll come for you."
"Yes, do. You'll see everything from there and it's less dangerous, and

may?"
"Don't trouble about me," said Pierre. "I'll go up onto the knoll if I

The adjutant looked at Pierre as if puzzled what to do with him now.

pointing to the right.
"He was here a minute ago but has just gone that way," someone told him,

"Is the general here?" asked the adjutant on reaching the knoll.

the hill on foot.
with a scent of autumn. Pierre and the adjutant dismounted and walked up
noise of firing, they came to a small wood. There it was cool and quiet,
which had been moved forward and was in action, deafening them with the
Having ridden in the smoke past the Sixth Corps, behind the artillery

fire!"
knee. A bullet, no doubt. I congratulate you, Count, on your baptism of
"Why... she's wounded!" said the adjutant. "In the off foreleg above the

puzzled tone.
"No it's not that, but her action seems so jerky," said Pierre in a

"You don't seem to be used to riding, Count?" remarked the adjutant.

and jolted him at every step.
adjutant to Raevski's Redoubt. His horse lagged behind the adjutant's
Pierre did not find his groom and rode along the hollow with the

checked himself.
the stern expression of the adjutant who was also looking that way, he
"Why haven't they carried him away?" Pierre was about to ask, but seeing

head thrown awkwardly back and his shako off.
before, a soldier was lying athwart the rows of scented hay, with his
carried on stretchers. On that very meadow he had ridden over the day
It was only now that he noticed wounded men staggering along or being

"Yes, I'll come with you," replied Pierre, looking round for his groom.

our battery it is still bearable," said the adjutant. "Will you come?"
"Come along with me to our knoll. We can get a view from there and in

"Really?" said Pierre. "Where is that?"

they're getting it frightfully hot."
"Here it's tolerable," said he, "but with Bagration on the left flank

But the adjutant turned his horse about and rode on.

"Yes, yes," assented Pierre.

inquisitive?"
"Why have you come here, Count?" he asked with a smile. "Still

then addressed Pierre.
colonel who was standing in the meadow, he gave him some message and
"One moment, one moment!" replied the adjutant, and riding up to a stout

"What's happening here? May I come with you?" he asked.

getting in someone's way again, galloped after the adjutant.
Pierre, feeling out of place there, having nothing to do, and afraid of

"How have you got here?" he said, and galloped on.

also intending to shout at him, but on recognizing him he nodded.
adjutants whom he knew. The adjutant looked angrily at him, evidently
Pierre went to the right, and unexpectedly encountered one of Raevski's

"To the left!... Keep to the right!" the men shouted to him.

"Why's that fellow in front of the line?" shouted somebody at him again.

not leave his face.
though many fell near him. He looked about him with a smile which did
of the river, and for a long time did not notice the killed and wounded,
projectiles that flew over him, did not see the enemy on the other side
not notice the sound of the bullets whistling from every side, or the
going on there he had no idea that this was the field of battle. He did
smoke of the campfires the day before; but despite the incessant firing
among the rows of new-mown hay which he had taken no notice of amid the
soldiers were doing something on both sides of it and in the meadow,
battle. Pierre saw that there was a bridge in front of him and that
(having occupied Borodino) were attacking in the first phase of the
bridge across the Kolocha between Gorki and Borodino, which the French
Pierre rode up to them. Without being aware of it he had come to the
There was a bridge ahead of him, where other soldiers stood firing.

galloped ahead of the soldiers where there was a free space.
bending over his saddlebow and hardly able to control his shying horse,
Another prodded his horse with the butt end of a musket, and Pierre,

"Why ride into the middle of the battalion?" one of them shouted at him.

hoofs.
who for some unknown reason threatened to trample them under his horse's
dissatisfied and inquiring expression at this stout man in a white hat,
some unseen but evidently important task. They all gazed with the same
everywhere, all with the same preoccupied expression and busy with
either in front of them or to the right or left, but there were soldiers
in among some ranks of infantry marching ahead of him. He tried to pass
turned sharply to the left, and Pierre, losing sight of him, galloped
Having descended the hill the general after whom Pierre was galloping


CHAPTER XXXI





watched him from the knoll.
galloped after the general, causing the staff officers to smile as they
were slipping off but unable to let go of the mane and reins, he
pressed his heels against its sides and, feeling that his spectacles
clambered onto it, seized it by the mane, and turning out his toes
his groom who was holding his horses and, asking which was the quietest,
The general mounted a horse a Cossack had brought him. Pierre went to

"I'll go there too, I too!" thought Pierre, and followed the general.

of the staff who asked where he was going.
"To the crossing!" said the general coldly and sternly in reply to one

the knoll.
Having received this order the general passed by Pierre on his way down

battlefield.
saying to a general who stood beside him, not taking his eye from the
"Go, my dear fellow, go... and Christ be with you!" Kutuzov was

after his talk with Prince Andrew.
of feeling Pierre had noticed the day before and had fully understood
same feelings. All their faces were now shining with that latent warmth
at the field of battle as he was, and, as it seemed to him, with the
to compare his impressions with those of others. They were all looking
movement, and those sounds. He turned to look at Kutuzov and his suite,
Pierre wished to be there with that smoke, those shining bayonets, that

of the cannon.
musketry, but it was irregular and feeble in comparison with the reports
in just the same way. "Trakh-ta-ta-takh!" came the frequent crackle of
cloudlets that had no time to become balls, but had their little echoes
still, in the hollows and woods, there burst from the muskets small
continually appearing followed by their solemn reports, while nearer
From the left, over fields and bushes, those large balls of smoke were
stood still while woods, fields, and glittering bayonets ran past them.
reply. It seemed as if those smoke clouds sometimes ran and sometimes
interval--"boom--boom, boom!" came the fine, firm, precise sounds in
then four more appeared and then from each, with the same
to one side, and--"puff" (with a pause)--"puff, puff!" three and
compact ball, and in its place already were balloons of smoke floating
Pierre glanced round at the first cloud, which he had seen as a round

seen.
together; and "boom, boom!" came the sounds confirming what the eye had
"Puff! puff!"--and two clouds arose pushing one another and blending

later.
violet into gray and milky white, and "boom!" came the report a second
"Puff!"--suddenly a round compact cloud of smoke was seen merging from

produced the chief beauty of the spectacle.
These puffs of smoke and (strange to say) the sound of the firing

the whole expanse.
dense, which, swelling, growing, rolling, and blending, extended over
nothing, now singly, now several at a time, some translucent, others
ground, clouds of powder smoke seemed continually to spring up out of
and fields to the left, in the valleys and on the summits of the high
along the entire line outside and above it and especially in the woods
the whole space. Just as in the mist-enveloped hollow near Borodino, so
this moved, or seemed to move, as the smoke and mist spread out over
masses of soldiers, or green ammunition chests and ordnance. And all
mist, and here and there the roofs of huts in Borodino as well as dense
riverbanks and in Borodino. A white church could be seen through the
the dew, and from the bayonets of the troops crowded together by the
sun were reflected, flashing back like lightning from the water, from
and over the whole expanse and through that mist the rays of the morning
and outlined everything. The smoke of the guns mingled with this mist,
become translucent when the brilliant sun appeared and magically colored
the Kolocha, a mist had spread which seemed to melt, to dissolve, and to
the left where the Voyna flowing between its marshy banks falls into
Above the Kolocha, in Borodino and on both sides of it, especially to

and the hollows on both sides of the Kolocha.
Pierre most of all was the view of the battlefield itself, of Borodino
left. All this was vivid, majestic, and unexpected; but what impressed
There were troops to be seen everywhere, in front and to the right and
Nearer at hand glittered golden cornfields interspersed with copses.
was pierced beyond Valuevo by the Smolensk highroad crowded with troops.
color; its undulating outline was silhouetted against the horizon and
the panorama seemed carved in some precious stone of a yellowish-green
light and long dark shadows. The forest at the farthest extremity of
through the clear morning air penetrating streaks of rosy, golden tinted
bright sun, rising slightly to the left behind Pierre, cast upon it
covered by smoke clouds from the guns, and the slanting rays of the
spot the day before, but now the whole place was full of troops and
spellbound by beauty. It was the same panorama he had admired from that
Mounting the steps to the knoll Pierre looked at the scene before him,

him.
shoulders. He was looking through a field glass down the highroad before
a white cap with a red band was visible, his gray nape sunk between his
staff could be heard conversing in French, and Kutuzov's gray head in
day before. A crowd of military men was assembled there, members of the
street to the knoll from which he had looked at the field of battle the
Telling the groom to follow him with the horses, Pierre went down the

"It's time, Count; it's time!" cried the adjutant.

Cossack passed by at a sharp trot.
roar of guns sounded more distinct outside. An adjutant accompanied by a
windows, the fence, and on Pierre's horses standing before the hut. The
dew-besprinkled dust of the road, on the walls of the houses, on the
by the clouds, over the roofs of the street opposite, on the
cloud that had concealed it, was shining, with rays still half broken
fresh, dewy, and cheerful. The sun, just bursting forth from behind a
Pierre dressed hastily and ran out to the porch. Outside all was bright,

ago."
gentlemen have gone out, and his Serene Highness himself rode past long
"Hear the firing," said the groom, a discharged soldier. "All the

"What? Has it begun? Is it time?" Pierre asked, waking up.

him, having apparently lost hope of getting him to wake up.
pertinaciously while he shook Pierre by the shoulder without looking at
"Your excellency! Your excellency! Your excellency!" he kept repeating

shaking him.
the hut. The panes were rattling in the little windows and his groom was
Before he was thoroughly awake next morning everybody had already left

had given up to him.
and then immediately fell asleep behind a partition in a corner Boris
his groom to get the horses ready and to call him early in the morning,
On returning to Gorki after having seen Prince Andrew, Pierre ordered


CHAPTER XXX





dismounted. The game had begun.
Napoleon with his suite rode up to the Shevardino Redoubt where he

and yet more were heard mingling with and overtaking one another.
The first shots had not yet ceased to reverberate before others rang out

right.
shook the air, then a fourth and a fifth boomed solemnly near by on the
the prevailing silence. Some minutes passed. A second and a third report
On the right a single deep report of a cannon resounded and died away in

faint morning light.
the east. The abandoned campfires were burning themselves out in the
It was growing light, the sky was clearing, only a single cloud lay in

At half-past five Napoleon rode to the village of Shevardino.


Napoleon nodded and walked away.

"It has, Your Majesty."

"Ah! One of the old ones! Has your regiment had its rice?"

The man answered the question.

soldiers.
of military bluntness and geniality with which he always addressed the
"What year did you enter the service?" he asked with that affectation

in front of him.
himself up like a black pillar at sight of the Emperor, Napoleon stopped
a shaggy cap, who was standing sentinel before his tent and had drawn
listened to these sounds, and as he was passing a tall guardsman in
Napoleon walked about in front of his tent, looked at the fires and

up their positions were clearly audible.
rustle and tramp of the French troops already beginning to move to take
Russian line shone through the smoke. The weather was calm, and the
burning among the French Guards, and in the distance those of the
moisture was descending from above. Near by, the campfires were dimly
out of the tent. The night was dark and damp, a scarcely perceptible
rose, walked to and fro, put on a warm overcoat and a hat, and went
sleepy. The punch was finished and there was still nothing to do. He
He looked at his watch. It was still only four o'clock. He did not feel

see!"
and did not once mount a horse to inspect his entrenchments.... We shall
see! Do you remember at Braunau he commanded an army for three weeks
"Tomorrow we shall have to deal with Kutuzov!" said Napoleon. "We shall

Rapp made no reply.

being stronger than the enemy at a given moment. That's all."
"Do you know, Rapp, what military art is?" asked he. "It is the art of

Napoleon suddenly and unexpectedly gave a new one.
And having entered on the path of definition, of which he was fond,

blindfold.... Yes, our body is just a machine for living, that is all."
watchmaker cannot open it, he can only adjust it by fumbling, and that
Our body is like a perfect watch that should go for a certain time; the
will do more than if you paralyze it by encumbering it with remedies.
nature. Let life go on in it unhindered and let it defend itself, it
Our body is a machine for living. It is organized for that, it is its
they don't help at all. What can doctors cure? One can't cure anything.
medicine when it can't cure a cold! Corvisart gave me these lozenges but
"This cold is tiresome. They talk about medicine--what is the good of
"I have neither taste nor smell," he remarked, sniffing at his glass.

own.
ordered another glass to be brought for Rapp, and silently sipped his
his order had been executed. An attendant came in with punch. Napoleon
Napoleon shook his head in dissatisfaction as if not believing that
Rapp replied that he had given the Emperor's order about the rice, but

"The rice too?"

"Yes, sire."

Guards?" asked Napoleon sternly.
"Have the biscuits and rice been served out to the regiments of the

all been given and were now being executed.
to give further orders for the sake of killing time, for the orders had
He was not sleepy and it was still not nearly morning. It was impossible
Napoleon took a lozenge, put it in his mouth, and glanced at his watch.

"Yes, sire," replied Rapp.

are intact?" he remarked interrogatively.
and I am beginning to experience it. But the Guards, Rapp, the Guards
Smolensk. Fortune is frankly a courtesan, Rapp. I have always said so
"This poor army!" he suddenly remarked. "It has diminished greatly since

hand.
Napoleon frowned and sat silent for a long time leaning his head on his

continued Rapp. "The wine is drawn and must be drunk."
"Do you remember, sire, what you did me the honor to say at Smolensk?"

Napoleon looked at him.

"Without doubt, sire," replied Rapp.

asked him.
"Well, Rapp, do you think we shall do good business today?" Napoleon

The adjutant in attendance came into the tent.

same places. He nodded approval.
not withdrawn, and was told that the enemy's fires were still in the
the morning, loudly blowing his nose. He asked whether the Russians had
evening, he went into the large division of the tent at three o'clock in
in spite of his cold which had grown worse from the dampness of the
was so much interested in that task that he was unable to sleep, and
the serious business which, he considered, awaited him next day. He
Having finished his second glass of punch, Napoleon went to rest before

ought to be, and the more amazed at my genius."
the more I jest and the calmer I am the more tranquil and confident you
set to work I shall do it as no one else could, but now I can jest, and
in my hands and is clear and definite in my head. When the time comes to
while a patient is being strapped to the operating table. "The matter is
knows his job does when turning up his sleeves and putting on his apron
travel, and chatted carelessly, as a famous, self-confident surgeon who
He showed an interest in trifles, joked about de Beausset's love of

relating to the court.
household, surprising the prefect by his memory of minute details
about Paris and about some changes he meant to make in the Empress'
Having ordered punch and summoned de Beausset, he began to talk to him

"The chessmen are set up, the game will begin tomorrow!"

On returning from a second inspection of the lines, Napoleon remarked:


CHAPTER XXIX





role of appearing to command, calmly and with dignity.
battle, but with his great tact and military experience carried out his
contradict himself, did not get frightened or run away from the field of
inclined to the most reasonable opinions, he made no confusion, did not
battles. He did nothing harmful to the progress of the battle; he
representative of authority as well as, and even better than, at other
Napoleon at the battle of Borodino fulfilled his office as

minuteness.
criticized--criticized for their very perfection, for their excessive
a model of perfection for that kind of composition, but still they were
The dispositions drawn up by Weyrother for the battle of Austerlitz were

battle that has been won.
fill whole volumes to demonstrate their merits, when they relate to a
very worst dispositions and orders seem very good, and serious people
of importance, when they relate to a battle that has been lost, and the
seem very bad, and every learned militarist criticizes them with looks
did not win. The profoundest and most excellent dispositions and orders
than previous ones because the battle of Borodino was the first Napoleon
much the same as usual. These dispositions and orders only seem worse
pseudo-orders during the battle were also no worse than formerly, but
better, than previous dispositions by which he had won victories. His
The dispositions cited above are not at all worse, but are even

the twenty-sixth of August was unimportant.
previously, is quite baseless, which again shows that Napoleon's cold on
occasions, and of his orders during the battle not being as good as
the cause of his dispositions not being as well planned as on former
Moreover, the assertion made by various writers that his cold was

transport soldiers.
cold has no more historic interest than the cold of the least of the
place by his will. And so the question whether he had or had not a
part in the common action. It only seemed to Napoleon that it all took
him, in accord with the will of hundreds of thousands of people who took
another was not decided by Napoleon's will but occurred independently of
was going on before him. So the way in which these people killed one
of his orders were executed and during the battle he did not know what
And it was not Napoleon who directed the course of the battle, for none

men.
was not because of Napoleon's commands that they killed their fellow
to fight, in order to get food and rest as conquerors in Moscow. So it
There was nothing left for them to do but cry "Vive l'Empereur!" and go
have cried "Vive l'Empereur!" at any nonsense that might be told them.
piercing the terrestrial globe with a toy stick, and just as they would
had cried "Vive l'Empereur!" at the sight of the portrait of the boy
in the battle before Moscow, they cried "Vive l'Empereur!" just as they
for mutilation and death, the words of posterity about their having been
When they heard Napoleon's proclamation offering them, as compensation

have proceeded to fight the Russians because it was inevitable.
forbidden them to fight the Russians, they would have killed him and
to Moscow that the wine was drawn and must be drunk. Had Napoleon then
weary of the campaign, felt at the sight of an army blocking their road
army--French, Italian, German, Polish, and Dutch--hungry, ragged, and
not because of Napoleon's orders but by their own volition. The whole
The French soldiers went to kill and be killed at the battle of Borodino

people.
That was all done by the soldiers. Therefore it was not he who killed
At the battle of Borodino Napoleon shot at no one and killed no one.

it.
solution of the question, and historic investigation abundantly confirms
less a man than the great Napoleon--demands the acceptance of that
dignity--which tells me that each of us is, if not more at least not
because he ordered it; strange as these suppositions appear, yet human
commencement and conduct of the battle and thought it was done
men at Borodino was not due to Napoleon's will, though he ordered the
strange as it may seem to suppose that the slaughter of eighty thousand
order for it and thought it was done as a result of that order; and
St. Bartholomew was not due to Charles IX's will, though he gave the
Strange as at first glance it may seem to suppose that the Massacre of

events is purely external and fictitious.
in the events, and that a Napoleon's influence on the course of these
high--depends on the coincidence of the wills of all who take part
namely, that the course of human events is predetermined from on
question of what causes historic events another answer presents itself,
untrue and irrational, but contrary to all human reality. To the
begun by the will of one man, Napoleon, that argument seems not merely
Peter I, or that the French Empire was formed and the war with Russia
to men who do not admit that Russia was formed by the will of one man,
of St. Bartholomew was due to Charles IX's stomach being deranged. But
(without knowing what he was jesting at) when he saw that the Massacre
indubitable, as indubitable as the deduction Voltaire made in jest
the savior of Russia. Along that line of thought such a deduction is
Napoleon his waterproof boots on the twenty-fourth would have been
might have saved Russia, and consequently the valet who omitted to bring
his will, then evidently a cold affecting the manifestation of his will
battle of Borodino, and if this or that other arrangement depended on
If it had depended on Napoleon's will to fight or not to fight the

convincing.
had a bad cold on the twenty-fourth of August may seem logical and
man--Napoleon--to say that Russia remained a power because Napoleon
became an empire and French armies went to Russia at the will of one
the will of one man--Peter the Great--and that France from a republic
have been changed. To historians who believe that Russia was shaped by
full of genius and Russia would have been lost and the face of the world
orders he gave before and during the battle would have been still more
because Napoleon had a cold, and that if he had not had a cold the
Many historians say that the French did not win the battle of Borodino


CHAPTER XXVIII





of his orders during the fight could be executed.
appeared later, he could not know the course of the battle and not one
done, for during the whole battle Napoleon was so far away that, as
made by Napoleon during the battle. But this was not and could not be
and so it might be supposed that all necessary arrangements would be
manner, orders will be given in accordance with the enemy's movements,
disposition it is said that, after the fight has commenced in this
the orders in the disposition was, or could be, executed. But in the
probably unforeseen and not heard of by Napoleon). So not one of
redoubt was only taken at the end of the battle by the cavalry (a thing
Morand and Gerard did not take the redoubt but were driven back, and the
back to the Kolocha and could get no farther; while the divisions of
not be executed. After passing through Borodino the vice-King was driven
All this, like the other parts of the disposition, was not and could

simultaneously from the front.
redoubt while the divisions of Morand and Gerard were to advance
given him, he was to advance from the left through Borodino to the
sentence as from the attempts the vice-King made to execute the orders
As far as one can make out, not so much from this unintelligible

and come into line with the rest of the forces.
given), which under his leadership will be directed against the redoubt
Morand's and Gdrard's divisions (for whose movements no directions are
and cross by its three bridges, advancing to the same heights as
The fourth order was: The vice-King will occupy the village (Borodino)

it had to reform under grapeshot, of which Napoleon was unaware.
first fortification but was driven back, for on emerging from the wood
the first fortification. General Campan's division did not seize the
The third order was: General Campan will move through the wood to seize

the Russian position.
wood, met Tuchkov there barring his way, and could not and did not turn
was not done, because Poniatowski, advancing on the village through the
wood, should turn the Russian left flank. This could not be done and
The second order was that Poniatowski, moving to the village through the

forward.
the nearest commander, contrary to Napoleon's instructions, moved them
carry to the Russian works, and those 102 guns shot into the air until
done, as from the spots selected by Napoleon the projectiles did not
shower shells on the Russian fleches and redoubts. This could not be
were to come in line with them, 102 guns in all, were to open fire and
spot chosen by Napoleon, with the guns of Pernetti and Fouche; which
In the disposition it is said first that the batteries placed on the

orders. Not one of these was, or could be, carried out.
related to Napoleon's orders to deal with four points--four different
oneself to regard the arrangements without religious awe of his genius,
These dispositions, which are very obscure and confused if one allows



September, 6, 1812.

The Imperial Camp near Mozhaysk,

methode) as far as possible retaining troops in reserve.
All this must be done in good order (le tout se fera avec ordre et

line with the rest of the forces.
under his leadership will be directed against the redoubt and come into
advancing to the same heights as Morand's and Gibrard's divisions, which
The vice-King will occupy the village and cross by its three bridges,

commence on the right wing.
the vice-King's division will open a heavy fire on seeing the attack
right wing are heard. The sharpshooters of Morand's division and of
The cannonade on the left flank will begin as soon as the guns of the

accordance with the enemy's movements.
After the advance has begun in this manner, orders will be given in

fortification.
General Campan will move through the wood to seize the first

on the village and turn the enemy's position.
During the cannonade Prince Poniatowski is to advance through the wood

entrenchments.
howitzers of the Guard's artillery against either one or other of the
General Sorbier must be ready at the first order to advance with all the

which will have forty guns in all directed against it.
flanks of the battery that is to bombard the entrenchment on the left,
place the howitzers of the 3rd and 8th Corps, sixteen in all, on the
The commander of the artillery of the 3rd Corps, General Fouche, will


 in all 62 guns.

        --
 and     8 guns of Friant's and Dessaix's divisions

        30 guns of Campan's division
        24 guns of the artillery of the Guards

will operate:
fire, and overwhelm with shellfire the enemy's battery, against which
howitzers of Dessaix's and Friant's divisions, will move forward, open
General Pernetti, with thirty cannon of Campan's division and all the
At the same time the commander of the artillery of the 1st Corps,

batteries of the enemy.
plain occupied by the Prince d'Eckmuhl will open fire on the opposing
At dawn the two new batteries established during the night on the


and other historians with profound respect, were as follows:
These dispositions, of which the French historians write with enthusiasm

dispositions for the battle were written down from his dictation.
After giving these and other commands he returned to his tent, and the

artillery should be placed.
entrenchments, and the places where, in line with them, the field
batteries should be set up by the morrow to act against the Russian
pondered a little in silence and then indicated the spots where two
Having inspected the country opposite the Shevardino Redoubt, Napoleon

through the woods was dangerous and might disorder the division.
the so-called Duke of Elchingen (Ney) ventured to remark that a movement
fleches) to lead his division through the woods, Napoleon agreed, though
why not. To a proposal made by General Campan (who was to attack the
left wing, Napoleon said it should not be done, without explaining
from Davout, who was now called Prince d'Eckmuhl, to turn the Russian
conclusions in the form of commands. Having listened to a suggestion
course of ideas which guided his decisions merely gave them his final
and without communicating to the generals around him the profound
air and in silence, nodded with approval or shook his head dubiously,
Napoleon rode over the plain and surveyed the locality with a profound

Napoleon, and he himself, thought otherwise.
historians who described the event later and the men who then surrounded
called genius that people are so apt to ascribe to Napoleon; yet the
marshals, nor was there any need of that special and supreme quality
nor any particular care or trouble on the part of the Emperor and his
seem that not much consideration was needed to reach this conclusion,
military or not, that it was here the French should attack. It would
ground was more open and level than elsewhere. It was evident to anyone,
back. That part of the line was not entrenched and in front of it the
twenty-fourth, and part of the line--the left flank--had been drawn
been dislocated by the capture of the Shevardino Redoubt on the
The original line of the Russian forces along the river Kolocha had

generals.
submitted to him by his marshals, and personally giving commands to his
the whole day on horseback inspecting the locality, considering plans
On the twenty-fifth of August, so his historians tell us, Napoleon spent


CHAPTER XXVII





indicate how profoundly he valued and comprehended the Emperor's words.
De Beausset closed his eyes, bowed his head, and sighed deeply, to

the portrait. "It is too soon for him to see a field of battle."
"Take him away!" he said, pointing with a gracefully majestic gesture to

son's portrait grew still louder. Napoleon frowned.
Napoleon came out of the tent the shouting of the Guards before his
But Napoleon nodded to the traveler, and de Beausset had to mount. When

was afraid of doing so.
accompany the Emperor; he wanted to sleep, did not know how to ride and
"Your Majesty is too kind!" replied de Beausset to the invitation to

to where the horses stood saddled.
so fond of travel, to accompany him on his ride, he went out of the tent
"Before Moscow!" repeated Napoleon, and inviting M. de Beausset, who was


you: "He was in the great battle before Moscow!"
recall your achievements this day with pride. Let it be said of each of
Austerlitz, Friedland, Vitebsk, and Smolensk. Let our remotest posterity
quarters and a speedy return to our country. Behave as you did at
you. It is essential for us; it will give us all we need: comfortable
Soldiers! This is the battle you have so longed for. Victory depends on


ran:
proclamation which he had dictated straight off without corrections. It
"Short and energetic!" he remarked when he had read over the

the day to the army.
After breakfast Napoleon in de Beausset's presence dictated his order of

ecstatic cries.
"Vive l'Empereur! Vive le roi de Rome! Vive l'Empereur!" came those

officers and men of the Old Guard who had run up to see the portrait.
him, they heard, as Napoleon had anticipated, the rapturous cries of the
And while he was doing M. de Beausset the honor of breakfasting with

Rome, the son and heir of their adored monarch.
round it, might not be deprived of the pleasure of seeing the King of
portrait to be carried outside his tent, that the Old Guard, stationed
rose, and recalled de Beausset and the officer on duty. He ordered the
thick spot of paint representing the highest light in the portrait,
Having sat still for a while he touched--himself not knowing why--the

tiptoe, leaving the great man to himself and his emotion.
before the portrait. At a single gesture from him everyone went out on
at a chair (which seemed to place itself under him), and sat down on it
paternal tenderness. His eyes grew dim, he moved forward, glanced round
terrestrial globe--to show, in contrast to that grandeur, the simplest
him--whose grandeur enabled his son to play stick and ball with the
be historical, and it seemed to him that it would now be best for
of pensive tenderness. He felt that what he now said and did would
his face at will, he drew nearer to the portrait and assumed a look
With the natural capacity of an Italian for changing the expression of

gesture. "Admirable!"
"The King of Rome!" he said, pointing to the portrait with a graceful

Paris, quite clear and very pleasing.
apparently seemed to Napoleon, as it had done to all who had seen it in
the so-called King of Rome spiking the earth with a stick, the allegory
Though it was not clear what the artist meant to express by depicting

terrestrial globe and the stick in his other hand a scepter.
Madonna was depicted playing at stick and ball. The ball represented the
A very pretty curly-headed boy with a look of the Christ in the Sistine

some reason everyone called "The King of Rome."
to Napoleon by the daughter of the Emperor of Austria, the boy whom for
It was a portrait, painted in bright colors by Gerard, of the son borne

"A present to Your Majesty from the Empress."

same time, and said:
back to the Emperor retired two steps, twitching off the cloth at the
With courtly adroitness de Beausset half turned and without turning his

looking at something concealed under a cloth.
"Ha, what's this?" asked Napoleon, noticing that all the courtiers were

which he had not till then been aware).
De Beausset bowed gratefully at this regard for his taste for travel (of

You will have a pleasant journey."
will see Moscow. You surely did not expect to see that Asiatic capital.
snuffbox to his nose. "You are fond of travel, and in three days you
"Yes, it has happened luckily for you," he said, raising the open

gold snuffbox, which he took.
right. An aide-de-camp approached with gliding steps and offered him a
Napoleon smiled and, lifting his head absent-mindedly, glanced to the

replied de Beausset.
"Sire, I expected nothing less than to find you at the gates of Moscow,"

"I am very sorry to have made you travel so far," said he.

pleased to hear it from him. Again he honored him by touching his ear.
kind, and though in his lucid moments he knew it was untrue, he was
But though Napoleon knew that de Beausset had to say something of this

proper.
"Sire, all Paris regrets your absence," replied de Beausset as was

tone.
asked, suddenly changing his former stern expression for a most cordial
"You have hurried here. I am very glad. Well, what is Paris saying?" he

Napoleon turned to him gaily and pulled his ear.

presenting an envelope.
old retainers of the Bourbons knew how to make, and approached him,
De Beausset bowed low, with that courtly French bow which only the

it with a cloth.
prepared the surprise, having placed something on the chairs and covered
later," he added, and summoned de Beausset, who by that time had
"I must make up for that in Moscow," said Napoleon. "I'll see you

otherwise in his absence.
Fabvier's account, as if he had not expected that matters could go
that battle had been deplorable. Napoleon made ironic remarks during
Emperor--and but one fear--to fail to please him. The result of
the other end of Europe, with but one thought--to be worthy of their
of the heroism and devotion of his troops fighting at Salamanca, at
him, listening silently and with a stern frown to what Fabvier told him
a surprise, so he pretended not to see de Beausset and called Fabvier to
not ready. He did not wish to deprive them of the pleasure of giving him
Napoleon noticed at once what they were about and guessed that they were

rapidity that he had not time to finish arranging the surprise.
entrance. But Napoleon had dressed and come out with such unexpected
he had brought from the Empress, on two chairs directly in front of the
De Beausset's hands meanwhile were busily engaged arranging the present

the Guards he went with firm quick steps to the reception room.
Two valets rapidly dressed His Majesty, and wearing the blue uniform of

tent.
"Yes, sire," and the aide-de-camp disappeared through the door of the

nodding to the aide-de-camp.
"All right. Let Monsieur de Beausset enter, and Fabvier too," he said,

presenting his fat shoulders.
army.... Go on... harder, harder!" he muttered, hunching his back and
are forcing us to exterminate them. So much the worse for the Russian
"No prisoners!" said he, repeating the aide-de-camp's words. "They

frowning, looked at him from under his brows.
delivering his message, awaiting permission to withdraw. Napoleon,
prisoners taken in yesterday's action, was standing by the door after
who had entered the bedroom to report to the Emperor the number of
who was rubbing him, slightly twitching and grunting. An aide-de-camp,
physical satisfaction. "Go on, harder, go on!" he muttered to the valet
matted on the forehead, but his face, though puffy and yellow, expressed
de Cologne should be sprinkled. Napoleon's short hair was wet and
expression which seemed to say that he alone knew where and how much Eau
was sprinkling Eau de Cologne on the Emperor's pampered body with an
him down. Another valet, with his finger over the mouth of a bottle,
now his plump hairy chest to the brush with which his valet was rubbing
toilet. Slightly snorting and grunting, he presented now his back and
The Emperor Napoleon had not yet left his bedroom and was finishing his

generals of his acquaintance.
Fabvier, not entering the tent, remained at the entrance talking to some

conversing with Napoleon's aides-de-camp who surrounded him.
compartment of Napoleon's tent, where he began opening the box while
brought for the Emperor to be carried before him and entered the first
Donning his court uniform, M. de Beausset ordered a box he had

Madrid.
Valuevo with Colonel Fabvier, the former from Paris and the latter from
of the French Emperor's palace, arrived at Napoleon's quarters at
On August 25, the eve of the battle of Borodino, M. de Beausset, prefect


CHAPTER XXVI





pacing up and down in front of the shed.
Prince Andrew jumped up as if someone had burned him, and again began

deign to unite his fate. And I?... and he is still alive and gay!"
only saw in her a pretty and fresh young girl, with whom he did not
of that kind. He neither saw nor understood anything of the sort. He
suddenly he remembered how his love had ended. "He did not need anything
was that soul I loved in her... loved so strongly and happily..." and
soul--that very soul of hers which seemed to be fettered by her body--it
just that inner, spiritual force, that sincerity, that frankness of
understood her," he thought. "I not only understood her, but it was
now the same happy smile as then when he had looked into her eyes. "I
describe it," she had said, flushed and excited. Prince Andrew smiled
it was so dark in the forest... and he had such kind... No, I can't
that day and wished to convey. "He was such a delightful old man, and
they did not convey the passionately poetic feeling she had experienced
say. But Natasha was not satisfied with her own words: she felt that
that he did understand, and he really had understood all she wanted to
it right; no, you don't understand," though he encouraged her by saying
constantly interrupted her story to say: "No, I can't! I'm not telling
the forest, her feelings, and a talk with a beekeeper she met, and
her way in the big forest. She incoherently described the depths of
how she had gone to look for mushrooms the previous summer and had lost
in Petersburg. Natasha with animated and excited face was telling him
one of them he dwelt long and joyfully. He vividly recalled an evening
He closed his eyes. One picture succeeded another in his imagination. On

not sleep.
On re-entering the shed Prince Andrew lay down on a rug, but he could

that this is our last meeting!" He sighed deeply and rode back to Gorki.
him or go away. "No, he does not want it!" Pierre concluded. "And I know
For some time he stood in silence considering whether he should follow

expression of Prince Andrew's face was angry or tender.
It was already dark, and Pierre could not make out whether the

hurriedly he entered the shed.
off!" he shouted. "Whether we meet again or not..." and turning away
He came quickly up to Pierre and embraced and kissed him. "Good-by, be

Andrew.
"Go, go! Before a battle one must have one's sleep out," repeated Prince

compassionate eyes.
"Oh no!" Pierre replied, looking at Prince Andrew with frightened,

Gorki!" said Prince Andrew suddenly.
"However, you're sleepy, and it's time for me to sleep. Go back to

added.
tree of knowledge of good and evil.... Ah, well, it's not for long!" he
begun to understand too much. And it doesn't do for man to taste of the
friend, it has of late become hard for me to live. I see that I have
them?" exclaimed Prince Andrew in a shrill, piercing voice. "Ah, my
the greater their achievement. How does God above look at them and hear
announce a victory, supposing that the more people they have killed
having killed so many people (they even exaggerate the number), and they
and maim tens of thousands, and then have thanksgiving services for
"They meet, as we shall meet tomorrow, to murder one another; they kill

highest rewards.
wear military uniforms, and he who kills most people receives the
highest class, respected by everyone. All the kings, except the Chinese,
cruelty, debauchery, and drunkenness. And in spite of all this it is the
are the absence of freedom, that is, discipline, idleness, ignorance,
and falsehood termed military craft. The habits of the military class
inhabitants, robbing them or stealing to provision the army, and fraud
are spying, treachery, and their encouragement, the ruin of a country's
habits of the military? The aim of war is murder; the methods of war
"But what is war? What is needed for success in warfare? What are the

calling is the most highly honored.
now, war is the favorite pastime of the idle and frivolous. The military
that: get rid of falsehood and let war be war and not a game. As it is
accept this terrible necessity sternly and seriously. It all lies in
life; and we ought to understand that and not play at war. We ought to
without knowing why. War is not courtesy but the most horrible thing in
him into Russia, and we should not go to fight in Austria and Prussia
Westphalians and Hessians whom Napoleon is leading would not follow
determination of the troops would be quite different. Then all these
when there was a war, like this one, it would be war! And then the
not be war because Paul Ivanovich had offended Michael Ivanovich. And
when it was worth while going to certain death, as now. Then there would
"If there was none of this magnanimity in war, we should go to war only

quivered as he began speaking.
few times in silence, but his eyes glittered feverishly and his lips
speech by an unexpected cramp in his throat. He paced up and down a
not Moscow was taken as Smolensk had been, was suddenly checked in his
Prince Andrew, who had thought it was all the same to him whether or

through the same sufferings..."
prisoners, but kill and be killed! He who has come to this as I have
father, and then talk of rules of war and magnanimity to foes! Take no
false paper money, and worst of all they kill my children and my
us and we humbugged them. They plunder other people's houses, issue
all rubbish! I saw chivalry and flags of truce in 1805; they humbugged
chivalry, of flags of truce, of mercy to the unfortunate and so on. It's
calf served up with sauce. They talk to us of the rules of war, of
is so kindhearted that she can't look at blood, but enjoys eating the
sensibility of a lady who faints when she sees a calf being killed: she
stuff. Such magnanimity and sensibility are like the magnanimity and
played at war--that's what's vile! We play at magnanimity and all that
quite change the whole war and make it less cruel. As it is we have
"Not take prisoners," Prince Andrew continued: "That by itself would

it were lightheartedly.
and this explained to him why they all prepared for death calmly, and as
physics) of patriotism which was present in all these men he had seen,
for him by a new light. He understood that latent heat (as they say in
stern expressions on the faces he had seen in passing, were lit up
impending battle. All he had seen that day, all the significant and
understood the whole meaning and importance of this war and of the
that day now seemed to him quite clear and completely solved. He now
The question that had perturbed Pierre on the Mozhaysk hill and all

"I quite agree with you!"
"Yes, yes," muttered Pierre, looking with shining eyes at Prince Andrew.

said at Tilsit."
Since they are my foes they cannot be my friends, whatever may have been
And so thinks Timokhin and the whole army. They should be executed!
every moment. They are my enemies. In my opinion they are all criminals.
their way to destroy Moscow, they have outraged and are outraging me
prisoners? It's chivalry! The French have destroyed my home and are on
I had the power," he began again, "I would not take prisoners. Why take
"Yes, yes," answered Prince Andrew absently. "One thing I would do if

"So you think we shall win tomorrow's battle?" asked Pierre.

teachers!" and again his voice grew shrill.
have yielded up all Europe to him, and have now come to teach us. Fine
hearts the one thing needed tomorrow--that which Timokhin has. They
heads but theories not worth an empty eggshell and haven't in their
make all the mess they can, because they have nothing in their German
you--those German gentlemen won't win the battle tomorrow but will only
Bald Hills. That's all the same to him! That's what I was saying to
ridden past. "In that 'extend' were my father, son, and sister, at
"Extend widely!" said Prince Andrew with an angry snort, when they had

"Oh, no," agreed the other.


     individuals."
     course one cannot take into account the loss of private
     * "Oh, yes, the only aim is to weaken the enemy, so of


nehmen." *
so kann man gewiss nicht den Verlust der Privat-Personen in Achtung
"Oh, ja," said the other, "der Zweck ist nur den Feind zu schwachen,


     commend that view."
     * "The war must be extended widely. I cannot sufficiently


Preis geben," * said one of them.
"Der Krieg muss in Raum verlegt werden. Der Ansicht kann ich nicht genug

words:
continuing to converse, and Prince Andrew involuntarily heard these
Wolzogen and Clausewitz accompanied by a Cossack. They rode close by
from the shed, and looking in that direction Prince Andrew recognized
when they heard the clatter of three horses' hoofs on the road not far
Pierre approached Prince Andrew and was about to start a conversation
with them, giving final orders to the adjutant. After they had gone
All were silent. The officers rose. Prince Andrew went out of the shed

they say."
believe me, wouldn't drink their vodka! 'It's not the day for that!'
Timokhin. "Who would spare himself now? The soldiers in my battalion,
"There now, your excellency! That's the truth, the real truth," said

may, we shall win!"
the top may make, we shall win tomorrow's battle. Tomorrow, happen what
like I will tell you that whatever happens and whatever muddles those at
that fights more fiercely and spares itself least will win. And if you
the thing is that these two hundred thousand men will fight and the side
thousand and a French army of a hundred thousand have met to fight, and
or ribbon. For me tomorrow means this: a Russian army of a hundred
affording opportunities to undermine a rival and obtain an extra cross
"At such a moment!" Prince Andrew repeated. "To them it is only a moment

"At such a moment?" said Pierre reproachfully.

petty interests."
do not help matters, but hinder. They are only concerned with their own
that those men with whom you have ridden round the position not only
killed, but all that is being done at present is only play. The fact is
our men or theirs run or do not run, and that this man or that man is
diverse chances which will be decided on the instant by the fact that
nothing of the kind. But what awaits us tomorrow? A hundred million most
right flank too extended," he went on. "That's all nonsense, there's
shan't say it! You talk about our position, the left flank weak and the
the evening, heaven knows what might not have happened. But tomorrow we
'We've lost, so let us run,' and we ran. If we had not said that till
there, we wanted to get away from the battlefield as soon as we could.
and we did lose it. And we said so because we had nothing to fight for
but very early we said to ourselves that we were losing the battle,
the battle at Austerlitz? The French losses were almost equal to ours,
"A battle is won by those who firmly resolve to win it! Why did we lose

expressing the thoughts that had suddenly occurred to him.
Prince Andrew now seemed excited. He could apparently not refrain from
and bewilderment. In contrast to his former reticent taciturnity
Prince Andrew glanced at Timokhin, who looked at his commander in alarm

in each soldier."
"On the feeling that is in me and in him," he pointed to Timokhin, "and

"But on what then?"

and least of all on position."
and never will depend, on position, or equipment, or even on numbers,
battle will depend and not on those others.... Success never depends,
the regiment with these gentlemen, and I consider that on us tomorrow's
arrangements, but instead of that I have the honor to serve here in
depended on arrangements made by the staff, I should be there making
never be known to anyone. Believe me," he went on, "if things
weaker than a company. The relative strength of bodies of troops can
in war a battalion is sometimes stronger than a division and sometimes
stronger than a pawn, and two pawns are always stronger than one, while
limited for time, and with this difference too, that a knight is always
in chess you may think over each move as long as you please and are not
"Yes," replied Prince Andrew, "but with this little difference, that

"And yet they say that war is like a game of chess?" he remarked.

Pierre looked at him in surprise.

settled long ago.
"But that's impossible," said Prince Andrew as if it were a matter

contingencies... and foresees the adversary's intentions."
"A skillful commander?" replied Pierre. "Why, one who foresees all

Prince Andrew ironically.
"I don't understand what is meant by 'a skillful commander,'" replied

"And they say he's a skillful commander," rejoined Pierre.

more unjust. He is an honest and very punctilious German."
him out a hero or a genius instead of a traitor, and that will be still
be that afterwards, ashamed of their false accusations, they will make
out a traitor! They slander him as a traitor, and the only result will
she needs one of her own kin. But in your Club they have been making him
serve her and be a splendid minister; but as soon as she is in danger
So it has been with Barclay. While Russia was well, a foreigner could
and will soothe him better than a skilled man who is a stranger could.
away and attend to your father with your own unpracticed, awkward hands,
him serve. But if your father is mortally sick you'll send the valet
father's requirements better than you could, then it's all right to let
father has a German valet, and he is a splendid valet and satisfies your
accurately as every German has to. How can I explain?... Well, say your
unsuitable now, just because he plans out everything very thoroughly and
he thought out everything, and that is why he is unsuitable. He is
He had no thought of betraying us, he tried to do the best he could,
ordered us to retreat, and all our efforts and losses went for nothing.
two days, and that that success had increased our strength tenfold. He
men such as I had never seen before, that we had held the French for
we were fighting for Russian soil, and that there was a spirit in the
involuntarily: "he could not understand that there, for the first time,
this," cried Prince Andrew in a shrill voice that seemed to escape him
outflank us, as they had larger forces. But he could not understand
marauding. At Smolensk too he judged correctly that the French might
one can't permit the land to be pillaged and accustom the troops to
enemy," said Prince Andrew with venomous irony. "It is very sound:
"Why, so as not to lay waste the country we were abandoning to the

such a question. Pierre put the same question to Prince Andrew.
Timokhin looked about in confusion, not knowing what or how to answer

"Then why was it forbidden?"

straight forward. Now we see light..."
that kind of thing. But when his Serenity took command everything became
"But we daren't. In our regiment two officers were court-martialed for
wasn't it so, your excellency?" and again Timokhin turned to the prince.
of hay or anything. You see, we were going away, so he would get it all;
we were retreating from Sventsyani we dare not touch a stick or a wisp
"Well, to mention only firewood and fodder, let me inform you. Why, when

"Why so?" asked Pierre.

his colonel.
excellency," said Timokhin timidly, and continually turning to glance at
"We see light again, since his Serenity has been appointed, your

with which everybody involuntarily addressed that officer.
Pierre looked at Timokhin with the condescendingly interrogative smile

"Ask them," replied Prince Andrew, indicating the officers.

heaven knows what about him.... What do you think of him?"
"And tell me your opinion of Barclay de Tolly. In Moscow they are saying

Andrew.
"I was very glad of his appointment, that's all I know," replied Prince

asked.
Andrew. "Well, and what do you think of Kutuzov's appointment?" he
"Oh!" said Pierre, looking over his spectacles in perplexity at Prince

Prince Andrew.
"Well, then, you know more than anyone else, be it who it may," said

position."
I can't say I have understood it fully, but I understand the general
"Yes--that is, how do you mean?" said Pierre. "Not being a military man

interrupted him.
"So you understand the whole position of our troops?" Prince Andrew

addressed his remarks chiefly to the good-natured battalion commander.
Andrew remained silent, and his expression was so forbidding that Pierre
Moscow and the position of our army, round which he had ridden. Prince
surprise at Pierre's huge stout figure and listened to his talk of
tea. Seats were brought in and so was the tea. The officers gazed with
reluctant to be left alone with his friend, asked them to stay and have
The officers were about to take leave, but Prince Andrew, apparently


CHAPTER XXV





missed them. They have gone to your estate near Moscow."
"Yes, they have. Julie Drubetskaya told me so. I went to see them, but

my people? Have they reached Moscow at last?" he asked seriously.
stop it?" said Prince Andrew sarcastically. "Well, and how's Moscow? And
"Oh yes, and what do the Masonic brothers say about war? How would they

"interesting." "I wish to see the battle."
Pierre, who had so often that day senselessly repeated that word
"I have come... simply... you know... come... it interests me," said

constrained and ill at ease.
the shed full of animation, but on seeing Prince Andrew's face he felt
expressed hostility, which Pierre noticed at once. He had approached
As he said this his eyes and face expressed more than coldness--they

unexpected!"
"You? What a surprise!" said he. "What brings you here? This is

his last visit to Moscow.
and Pierre especially, for he reminded him of all the painful moments of
unpleasant to Prince Andrew to meet people of his own set in general,
over a pole on the ground and had nearly fallen, coming his way. It was
Prince Andrew looked out of the shed and saw Pierre, who had tripped

"Devil take it!" said the voice of a man stumbling over something.

them when he heard a familiar, lisping, voice behind the shed.
about, gave them some further instructions, and was about to dismiss
Prince Andrew rose hastily, listened to the business they had come

shed followed by an adjutant and the regimental paymaster.
but now from lack of officers a battalion commander, shyly entered the
The red-nosed Captain Timokhin, formerly Dolokhov's squadron commander,

he cried.
After he had returned, voices were heard outside the shed. "Who's that?"

quickly, went out of the shed, and began to walk about.
terrible and menacing. A cold shiver ran down his spine. He rose
smoke of the campfires, and all that was around him changed and seemed
And the birches with their light and shade, the curly clouds, the

be, but no me...."
killed tomorrow... That I should not exist... That all this should still
motionless green and yellow foliage and white bark. "To die... to be
He looked at the row of birches shining in the sunshine, with their

and about which I shall know nothing. I shall not exist..."
conditions of life will arise, which will seem quite ordinary to others
and fling me into a hole that I may not stink under their noses, and new
did yesterday, and the French will come and take me by head and heels
men, by a soldier discharging a musket close to my ear as one of them
shall be killed, perhaps not even by a Frenchman but by one of our own
intended? The Fatherland, the destruction of Moscow! And tomorrow I
here and will never return? He is not here! For whom then is the trial
it is a trial sent from above. What is the trial for, when he is not
and his Bald Hills and his whole life fell to pieces. Princess Mary says
unconscious of his existence, as he might brush a chip from his path,
land, his air, his peasants. But Napoleon came and swept him aside,
"When my father built Bald Hills he thought the place was his: his

really.... It was all very simple and horrible."
in the fable she was to pine apart from me.... But it was much simpler
faithful to me for the whole year of my absence! Like the gentle dove
bitterly. "Ah me! I believed in some ideal love which was to keep her
of love and happiness with her! Oh, what a boy I was!" he said aloud
over with mystic forces! Yes, indeed, I loved her. I made romantic plans
overrun half Russia. "Love... that little girl who seemed to me brimming
love for a woman, his father's death, and the French invasion which had
three great sorrows of his life held his attention in particular: his
cold white light of this morning which I feel is dawning for me." The
seemed to be filled! And it is all so simple, pale, and crude in the
important these pictures appeared to me, with what profound meaning they
Glory, the good of society, love of a woman, the Fatherland itself--how
rudely painted figures that once seemed splendid and mysterious.
white daylight of his clear perception of death. "There they are, those
pictures of the magic lantern of life and regarding them now in the cold
and tormented me," said he to himself, passing in review the principal
yes! There they are, those false images that agitated, enraptured,
badly daubed pictures in clear daylight and without a glass. "Yes,
gazing by artificial light through a glass. Now he suddenly saw those
appeared to him like magic-lantern pictures at which he had long been
shadows, without perspective, without distinction of outline. All life
preoccupied him suddenly became illumined by a cold white light without
from the height of this perception all that had previously tormented and
his own soul--vividly, plainly, terribly, and almost as a certainty. And
reference to its effect on others, but simply in relation to himself, to
presented itself to him--not in relation to any worldly matter or with
part in, and for the first time in his life the possibility of death
tomorrow's battle would be the most terrible of all he had taken
therefore most terrible thoughts--would give him no peace. He knew that
nothing more to do. But his thoughts--the simplest, clearest, and
He had received and given the orders for next day's battle and had

he had done seven years before at Austerlitz.
him, Prince Andrew on the eve of battle felt agitated and irritable as
Narrow and burdensome and useless to anyone as his life now seemed to

campfires--the soldiers' kitchens.
oats were standing, and some bushes near which rose the smoke of
with their lower branches lopped off, a field on which shocks of
could see, beside the wooden fence, a row of thirty year-old birches
end of his regiment's encampment. Through a gap in the broken wall he
elbow in a broken-down shed in the village of Knyazkovo at the further
On that bright evening of August 25, Prince Andrew lay leaning on his


CHAPTER XXIV





matter to the commander in chief.
the troops forward according to his own ideas without mentioning the
approaching enemy unexpectedly. Bennigsen did not know this and moved
an ambush, that they should not be seen and might be able to strike an
put there to defend the position, but were in a concealed position as
Pierre did not know that these troops were not, as Bennigsen supposed,

and palpable a blunder.
how the man who put them there behind the hill could have made so gross
shared their opinion, but for that very reason he could not understand
position of the troops behind the hill, he quite understood them and
matters. Listening to Bennigsen and the generals criticizing the
increased Pierre's doubt of his own capacity to understand military
the troops to occupy the high ground. This disposition on the left flank
were put there to be slaughtered. Bennigsen on his own authority ordered
the same opinion. One in particular declared with martial heat that they
unoccupied and to place troops below it. Some of the generals expressed
that it was madness to leave a height which commanded the country around
occupied by troops. Bennigsen loudly criticized this mistake, saying
importance. In front of Tuchkov's troops was some high ground not
much heat, and, as it seemed to Pierre, gave orders of great military
Here, at the extreme left flank, Bennigsen talked a great deal and with

to defend the left flank.
they came out on a glade where troops of Tuchkov's corps were stationed
in the thicket. After going through the wood for about a mile and a half
when several voices shouted at it did it dart to one side and disappear
of them for some time, arousing general attention and laughter, and only
the many horses, grew so confused that it leaped along the road in front
wood a brown hare with white feet sprang out and, scared by the tramp of
winding through a thick, low-growing birch wood. In the middle of the
From the fleches they rode still farther to the left, along a road

truthfully.
"On the contrary it's very interesting!" replied Pierre not quite

"I don't think this interests you?"

noticing that Pierre was listening, suddenly said to him:
task. He could make nothing of it. Bennigsen stopped speaking and,
was mortified to feel that his mental capacity was inadequate for the
faculty to understand the essential points of the impending battle, but
the whole position of our troops. Pierre listened to him, straining each
Bennigsen spoke to a general who approached him, and began explaining

rode away from the mound and disappeared.
scarcely discernible figures was Napoleon. At last those mounted men
horsemen. Pierre also looked at them, trying to guess which of the
Murat was there, and they all gazed eagerly at this little group of
horsemen could be descried. The officers said that either Napoleon or
Redoubt opposite, which had been ours the day before and where several
At the fleches Bennigsen stopped and began looking at the Shevardino


    * A kind of entrenchment.


dug.
of the plowed land, and reached some fleches * which were still being
hail, following a track freshly made by the artillery over the furrows
downhill and uphill, across a ryefield trodden and beaten down as if by
dragging away the last logs from the huts and barns. Then they rode
They then crossed the hollow to Semenovsk, where the soldiers were

him than any other spot on the plain of Borodino.
attention to it. He did not know that it would become more memorable to
the Raevski Redoubt, or the Knoll Battery, but Pierre paid no special
This was the redoubt, as yet unnamed, which afterwards became known as
troops and guns, and came to a high knoll where militiamen were digging.
Borodino and thence turned to the left, passing an enormous number of
lay by the riverside. They rode across that bridge into the village of
being the center of our position and where rows of fragrant new-mown hay
they had looked at it from the hill, the officer had pointed out as
From Gorki, Bennigsen descended the highroad to the bridge which, when


CHAPTER XXIII





suite, with Pierre among them, set out on their ride along the line.
Half an hour later Kutuzov left for Tatarinova, and Bennigsen and his

"Yes, very much," replied Pierre.

"It will interest you," said he.

Pierre and proposed that he should ride with him along the line.
Boris said a few words to his general, and Count Bennigsen turned to

With tears in his eyes Dolokhov embraced Pierre and kissed him.
Pierre looked at Dolokhov with a smile, not knowing what to say to him.

have any ill feeling for me. I beg you to forgive me."
misunderstandings that occurred between us and should wish you not to
survive, I am glad of this opportunity to tell you that I regret the
tone. "On the eve of a day when God alone knows who of us is fated to
of the presence of strangers and in a particularly resolute and solemn
"I am very glad to meet you here, Count," he said aloud, regardless

When Pierre had left Kutuzov, Dolokhov came up to him and took his hand.

the verses.
Kaysarov recited.... Kutuzov smilingly nodded his head to the rhythm of

recite them!" said he, evidently preparing to laugh.
wrote about Gerakov: 'Lectures for the corps inditing'... Recite them,
"Those verses... those verses of Marin's... how do they go, eh? Those he

Kaysarov, his adjutant's brother.
Then, evidently remembering what he wanted, he beckoned to Andrew

absent-mindedly as if forgetting all he wanted to say or do.
And as often happens with old people, Kutuzov began looking about

she well? My quarters are at your service."
pleasant smell. I have the honor to be one of your wife's adorers. Is
"So you want to smell gunpowder?" he said to Pierre. "Yes, it's a

eyes and swayed his head. "A matchless people!" he repeated with a sigh.
"Ah... a wonderful, a matchless people!" said Kutuzov; and he closed his

on clean shirts."
"Preparing for tomorrow, your Serene Highness--for death--they have put

"What are you saying about the militia?" he asked Boris.

words, and so it was.
Serene Highness. He knew Kutuzov's attention would be caught by those
Boris evidently said this to Pierre in order to be overheard by his

heroism, Count!"
"The militia have put on clean white shirts to be ready to die. What

conversation:
raising his voice, said to Pierre, as though continuing an interrupted
Pierre's side near Kutuzov and in a most natural manner, without
Just then Boris, with his courtierlike adroitness, stepped up to

more as he looked at Pierre.
"Yes... Yes..." Kutuzov repeated, his laughing eye narrowing more and

Highness."
skin, please think of me.... Perhaps I may prove useful to your Serene
"And should your Serene Highness require a man who will not spare his

"Yes, yes."

for which I am ready to die."
"But if I were right, I should be rendering a service to my Fatherland

"Yes, yes."

lose anything..." Dolokhov was saying.
me away or say that you knew what I was reporting, but then I shouldn't
"I concluded that if I reported to your Serene Highness you might send

Pierre took off his hat and bowed respectfully to Kutuzov.

line at night.... He's a brave fellow."
proposing some scheme or other and has crawled into the enemy's picket
has been degraded, you know. Now he wants to bob up again. He's been
"He's a creature that wriggles in anywhere!" was the answer. "He

"How did that fellow get here?" asked Pierre.

Dolokhov.
toward Kutuzov's bench. But a militiaman got there before him. It was
An adjutant told Pierre of his Serene Highness' wish, and Pierre went

"Call him to me," said Kutuzov.

Kutuzov noticed Pierre's figure and the group gathered round him.
personal matters but of the universal questions of life and death.
expression he saw on other faces--an expression that spoke not of
of personal success; his mind, however, was occupied by the different
the excitement shown in some of these faces lay chiefly in questions
animation and apprehension, but it seemed to Pierre that the cause of
him, or to listen to all that was told him. The faces all expressed
time to reply to all the questions about Moscow that were showered upon
After Kaysarov, others whom Pierre knew came up to him, and he had not

full of nervous vivacity all day.
tomorrow's action, and new men would come to the front. So Boris was
Bennigsen. In any case many great rewards would have to be given for
if Kutuzov won the battle it would be felt that everything was done by
when Kutuzov would be destroyed and the power pass to Bennigsen, or even
Bennigsen managed everything. Now the decisive moment of battle had come
so create an impression that the old fellow was not much good and that
latter and no one else, while showing servile respect to Kutuzov, could
party and that of Bennigsen, the chief of staff. Boris belonged to the
In the higher command there were two sharply defined parties: Kutuzov's

man.
had been in attendance, considered young Prince Drubetskoy an invaluable
established himself with Count Bennigsen, who, like all on whom Boris
had contrived to remain at headquarters after the changes. He had
Though Kutuzov had dismissed all unnecessary men from the staff, Boris

"Yes, exactly; the left flank is now extremely strong."

"You mean the left flank?" asked Kaysarov.

intentions of the French!"
the count. It is amazing how his Serene Highness could so foresee the
unembarrassed smile, "I was just trying to explain our position to
came up to Pierre. "Ah, Kaysarov!" said Boris, addressing him with an
Boris did not finish, for at that moment Kaysarov, Kutuzov's adjutant,
Highness would not have it, or someone persuaded him. You see..." but
quite differently, but..." Boris shrugged his shoulders, "his Serene
not at all what Count Bennigsen intended. He meant to fortify that knoll
left flank is in," said Boris confidentially lowering his voice. "It is
"To tell you the truth, between ourselves, God only knows what state our

"What about the left flank?" asked Pierre

"Prince Andrew's? We shall pass it and I'll take you to him."

out to me?"
"Yes, yes. But where is Prince Bolkonski's regiment? Can you point it

"Well, you can do that later, but the chief thing is the left flank."

round the whole position."
said Pierre. "I should like to start from the Moskva River and ride
"But I should like to see the right flank. They say it's very strong,"

in the village of Gorki.
Sergeevich? Those are his quarters," and he pointed to the third house
with me and we'll arrange a game of cards. Of course you know Dmitri
just going to the left flank. Then when we get back, do spend the night
But if you want to ride round the position, come along with us. We are
will be. I am in attendance on him, you know; I'll mention it to him.
camp to you. You will see everything best from where Count Bennigsen
"This is what you must do," said Boris. "I will do the honors of the

position.
He explained his wish to be present at the battle and to see the

some thirty paces from Kutuzov, talking to Boris.
The icon was carried further, accompanied by the throng. Pierre stopped

brilliant suite surrounded him.
to fetch and another had hastily covered with a rug. An immense and
shade of the nearest house, on a bench which one Cossack had run
Meanwhile Kutuzov had reached the village and seated himself in the

Kutuzov had a whip slung across his shoulder.
martial touch appropriate to a campaign. He wore a long coat and like
came up to him smiling. Boris was elegantly dressed, with a slightly
(he had probably soiled them when he, too, had knelt before the icon),
Pierre looked round. Boris Drubetskoy, brushing his knees with his hand

"Count Peter Kirilovich! How did you get here?" said a voice.

Staggering amid the crush, Pierre looked about him.


CHAPTER XXII





militiamen.
another, crowding, panting, and pushing, scrambled the soldiers and
then the officers, and after them with excited faces, pressing on one
the ground with his hand. The other generals followed his example,
a child does with naively pouting lips, and again bowed till he touched
white head twitched with the effort. At last he rose, kissed the icon as
rise, but could not do so on account of his weakness and weight. His
to his knees, bowed to the ground, and for a long time tried vainly to
When the service was over, Kutuzov stepped up to the icon, sank heavily

continued their prayers without looking at him.
the attention of all the superior officers, the militiamen and soldiers
the suite. Despite the presence of the commander in chief, who attracted
bowed his white head with a deep sigh. Behind Kutuzov was Bennigsen and
accustomed movement, bent till he touched the ground with his hand, and
the crowd and stopped behind the priest. He crossed himself with an
eye he had lost, Kutuzov walked with plunging, swaying gait into
with uncovered white head and puffy face showing the white ball of the
With a long overcoat on his exceedingly stout, round-shouldered body,

from everybody else.
recognized him at once by his peculiar figure, which distinguished him
back to Tatarinova had stopped where the service was being held. Pierre
It was Kutuzov, who had been riding round the position and on his way

was made for him, was approaching the icon.
Someone, a very important personage judging by the haste with which way
The crowd round the icon suddenly parted and pressed against Pierre.

and sighs and the sound men made as they crossed themselves were heard.
that morning; and heads were bowed more frequently and hair tossed back,
the hill at Mozhaysk and momentarily on many and many faces he had met
of the impending moment that Pierre had seen on the faces at the foot of
all those faces the same expression of consciousness of the solemnity
flee as to an inviolable bulwark and protection," there again kindled in
God," and the priest and deacon chimed in: "For to Thee under God we all
mechanically to sing: "Save from calamity Thy servants, O Mother of
singing the service for the twentieth time that day, began lazily and
all gazing eagerly at the icon. As soon as the tired chanters, who were
expression on the faces of the crowd of soldiers and militiamen who were
look at them--his whole attention was absorbed in watching the serious
recognized several acquaintances among these notables, but did not
while looking about him. Standing among the crowd of peasants, Pierre
pose, crossing himself by shaking his hand in front of his chest
patriotism of the Russian people. Another general stood in a martial
he considered it necessary to hear to the end, probably to arouse the
was evidently a German) patiently awaited the end of the service, which
stood just behind the priest's back, and without crossing himself (he
reserved for them. A bald general with a St. George's Cross on his neck
Behind the priest and a chanter stood the notabilities on a spot
of bareheaded officers, soldiers, and militiamen surrounded the icon.
The singing did not sound loud under the open sky. An immense crowd
the hair of the bared heads and with the ribbons decorating the icon.
rays of the sun beat down vertically and a fresh soft wind played with
others, the chanters relit their censers, and service began. The hot
been holding it up by the linen bands attached to it were relieved by
At the summit of the hill they stopped with the icon; the men who had

ran, and bowed to the ground.
before, and on both sides, crowds of militiamen with bared heads walked,
been brought from Smolensk and had since accompanied the army. Behind,
dark-faced icon with an embossed metal cover. This was the icon that had
attendants and singers. Behind them soldiers and officers bore a large,
road came priests in their vestments--one little old man in a hood with
church procession. Following the battalion that marched along the dusty
been at work on the battery, threw down their spades and ran to meet the
The militiamen, both those who had been in the village and those who had

"The Smolensk Mother of God," another corrected him.

someone cried.
"They are bringing her, our Protectress!... The Iberian Mother of God!"

procession.
Soldiers and militiamen ran bareheaded past Pierre toward the

reversed. From behind them came the sound of church singing.
the dusty road came the infantry in ranks, bareheaded and with arms
A church procession was coming up the hill from Borodino. First along

soldiers, and militiamen began running forward along the road.
here in a minute..." voices were suddenly heard saying; and officers,
"There they are... bringing her, coming... There they are... They'll be

holding his nose as he ran past the men at work.
"Oh, those damned fellows!" muttered the officer who followed him,

again, passing the militiamen.
"No, I've come on my own," answered Pierre, and he went down the hill

"And you, are you one of the doctors?"

"Well, send number three company again," the officer replied hurriedly.

of it.
think of how many men would be missing tomorrow but ought not to speak
The officer appeared abashed, as though he understood that one might

"Gabions must be sent for," said he sternly.

him.
at this point, evidently not liking the officer's remark, interrupted
these explanations had waited in silence for him to finish speaking, but
An elderly sergeant who had approached the officer while he was giving

many a man will be missing tomorrow!" he remarked.
probably pass round to the right of the Moskva. But wherever it may be,
be there. His having moved his troops there is only a ruse; he will
yes, there," he pointed to Raevski's knoll. "But the battle will hardly
over there, do you see that village and the smoke? That's Semenovsk,
where the oak is, but now we have withdrawn our left wing--now it is
explain.... Yesterday our left flank was there at Shevardino, you see,
flank..." here the officer paused. "Well, you see, that's difficult to
we have thrown up three redoubts there, very strong ones. The left
far away in the broken ground--"That's where the Moskva River is, and
center. Our right flank is over there"--he pointed sharply to the right,
the rows of hay are lying in the hollow, there's the bridge. That's our
church. "That's where one crosses the Kolocha. You see down there where
there," and he pointed to the village in front of them with the white
entrenchments. There, you see? There's our center, at Borodino, just
can tell you quite clearly, because I constructed nearly all our
"Our position?" replied the officer with a smile of satisfaction. "I

"Then how about our position?"

"It was ours yesterday, but now it is his."
"That's his again," said the officer. (It was the Shevardino Redoubt.)

where also some campfires were smoking and something black was visible.
distance with a big tree on it, near a village that lay in a hollow
"Ah, ours! And there?..." Pierre pointed to another knoll in the

"Those are ours."

on the left, near which some troops could be seen.
"Ah, those are the French! And over there?..." Pierre pointed to a knoll

had noticed on many of the faces he had met came into his face.
beyond the river, and the same stern and serious expression that Pierre
The officer pointed with his hand to the smoke visible on the left

"One can see them with the naked eye... Why, there!"

"Where? Where?" asked Pierre.

they are, there... you can see them."
"Yes, and there, further on, are the French," said the officer. "There

"Are those our men there?" Pierre inquired.

Pierre.
The officer, evidently glad of an opportunity for a talk, moved up to

"Borodino," the other corrected him.

"Burdino, isn't it?" said the officer, turning to his companion.

"May I ask you," said Pierre, "what village that is in front?"

was looking with curiosity at his huge unmilitary figure.
"I must ask someone who knows," he thought, and addressed an officer who

troops from the enemy's.
this place which teemed with life, nor could he even distinguish our
streams; and try as he would he could descry no military "position" in
meadows, troops, woods, the smoke of campfires, villages, mounds, and
could he see the battlefield he had expected to find, but only fields,
right side of the field fully satisfied his expectations. Nowhere
All that Pierre saw was so indefinite that neither the left nor the

could be seen.
grain, and the smoking ruins of Semenovsk, which had been burned down,
distance. On the left the ground was more level; there were fields of
Between the hollows the villages of Bezubova and Zakharino showed in the
the course of the Kolocha and Moskva rivers--was broken and hilly.
masses of troops--ours and the enemy's. The ground to the right--along
forest and the road, smoking campfires could be seen and indefinite
there over the whole of that blue expanse, to right and left of the
cross and belfry of the Kolocha Monastery gleamed in the sun. Here and
the distance in that birch and fir forest to the right of the road, the
the road disappeared into a yellowing forest on the horizon. Far in
about four miles away, where Napoleon was then stationed. Beyond Valuevo
down and up, rose higher and higher to the village of Valuevo visible
Below the village the road crossed the river by a bridge and, winding
hundred paces in front of the knoll and below it. This was Borodino.
highroad, passing through a village with a white church some five
From above on the left, bisecting that amphitheater, wound the Smolensk

an amphitheater, extended before him in the clear rarefied atmosphere.
behind him and brightly lit up the enormous panorama which, rising like
It was about eleven o'clock. The sun shone somewhat to the left and

could be seen.
ascended the knoll from which, according to the doctor, the battlefield
Pierre stepped out of his carriage and, passing the toiling militiamen,


CHAPTER XXI





than anything he had yet seen or heard.
Pierre more strongly with the solemnity and importance of the moment
the middle, unfastened, exposing their sunburned collarbones, impressed
and perspiring necks, and their shirts opening from the left toward
peasants at work on the battlefield, with their queer, clumsy boots
want the whole nation to fall on them." The sight of these bearded
Mozhaysk and understood what the soldier had meant when he said: "They
position as soldiers, Pierre once more thought of the wounded men at
these peasants, who were evidently still amused by the novelty of their
Two officers were standing on the knoll, directing the men. On seeing

along planks, while others stood about doing nothing.
Some of them were digging, others were wheeling barrowloads of earth

right of the road.
perspiring, were at work on a huge knoll overgrown with grass to the
crosses on their caps, who, talking and laughing loudly, animated and
saw for the first time peasant militiamen in their white shirts and with
When he had ascended the hill and reached the little village street, he

Pierre drove on toward Gorki.
hardly any of the staff were there--they had gone to the church service.
was putting up there, but just when Pierre arrived he was not in and
wagons, and crowds of orderlies and sentinels. The commander in chief
In front of a landowner's house to the left of the road stood carriages,

hat! Strange!" thought Pierre, continuing his way to Tatarinova.
among these men twenty thousand are doomed to die, and they wonder at my
think of what awaits them, but pass by, winking at the wounded. Yet from
"The cavalry ride to battle and meet the wounded and do not for a moment

sun, and the songs of the cavalrymen vividly recurred to his mind.
the carts with the wounded, the ringing bells, the slanting rays of the
And by some latent sequence of thought the descent of the Mozhaysk hill,
"They may die tomorrow; why are they thinking of anything but death?"

amazed Pierre.
noticed), twenty thousand were inevitably doomed to wounds and death
had stared with merry surprise at his hat (perhaps the very men he had
The strange thought that of the thousands of men, young and old, who

well--we must manage as best we can!"
six thousand. We have ten thousand carts, but we need other things as
and we haven't stretchers, or bunks, or dressers, or doctors enough for
of a hundred thousand we must expect at least twenty thousand wounded,
stand?... You know, Count, there'll be a battle tomorrow. Out of an army
his throat. "I'm galloping to the commander of the corps. How do matters
"I would go with you but on my honor I'm up to here"--and he pointed to

But the doctor interrupted him and moved toward his gig.

"Can one see from there?... If you would..."

and you'll see."
past Tatarinova, a lot of digging is going on there. Go up the hillock
"The position?" repeated the doctor. "Well, that's not my line. Drive

exactly?" said Pierre.
"You think so?... Ah, I also wanted to ask you where our position is

The doctor seemed tired and in a hurry.

do."
Highness knows you and will receive you graciously. That's what you must
said, exchanging glances with his young companion. "Anyhow his Serene
"Why should you be God knows where out of sight, during the battle?" he

The doctor advised him to apply direct to Kutuzov.

taking part in a battle.
Pierre got out and talked to the doctor, explaining his intention of

"Yes, yes, there will be something to see...."

"Well, you know, I wanted to see..."

"Count! Your excellency, how come you to be here?" asked the doctor.

seat to pull up.
and on recognizing Pierre he told the Cossack who occupied the driver's
driving toward Pierre in a covered gig, sitting beside a young surgeon,
eagerly addressed him. This was one of the head army doctors. He was
Having gone nearly three miles he at last met an acquaintance and

hat and green tail coat.
branches of the service, who all looked with astonishment at his white
saw everywhere the unfamiliar faces of various military men of different
He kept looking to either side of the road for familiar faces, but only

The road was clear again; Pierre descended the hill and drove on.

he wanted to say and nodded approval.
In spite of the obscurity of the soldier's words Pierre understood what

want to make an end of it."
They want the whole nation to fall on them--in a word, it's Moscow! They
addressing Pierre with a sad smile. "No distinctions made nowadays....
The peasants--even they have to go," said the soldier behind the cart,
"It's not the soldiers only, but I've seen peasants today, too....

"Oh, the coxcombs!" he muttered reproachfully.

singers.
The soldier with the swollen cheek looked angrily at the cavalry

panting little nag where Pierre stood, it was damp, somber, and sad.
merriment. But beneath the slope, by the cart with the wounded near the
the sun bathed the top of the opposite slope with yet another sort of
metallic sound of the bells reverberated high above and the hot rays of
As if responding to them but with a different sort of merriment, the

they sang their soldiers' dance song.

   Living in a foreign land.
   Ah lost, quite lost... is my head so keen,

face was not visible. The cavalry singers were passing close by:
at Pierre kindly, with a fixed smile. The third lay prone so that his
recruit as white as though there was no blood in his thin face, looked
cathedral and crossing himself. Another, a young lad, a fair-haired
and mouth were twisted to one side. This soldier was looking at the
and one cheek was swollen to the size of a baby's head. His nose
probably been wounded in the cheek. His whole head was wrapped in rags
were sitting and one was lying. One of those sitting up in the cart had
now at the cart by which he was standing, in which two wounded men
looking now at the cavalry regiment that had met the convoy of wounded,
Pierre was so deep in thought that he did not hear the question. He was

Moscow?" he asked.
"I say, fellow countryman! Will they set us down here or take us on to

look at Pierre.
the cart on foot, caught hold of it with his sound hand and turned to
One of the wounded, an old soldier with a bandaged arm who was following

little horse.
of its tireless hind wheels, and began arranging the breech-band on his
driver in his bast shoes ran panting up to it, placed a stone under one
carts with wounded stopped by the side of the road close to Pierre. The
the bright August sunshine and the bells sounded merrily. One of the
the cutting and there it was cold and damp, but above Pierre's head was
the road ran. The sunshine from behind the hill did not penetrate into
Pierre stopped, being pressed against the side of the cutting in which
with its singers, surrounded Pierre's carriage and blocked the road.
one side of the road. The cavalry regiment, as it descended the hill
Pierre's coachman shouted angrily at the convoy of wounded to keep to

and green swallow-tail coat.
all of them stared with naive, childlike curiosity at Pierre's white hat
the sides of the carts as they were jolted against one another. Almost
rags, with pale cheeks, compressed lips, and knitted brows, held on to
incline to make it something like a road. The wounded, bandaged with
or sitting, jolted over the stones that had been thrown on the steep
carts, in each of which three or four wounded soldiers were lying
shouting and lashing their horses, kept crossing from side to side. The
had been wounded in the engagement the day before. The peasant drivers,
its singers. Coming up toward him was a train of carts carrying men who
foot. Behind him a cavalry regiment was coming down the hill preceded by
the bells were ringing, Pierre got out of his vehicle and proceeded on
town past the cathedral on the right, where a service was being held and
descent of the high steep hill, down which a winding road led out of the
On the morning of the twenty-fifth Pierre was leaving Mozhaysk. At the


CHAPTER XX





disintegration and flight.
result, but unthinkable to keep an army even from complete
merely unthinkable to fight for ten hours and secure an indecisive
as the French; that is to say, under conditions in which it was not
open and almost unentrenched position, with forces only half as numerous
Shevardino Redoubt, the Russians fought the battle of Borodino on an
weaker than those of the enemy, but, as a result of the loss of the
fought on a chosen and entrenched position with forces only slightly
army and people) it has been described. The battle of Borodino was not
mistakes even at the cost of diminishing the glory due to the Russian
did not take place at all as (in an effort to conceal our commanders'
distinct from the main course of the battle.) So the battle of Borodino
and Uvarov's on the right flank against the French, were actions
flank with but half as many men. (Poniatowski's action against Utitsa,
the Russians opposed the entire French army launched against our left
left during the battle. So it happened that throughout the whole battle
Novoe to Utitsa, and consequently had to move their forces from right to
right to left--maintained their extended position from the village of
flank and the shifting of the whole field of the forthcoming battle from
realized what had happened, namely the loss of our position on the left
increased by the fact that the Russian commanders--not having fully
unfinished entrenchments, but the disadvantage of that position was
Not only was the Russian army on the twenty-sixth defended by weak,

be.
were forced to bend it back and hastily entrench it where it chanced to
morning of the twenty-fifth without a position for our left flank, and
After the loss of the Shevardino Redoubt, we found ourselves on the

twenty-sixth.
twenty-fourth, and obviously led to the loss of the one fought on the
and chief action of the battle of Borodino was already lost on the
general engagement then on the evening of the twenty-fourth, the first
as the Russian commanders did not wish, or were not in time, to begin a
our rear guard (that is, immediately after the fight at Gridneva), and
attack on our left flank took place in the evening after the retreat of
twenty-fifth, in the position we intended and had fortified. But as the
center or on the right, and the engagement would have taken place on the
flank--still more obstinately. We should have attacked Napoleon in the
we should probably have defended the Shevardino Redoubt--our left
battle would have taken place where we expected it. In that case
the Shevardino Redoubt was the left flank of our position, and the
but had begun the attack next morning, no one would have doubted that
Kolocha, and had he not then ordered an immediate attack on the redoubt
Had Napoleon not ridden out on the evening of the twenty-fourth to the

August took place.
plain in Russia--and there the whole battle of the twenty-sixth of
Borodino--a plain no more advantageous as a position than any other
side) and transferred it to the plain between Utitsa, Semenovsk, and
whole forthcoming battle from right to left (looking from the Russian
side of the Kolocha to the left of the highroad, Napoleon shifted the
had not been foreseen and was not fortified. By crossing to the other
position they had intended to occupy and took up a new position which
time to begin a general engagement, withdrew their left wing from the
Russians moved his army across the Kolocha. And the Russians, not having
Russian position--at the Shevardino Redoubt--and unexpectedly for the
pursuing the Russian rearguard he came upon the left flank of the
exist), nor did he see an advanced post of the Russian army, but while
to Borodino (he could not have seen that position because it did not
history books say he did) the position of the Russians from Utitsa
Napoleon, riding to Valuevo on the twenty-fourth, did not see (as the

prevent an enemy from advancing along the Smolensk road to Moscow.
Kolocha, presents itself as obvious for an army whose object was to
the battle was actually fought, this position, protected by the river
To anyone who looks at the field of Borodino without thinking of how

the rivers Kolocha and Voyna.
the village of Novoe, and the center at Borodino at the confluence of
angle--so that the left flank was at Shevardino, the right flank near
Kolocha--which crosses the highroad not at a right angle but at an acute
The case was evidently this: a position was selected along the river

which was almost unentrenched.
previously selected, where as it was fought on a quite unexpected spot
that the battle of Borodino was fought by us on an entrenched position
in reality it was simply a fortified point on the left flank--and
as infallible) that the Shevardino Redoubt was an advanced post--whereas
justify the mistakes of a commander in chief who had to be represented
that the incorrect and extraordinary statement was invented (probably to
later, when reports on the battle of Borodino were written at leisure,
the Shevardino Redoubt as the left flank of the position. It was much
himself in his report, written in hot haste after the battle, speaks of
Shevardino Redoubt was the left flank of the position, and that Kutuzov
the twenty-fifth, Barclay de Tolly and Bagration were convinced that the
was not an advanced post of that position, we have the fact that up to
battle was fought had not been foreseen and that the Shevardino Redoubt
observe the enemy. Thirdly, as proof that the position on which the
night on the twenty-fourth? A Cossack patrol would have sufficed to
exhausted and six thousand men sacrificed to defend it till late at
more strongly fortified than any other post? And why were all efforts
in front of the position where the battle was accepted. Why was it
position of the Shevardino Redoubt. That redoubt was quite senseless
twenty-fifth and twenty-sixth were not completed, and secondly, by the
entrenchments there by the twenty fifth and that those begun on the
fought there. This was shown first by the fact that there were no
twenty-fifth of August, 1812, did they think that a battle might be
is, the position on which the battle took place), but never till the
Borodino to the left of, and at a right angle to, the highroad (that
Not only did the Russians not fortify the position on the field of

hazard.
might find in the Russian Empire by sticking a pin into the map at
far from being strong, was no more a position than any other spot one
and that the position at Borodino (the one where the battle was fought),
reasons. The fact is that other positions they had passed were stronger,
Miloradovich had not yet arrived with the militia, and for many other
for a battle had not yet expressed itself strongly enough, and because
occupy a position he had not himself chosen, because the popular demand
not stop at any one of these positions because Kutuzov did not wish to
during the retreat passed many positions better than Borodino. They did
The Russians did not seek out the best position but, on the contrary,

look into the matter can easily convince himself.
So the histories say, and it is all quite wrong, as anyone who cares to

the field of Borodino.
twenty-sixth, attacked the whole Russian army, which was in position on
are told, Napoleon attacked this advanced post and took it, and, on the
the Shevardino mound to observe the enemy. On the twenty-fourth, we
In front of this position, they say, a fortified outpost was set up on

fought.
to it, from Borodino to Utitsa, at the very place where the battle was
of the highroad (from Moscow to Smolensk) and almost at a right angle
The Russians, they say, fortified this position in advance on the left

position at Borodino.
for itself the best position for a general engagement and found such a
The Russian army, they say, in its retreat from Smolensk sought out

affair as follows:
well-known, but quite false, conception. All the historians describe the
battle of Shevardino were fought, there also exists a definite and
On the other question, how the battle of Borodino and the preceding

meaningless.
ourselves to the fact that for our epoch histories of that kind are
the whole interest of the story, and we are still unable to accustom
The ancients have left us model heroic poems in which the heroes furnish

and involuntary.
generals who, of all the blind tools of history were the most enslaved
provided cunningly devised evidence of the foresight and genius of the
and irrationally. But later on, to fit what had occurred, the historians
In giving and accepting battle at Borodino, Kutuzov acted involuntarily

wish to negotiate.
had not received a single reply to his repeated announcements of his
seen at Smolensk the state in which Russian towns were left to him, and
occupation of Moscow would not be the end of the campaign, for he had
to stop, knew the danger of his extended position, and knew that the
historians themselves tell us that from Smolensk onwards he wished
occupying Vienna, there is much evidence to the contrary. Napoleon's
campaign by occupying Moscow as he had ended a previous campaign by
communication still more. If it is said that he expected to end the
gave it, losing a quarter of his army and lengthening his lines of
battle, while Napoleon, who was said to be a commander of genius,
hundred thousand. Yet the shrewd and experienced Kutuzov accepted the
twenty thousand; afterwards little more than fifty thousand against a
one to two: previously we had a hundred thousand against a hundred and
was about as five to six, but after that battle it was little more than
Before the battle of Borodino our strength in proportion to the French

thirteen more men he will be three times as strong as I am.
fourteen, I am only one eighth weaker than he, but when I have exchanged
should not exchange. When my opponent has sixteen men and I have
man less and go on exchanging, I shall certainly lose, and therefore
mathematically clear, as it is that if when playing draughts I have one
quarter of his army he would certainly lose Moscow. For Kutuzov this was
clear to Kutuzov that by accepting battle and risking the loss of a
he was advancing to certain destruction, and it must have been equally
and giving battle with a probability of losing a quarter of his army,
have been obvious to Napoleon that by advancing thirteen hundred miles
If the commanders had been guided by reason, it would seem that it must

obvious, and yet Napoleon offered and Kutuzov accepted that battle.
more than anything in the world. What the result must be was quite
brought nearer to the destruction of their whole army--which they feared
the world; and for the French its immediate result was that they were
to the destruction of Moscow--which we feared more than anything in
for the Russians was, and was bound to be, that we were brought nearer
sense in it for either the French or the Russians. Its immediate result
accepted? Why was the battle of Borodino fought? There was not the least
Why and how were the battles of Shevardino and Borodino given and

the twenty-sixth the battle of Borodino itself took place.
fought, on the twenty-fifth not a shot was fired by either side, and on
On the twenty-fourth of August the battle of the Shevardino Redoubt was


CHAPTER XIX





joyous sensation.
sacrifice for; the fact of sacrificing in itself afforded him a new and
sacrificing everything. He was not occupied with the question of what to
determine for whom and for what he felt such particular delight in
something... With what? Pierre could not say, and he did not try to
life itself--is rubbish it is pleasant to throw away, compared with
constitutes men's happiness--the comforts of life, wealth, even
something. He now experienced a glad consciousness that everything that
sense of the necessity of undertaking something and sacrificing
what he had felt at the Sloboda Palace during the Emperor's visit--a
joyful feeling he had not experienced before. It was a feeling akin to
of troops the more was he overcome by restless agitation and a new and
farther he left Moscow behind and the deeper he plunged into that sea
were everywhere. Pierre pushed forward as fast as he could, and the
march. Cossacks, foot and horse soldiers, wagons, caissons, and cannon
Everywhere in Mozhaysk and beyond it, troops were stationed or on the

had. It was full of officers.
where Pierre was met by his groom and coachman there was no room to be
Every house in Mozhaysk had soldiers quartered in it, and at the hostel

Mozhaysk.
his questions as to who had won. At dawn next day Pierre was approaching
Perkhushkovo the earth trembled from the firing, but nobody could answer
evening. (This was the battle of Shevardino.) He was told that there in
in Perkhushkovo, he learned that there had been a great battle that
after dinner Pierre left Moscow. When changing horses that night
On the twenty-fourth the weather cleared up after a spell of rain, and

next day to allow time for the relay horses to be sent on in advance.
so on Evstafey's representation Pierre had to put off his departure till
horses should be sent there. This could not all be arranged that day,
he would leave that night for the army at Mozhaysk, and that his saddle
knew everything, could do anything, and was known to all Moscow--that
On reaching home Pierre gave orders to Evstafey--his head coachman who

man ought to have known it for himself.
it seemed to him that either he had told the coachman this or that the
longer remain in Moscow and would leave for the army that very day that
Lobnoe Place, Pierre had so definitely made up his mind that he could no
At the sight of the tortured Frenchman and the crowd surrounding the

this very day," he murmured to himself.
did. "Home, I told you! And drive faster, blockhead!" "I must get away
"Fool! Idiot!" shouted Pierre, abusing his coachman--a thing he rarely

"To the Governor's, as you ordered," answered the coachman.

Lubyanka Street.
"Where are you going?" shouted Pierre to the man, who was driving to

"What is your pleasure?"

audibly that the coachman asked him:
seat. As they drove along he shuddered and exclaimed several times so
to his trap muttering something to himself as he went, and took his
Pierre choked, his face puckered, and he turned hastily away, went back

dismay the executioner who was undressing the other man.
appreciated. Some people began to laugh, others continued to watch in
The clerk glanced round, evidently hoping that his joke would be

when the Frenchman began to cry.
teeth on edge!" said a wrinkled clerk who was standing behind Pierre,
"Eh, mounseer, Russian sauce seems to be sour to a Frenchman... sets his

"He's cook to some prince."

seemed to Pierre.
people began talking loudly, to stifle their feelings of pity as it
grown-up men cry, though angry with himself for doing so. In the crowd
suddenly his lips trembled and he began to cry, in the way full-blooded
appear firm began to pull on his jacket without looking about him, but
man rose, frowned, shrugged his shoulders, and evidently trying to
on what was passing in Lobnoe Place that no one answered him. The stout
peasants, and women in cloaks and in pelisses--was so eagerly centered
But the attention of the crowd--officials, burghers, shopkeepers,

"What is it? Who is it? What is it for?" he kept asking.

face, Pierre pushed his way in through the crowd.
a frightened and suffering look resembling that on the thin Frenchman's
pale, stood near. Judging by their faces they were both Frenchmen. With
a green jacket, who was moaning piteously. Another criminal, thin and
flogging bench a stout man with red whiskers, in blue stockings and
flogging was only just over, and the executioner was releasing from the
of his trap. A French cook accused of being a spy was being flogged. The
Pierre, seeing a large crowd round the Lobnoe Place, stopped and got out
On his way home from Vorontsovo, as he was passing the Bolotnoe Place


the commander in chief.
hands. It is essential for him to combine his movements with those of
the first time, that he may not make a mistake and fall into the enemy's
Please impress upon Leppich to be very careful where he descends for

him know. I have informed him of the matter.
intelligent men for his car and send a courier to General Kutuzov to let
As soon as Leppich is ready, get together a crew of reliable and


desire. The Emperor had written to Count Rostopchin as follows:
ready, but Pierre learned that it was being constructed by the Emperor's
and a trial balloon that was to go up next day. The balloon was not yet
to see the great balloon Leppich was constructing to destroy the foe,
To distract his thoughts he drove that day to the village of Vorontsovo

Rostovs remained, but he did not go to see them.
had gone, and so had Princess Mary. Of his intimate friends only the
expected was approaching. Hardly anyone he knew was left in town. Julie
was Pierre pleased and the more evident was it that the catastrophe he
The worse everything became, especially his own affairs, the better

now!"
"Well then, sell it," said he. "What's to be done? I can't draw back

repress a smile.
a regiment would ruin him. Pierre listened to him, scarcely able to
general the head steward made out to Pierre that his project of raising
regiment could not be found without selling one of the estates. In
came to inform him that the money needed for the equipment of his
Next day toward evening the princess set off, and Pierre's head steward

something terrible.
irresolution, and alarm, yet at the same time joyfully expecting
but remained in deserted Moscow ever in the same state of agitation,
Although that patience did come out, Pierre did not join the army,

began laying out his cards for patience.
"Oh, but it's so... You take everything so to heart," said Pierre, and

because she said something in French."
has brought us to! Barbara Ivanovna told me the mob near killed her
and glory to whoever captures him,' he says. This is what his cajolery
should be dragged to the lockup by his hair'? (How silly!) 'And honor
he write in those idiotic broadsheets that anyone, 'whoever it might be,
hypocrite, a rascal who has himself roused the people to riot. Didn't
"Oh, that count of yours!" said the princess malevolently. "He is a

he will stake his life on it that the enemy will not enter Moscow."
reading..." He showed her the broadsheet. "Count Rostopchin writes that
the city and there is not the slightest danger. See! I've just been
"But you have been misinformed," said Pierre. "Everything is quiet in

Muttering to herself, she sat down on a chair.
The princess was apparently vexed at not having anyone to be angry with.

"But I will, I'll give the order at once."

don't want to do this..."
"I won't submit to your Napoleon! Others may if they please.... If you

contrary..."
"Oh, come, ma cousine! Where do you get your information from? On the

Petersburg. Whatever I may be, I can't live under Bonaparte's rule."
thing of you, cousin," she went on, "arrange for me to be taken to
will be here any day now, so what are we waiting for? I ask just one
beating us. One can't walk in the streets. But, above all, the French
even my maid has taken to being rude. At this rate they will soon begin
credit! And the people too are quite mutinous--they no longer obey,
how our troops are distinguishing themselves. It certainly does them
"Satisfactory, indeed! Very satisfactory! Barbara Ivanovna told me today

uncomfortable in the role of her benefactor.
in the bantering tone he habitually adopted toward her, always feeling
"On the contrary, things seem satisfactory, ma cousine," said Pierre

it that we are staying on?"
to happen? Everyone has left Moscow and the people are rioting. How is
agitated voice. "You know some decision must be come to. What is going
"Excuse my coming to you, cousin," she said in a reproachful and

married.
was still living in Pierre's house. The two younger ones had both
Only the eldest princess, the one with the stony face and long waist,

"Come in, come in!" he added to the princess.
"Then it will mean that I must go to the army," said Pierre to himself.

eldest princess at the door asking whether she might come in.
He had not decided what it should mean when he heard the voice of the

it means... what does it mean?"
cards, holding them in his hand, and lifting his head, "if it comes out,
"If this patience comes out," he said to himself after shuffling the

and began to lay them out for a game of patience.
for the hundredth time. He took a pack of cards that lay on the table
"Shall I join the army and enter the service, or wait?" he asked himself

but which yet aroused involuntary horror in him was drawing near.
terrible stormcloud he had desired with the whole strength of his soul
Chigirin talks. Pierre pondered over these broadsheets. Evidently the
price. The tone of the proclamation was not as jocose as in the former
at the arsenal: sabers, pistols, and muskets which could be had at a low
inhabitants of Moscow wished to be armed, weapons were ready for them
Count Wittgenstein had defeated the French, but that as many of the
second broadsheet stated that our headquarters were at Vyazma, that
clearly for the first time that the French would enter Moscow. The
on it that scoundrel will not enter Moscow." These words showed Pierre
panic and less gossip," ran the broadsheet "but I will stake my life
ladies and tradesmen's wives were leaving the city. "There will be less
people to leave Moscow was false; on the contrary he was glad that
The first declared that the report that Count Rostopchin had forbidden

that had been brought that day.
When Pierre returned home he was handed two of Rostopchin's broadsheets


CHAPTER XVIII





"But how could one say that in Russian?"

"Forfeit, forfeit, forfeit!"


    * "A little bit in love with the young man."


homme." *
"Do you know, I really believe she is un petit peu amoureuse du jeune

is one and Princess Bolkonskaya another."
flight has been arranged to get all the old maids married off. Catiche
"Another romance," said the militia officer. "Really, this general

her and had wounded some of her people. He rushed in and saved her...."
romance. Nicholas Rostov! She was surrounded, and they wanted to kill
"She is well, but sad. But do you know who rescued her? It is quite a

"Well, and how is she?" asked Pierre.

near Moscow either today or tomorrow morning, with her nephew."
"I spent the evening with her yesterday. She is going to their estate

"Really? Where is she? I should like very much to see her," said Pierre.


    * "Who excuses himself, accuses himself."


in Moscow yesterday. Do you know that she has lost her father?"
subject. "Do you know what I heard today? Poor Mary Bolkonskaya arrived
triumphantly, and to have the last word she promptly changed the
"Qui s'excuse s'accuse," * said Julie, smiling and waving the lint

cruelty..."
not been to their house for nearly a month. But I cannot understand the
taken on myself the role of Natalie Rostova's knight at all, and have
"No, madame!" Pierre continued in a tone of displeasure, "I have not

friendly with Vera--that dear Vera."
"I know you were friendly with Natalie, and so... but I was always more

"I don't know anything about it," said Pierre.

"Come now, Count, you know!"

feet.
"What is 'the talk of all Moscow'?" Pierre asked angrily, rising to his

"All right, one can't talk--how tiresome!"

"Forfeit, forfeit!" cried the militia officer.


    * "It is the talk of all Moscow. My word, I admire you!"


ma parole d'honneur!" *
"Oh, come, my dear count! C'est la fable de tout Moscou. Je vous admire,

"What knights? What do you mean?" demanded Pierre, blushing.

Souza's novels."
"You know, Count, such knights as you are only found in Madame de

Julie smiled.

"Get over what?" inquired Pierre, looking displeased.

people get over everything!"
recovered her looks and is brighter. She sang a song. How easily some
"I met them the day before yesterday at the Arkharovs'. Natalie has

countess won't on any account leave Moscow till her son returns."
are expecting him every day. The count wanted to leave long ago, but the
being formed. But now they have had him transferred to my regiment and
Obolenski's Cossacks and went to Belaya Tserkov where the regiment is
"They are waiting for their younger son," Pierre replied. "He joined

well again now, isn't she?" Julie asked Pierre with a knowing smile.
Moscow? They meant to leave for the country long ago. Natalie is quite
"A kindly old man but not up to much. And why do they stay on so long in

debts," said the militia officer, speaking of Rostov.
"If he manages the business properly he will be able to pay off all his

"Well, of course, of course! Let me have some more strips of linen."

going: and besides--I am not Joan of Arc or an Amazon."
"I? What a question! I am going because... well, because everyone is

"Then why are you leaving?"

"Why?" asked Julie. "You don't think Moscow is in danger?"

"Though it is madness to buy anything in Moscow now."
"No, I think the sale will come off in a few days," said someone.

asks too much."
to buy his house and his estate near Moscow, but it drags on and on. He
is so unreasonable, the count himself I mean. The Razumovskis wanted
"I hear that their affairs are in a very bad way," said Julie. "And he

the Rostovs.
Among those whom Julie's guests happened to choose to gossip about were

should hardly be able to climb onto a horse."
should make too good a target for the French, besides I am afraid I
"No," said Pierre, with a laughing glance at his big, stout body. "I

checked any attempt to ridicule him to his face.
his absent-mindedness and good nature, Pierre's personality immediately
expressed perplexity as to what Julie's smile might mean. In spite of
The latter in Pierre's presence had ceased to be caustic, and his face

sarcastic glance toward the militia officer.
"You will, of course, command it yourself?" said Julie, directing a sly,

hostess' hand and taking a seat beside her. "I am so sick of it."
"Oh, don't talk to me of my regiment," replied Pierre, kissing his

saying that your regiment would be sure to be better than Mamonov's."
she said with the facility in lying natural to a society woman. "We were
rays!" and she smiled amiably at Pierre. "We were just talking of you,"
militia officer, "you won't catch me. Speak of the sun and you see its
"Ah, here he is!" she added. "Quand on... No, no," she said to the

Russian!"
money nor the time, like Prince Galitsyn, to engage a master to teach me
responsible," she remarked, turning to the author: "I have neither the
for the pleasure of telling you the truth. For Gallicisms I won't be
"For caustique--I am guilty and will pay, and I am prepared to pay again

author's remark.
"You spare no one," continued Julie to the young man without heeding the

present. "'What pleasure is there to be' is not Russian!"
"Another forfeit for a Gallicism," said a Russian writer who was

Contributions.
slip and spoke French should pay fines to the Committee of Voluntary
that they would speak nothing but Russian and that those who made a
In Julie's set, as in many other circles in Moscow, it had been agreed

chevalier," and who was going with her to Nizhni.
"A forfeit!" cried a young man in militia uniform whom Julie called "mon

pleasure is there to be so caustique?"
"Bezukhov est ridicule, but he is so kind and good-natured. What

soiree.
Julie was preparing to leave Moscow next day and was giving a farewell

fingers.
and pressed together a bunch of raveled lint with her thin, beringed
"You don't spare anyone," said Julie Drubetskaya as she collected


     make it a barque of Charon."
     * "Think it over; get into the barque, and take care not to


head of his regiment without charging anything for the show.
action was that he himself was going to don a uniform and ride at the
had spent even more on his, but that the best thing about Bezukhov's
regiment would cost him eight hundred thousand rubles, and that Bezukhov
Moscow ought to be grateful to Napoleon. It was said that Mamonov's
Moscow, and to this Shinshin's witticism was added--that for that alone
talk of all the government offices having been already removed from
dans la barque, et n'en faites pas une barque de Charon." * There was
and Rostopchin had said to them in French: "Rentrez en vousmemes; entrez
remark on that occasion. The foreigners were deported to Nizhni by boat,
among them; but this was told chiefly to introduce Rostopchin's witty
from Moscow, and that there had been some spies and agents of Napoleon
said that Rostopchin had expelled all Frenchmen and even all foreigners
Others did not like that tone and said it was stupid and vulgar. It was
dwarfs and one peasant woman will toss three of them with a hayfork."
buckwheat porridge, and choke themselves with cabbage soup. They are all
saying: "They will swell up with Russian cabbage, burst with our
broadsheets, and some liked the way Karpushka jeered at the French,
In the corner room at the Club, members gathered to read these

together with the latest of Vasili Lvovich Pushkin's bouts rimes.
eagle, began to address the assembled people," were read and discussed,
bad language, came out of the drink shop, and, under the sign of the
Napoleon wished to come to Moscow, grew angry, abused the French in very
a militiaman and having had rather too much at the pub--heard that
and a Moscow burgher called Karpushka Chigirin, "who--having been
Rostopchin's broadsheets, headed by woodcuts of a drink shop, a potman,

Moscow as that year.
inhabitants of Moscow. It was long since people had been as gay in
the first voice, but in society to the second. So it was now with the
think about what is pleasant. In solitude a man generally listens to
therefore better to disregard what is painful till it comes, and to
foresee everything and avert the general course of events, and it is
painful to think of the danger, since it is not in man's power to
the other, still more reasonably, says that it is too depressing and
man to consider the nature of the danger and the means of escaping it;
speak with equal power in the human soul: one very reasonably tells a
approaching. At the approach of danger there are always two voices that
more frivolous, as always happens with people who see a great danger
situation did not grow more serious but on the contrary became even
With the enemy's approach to Moscow, the Moscovites' view of their

assumed a legal, official form and became unavoidable.
men and money, a necessity that as soon as the promises had been made
displayed during the Emperor's stay was the call for contributions of
for it. The one thing that recalled the patriotic fervor everyone had
Club were also sons of the Fatherland ready to sacrifice everything
that Russia was really in danger and that the members of the English
remember the recent days of patriotic elation and ardor, hard to believe
course, and its course was so very usual that it was difficult to
After the Emperor had left Moscow, life flowed on there in its usual


CHAPTER XVII





popular choice of Kutuzov as commander in chief was received.
general approval were founded with which, despite court influences, the
On such feelings, more or less dimly shared by all, the unanimity and

he would 'make them eat horseflesh!'"
said: 'What they have brought us to!' and had a sob in it when he said
by Genlis and the French proverbs, and because his voice shook when he
Andrew, "one believes in him because he's Russian, despite the novel
personal wish directed to something else. And above all," thought Prince
and seeing that significance can refrain from meddling and renounce his
course of events, and he can see them and grasp their significance,
something stronger and more important than his own will--the inevitable
anything useful nor allow anything harmful. He understands that there is
everything, and put everything in its place. He will not hinder
anything," thought Prince Andrew, "but he will hear everything, remember
bring in any plan of his own. He will not devise or undertake
reassured he was that everything would be as it should. "He will not
only the capacity calmly to contemplate the course of events--the more
and in place of an intellect (grouping events and drawing conclusions)
that old man--in whom there seemed to remain only the habit of passions,
entrusted. The more he realized the absence of all personal motive in
the general course of affairs and as to the man to whom it had been
interview with Kutuzov he went back to his regiment reassured as to
Prince Andrew could not have explained how or why it was, but after that

unfinished novel, Les Chevaliers du Cygne by Madame de Genlis.
had left the room Kutuzov gave a sigh of relief and went on with his
Again he embraced and kissed Prince Andrew, but before the latter

straight to me. Good-by, my dear boy."
nor a commander in chief, but a father! If you want anything come
your sorrow, and that for you I am not a Serene Highness, nor a prince,
"Well, good-by, my dear fellow; remember that with all my heart I share


     * (2) "When in doubt, my dear fellow, do nothing."

     * "Don't see it that way, that's the trouble."


deliberately.
cher," he paused, "abstiens-toi" *(2)--he articulated the French proverb
reply: "I will tell you what to do, and what I do. Dans le doute, mon
"I'll tell you what to do," he continued, as Prince Andrew still did not
us to do?" he repeated and his eye shone with a deep, shrewd look.
do?" he asked, evidently expecting an answer. "Well, what do you want
oreille, voila le mal. * Some want a thing--others don't. What's one to
time, they will do it all. But the advisers n'entendent pas de cette
me, my dear boy, there is nothing stronger than those two: patience and
"We shall if everybody wants it; it can't be helped.... But believe

"But shan't we have to accept battle?" remarked Prince Andrew.


    * "Everything comes in time to him who knows how to wait."


make them eat horseflesh!" And tears again dimmed his eyes.
believe me," he went on, growing warmer and beating his chest, "I'll
Turks eat horseflesh!" He swayed his head. "And the French shall too,
these two things and took more fortresses than Kamenski and made them
time are wanted. Kamenski sent soldiers to Rustchuk, but I only employed
win a campaign. For that, not storming and attacking but patience and
men. It is not difficult to capture a fortress but it is difficult to
been lost if he had not died. He stormed fortresses with thirty thousand
Everything in haste, but more haste, less speed. Kamenski would have
made peace with Turkey and should not have been through with that war.
advisers!" said he. "If we had listened to them all we should not have
to the subject of "advisers" which evidently occupied him. "Ah, those
And there were as many advisers there as here..." he went on, returning
came at the right time. Tout vient a point a celui qui sait attendre. *
blamed," he said, "both for that war and the peace... but everything
war and the peace that had been concluded. "Yes, I have been much
send." And changing the subject, Kutuzov began to speak of the Turkish
honor!" He paused. "I missed you at Bucharest, but I needed someone to
"Go your way and God be with you. I know your path is the path of

pleasant and flattering to him.
show sympathy with his loss, yet this reminder of Austerlitz was both
was particularly tender to and considerate of him from a wish to
Though Prince Andrew knew that Kutuzov's tears came easily, and that he
be kissed, and again Prince Andrew noticed tears in the old man's eyes.
Taking his hand and drawing him downwards, Kutuzov offered his cheek to

pleasure suffused Prince Andrew's face at this recollection.
yes, I remember you with the standard!" said Kutuzov, and a flush of
served there as you do. I remember you at Austerlitz.... I remember,
not. The regiments would not be what they are if the would-be advisers
here that men are needed. Advisers are always plentiful, but men are
"I am sorry, for I need you. But you're right, you're right! It's not

face. He cut Bolkonski short.
A shrewd, kindly, yet subtly derisive expression lit up Kutuzov's podgy

believe me..."
sorry to leave the regiment. If I decline the honor of being with you,
am fond of the officers, and I fancy the men also like me. I should be
"But above all," added Prince Andrew, "I have grown used to my regiment,

Kutuzov glanced inquiringly at him.

staff," replied Prince Andrew with a smile which Kutuzov noticed.
"I thank your Serene Highness, but I fear I am no longer fit for the

agitating conversation, and added: "I sent for you to keep you with me."
time!" he said with a grim look, evidently not wishing to continue this
Andrew's story the condition Russia was in. "But give me time, give me
agitated voice, evidently picturing vividly to himself from Prince
"What... what they have brought us to!" Kutuzov suddenly cried in an

he had seen at Bald Hills when he passed through it.
Prince Andrew told Kutuzov all he knew of his father's death, and what

a second father...."
sad, very sad. But remember, my dear fellow, that I am a father to you,
"Well, sit down, sit down here. Let's have a talk," said Kutuzov. "It's

cover that it was Les Chevaliers du Cygne by Madame de Genlis.
Andrew entered, marking the place with a knife. Prince Andrew saw by the
overcoat. He had in his hand a French book which he closed as Prince
He found him reclining in an armchair, still in the same unbuttoned
him. Half an hour later Prince Andrew was again called to Kutuzov.
The adjutant came out to the porch and asked Prince Andrew to lunch with
smiled, and with dimples in her rosy cheeks followed him into the room.
moving to the door of the room assigned to him. The priest's wife
dish for her. "Well, my dear, and how are we getting on?" he asked,
He took some gold pieces from his trouser pocket and put them on the

"Ah, what a beauty! Thank you, sweetheart!"

He screwed up his eyes, smiled, lifted her chin with his hand, and said:

been preparing for it, and with a low bow offered it to Kutuzov.
all not managed to present at the right moment, though she had so long
The priest's wife, flushing rosy red, caught up the dish she had after

moved toward the door with a more cheerful expression.
and rising heavily and smoothing out the folds in his fat white neck he
"Well, that's all!" said Kutuzov as he signed the last of the documents,


CHAPTER XVI





paper again. "Oh, this German precision!" he muttered, shaking his head.
without it. 'When wood is chopped the chips will fly.'" He looked at the
or allow it, but I don't exact compensation either. One can't get on
the crops and burn wood to their hearts' content. I don't order it
dear fellow," said he, "into the fire with all such things! Let them cut
"Into the stove... into the fire with it! I tell you once for all, my

his head.
After hearing the matter, Kutuzov smacked his lips together and shook

landowners lodged petitions for compensation.
from army commanders for green oats mown down by the soldiers, when
put before him for signature a paper relating to the recovery of payment
to looting by the Russian troops. At the end of the report the general
instruction Kutuzov gave of his own accord during that report referred
despised them because of his old age and experience of life. The only
not try to display any of these--but because of something else. He
them not because of his own intellect, feelings, or knowledge--he did
learning and even the patriotic feeling shown by Denisov, but despised
observe propriety. It was evident that Kutuzov despised cleverness and
meaning of the feminine whispering behind the door, and a desire to
expression he could see there was one of boredom, curiosity as to the
Andrew watched the commander in chief's face attentively, and the only
matter--something independent of cleverness and knowledge. Prince
and cleverness, and knew of something else that would decide the
the point, but it was evident that Kutuzov despised knowledge
point. What the general was saying was even more clever and to
a service of prayer. All that Denisov had said was clever and to the
it all only because he had to, as one has to listen to the chanting of
interest him, that he knew all that would be said beforehand, and heard
was evident that nothing the general could say would surprise or even
was a piece of tow in one of them, could not help hearing; but it
war. He evidently listened only because he had ears which, though there
previously had listened to the discussion at the Austerlitz council of
Tsarevo-Zaymishche--as he had listened to Denisov, and seven years
report--which consisted chiefly of a criticism of the position at
those words Kutuzov looked round. He was listening to the general's
house.... She's very pretty," added the adjutant with a smile. At
with the cross at the church, and she intends to welcome him in the
Highness bread and salt. "Her husband has welcomed his Serene Highness
the priest whose home it was, and that she intended to offer his Serene
Kutuzov's adjutant whispered to Prince Andrew that this was the wife of
a dish and evidently awaiting the entrance of the commander in chief.
woman in a pink dress with a lilac silk kerchief on her head, holding
glancing that way he noticed behind that door a plump, rosy, handsome
voice and the rustle of a silk dress behind the door. Several times on
While this was being given, Prince Andrew heard the whisper of a woman's

Andrew, who remained in the porch and listened to the general's report.
at them here," said he. "Don't go away," he added, turning to Prince
"No, tell them to bring a small table out here, my dear boy. I'll look

was disengaged. He made a grimace...
within. But Kutuzov evidently did not wish to enter that room till he
An adjutant came out and announced that everything was in readiness

papers have to be signed."
on duty in a discontented voice, "the plans must be examined and several
"Would not your Serene Highness like to come inside?" said the general

Konovnitsyn had brought him.
With a nod to Denisov he turned away and put out his hand for the papers

friend, stay here at the staff and tomorrow we'll have a talk."
"Ah, we were friends," said Kutuzov cheerfully. "All right, all right,

"He is my uncle, your Sewene Highness."

asked Kutuzov, interrupting him.
"What relation are you to Intendant General Kiril Andreevich Denisov?"

can bweak Napoleon's line of communication!"
"I give my word of honor as a Wussian officer," said Denisov, "that I

it all?" and again listened to Denisov.
Kutuzov swayed his head, as much as to say: "How is one man to deal with

"Ready, your Serene Highness," replied the general.

ready so soon?"
"What?" said Kutuzov, in the midst of Denisov's explanations, "are you

portfolio under his arm really did appear.
from it. And from that hut, while Denisov was speaking, a general with a
door of the adjoining hut as if expecting something unpleasant to emerge
spoke. Kutuzov looked down at his own legs, occasionally glancing at the
a good one, especially from the strength of conviction with which he
from those parts and knew the country well. His plan seemed decidedly
enemy's lines of communication between Smolensk and Vyazma. Denisov came
time-worn face) and boldly began to expound his plan of cutting the
girl (it was strange to see the color rise in that shaggy, bibulous,
country's welfare? Well, what is it? Speak!" Denisov blushed like a
annoyance, folded them across his stomach, repeating the words: "For our
Kutuzov looked wearily at him and, lifting his hands with a gesture of
Highness a matter of great importance for their country's welfare.
given his name, announced that he had to communicate to his Serene
hands still pressed on the seat, glanced at him glumly. Denisov, having
the angry whispers of the adjutants who tried to stop him. Kutuzov, his
the enemy, came with jingling spurs up the steps of the porch, despite
But at that moment Denisov, no more intimidated by his superiors than by

"Come! Come with me, we'll have a talk," said he.

sighed and pressed on the bench with both hands to raise himself.
Kutuzov's flabby lips were trembling and that tears were in his eyes. He
time did not let him go. When he released him Prince Andrew saw that
He embraced Prince Andrew, pressing him to his fat breast, and for some

loved him and respected him, and sympathize with you with all my heart."
sighed deeply, his whole chest heaving, and was silent for a while. "I
"May the kingdom of Heaven be his! God's will be done to us all!" He

his cap and crossed himself:
Kutuzov looked at him with eyes wide open with dismay and then took off

abruptly.
"I received news of his death, yesterday," replied Prince Andrew

"And how's your father?"

He unbuttoned his coat and sat down on a bench in the porch.

which creaked under his weight.
along..." said he, glancing wearily round, and he stepped onto the porch
"Ah, how do you do, my dear prince? How do you do, my dear boy? Come

face linked itself up with Kutuzov's remembrance of his personality.
only after some seconds that the impression produced by Prince Andrew's
again glanced at Prince Andrew. As often occurs with old men, it was
waddling gait to the porch. "Whew... whew... whew!" he whistled, and
at Prince Andrew, and, evidently not recognizing him, moved with his
He pulled himself together, looked round, screwing up his eyes, glanced

who stood ready to assist him.
groaned, and slipped down into the arms of the Cossacks and adjutants
effort, raised it with difficulty onto the saddle, leaned on his knee,
and, lurching with his whole body and puckering his face with the
means to rest after a ceremony. He drew his left foot out of the stirrup
yard. His face expressed the relief of relaxed strain felt by a man who
"Whew... whew... whew!" he whistled just audibly as he rode into the

his brisk little horse.
over his shoulder by a thin strap. He sat heavily and swayed limply on
the white Horse Guard's cap and a military overcoat with a whip hanging
familiar weariness of his expression were still the same. He was wearing
corpulent, flaccid, and fat. But the bleached eyeball, the scar, and the
Since Prince Andrew had last seen him Kutuzov had grown still more

"Hurrah! hurrah! hurrah!" shouted those behind him.

Denisov.
General," he added, and rode into the yard past Prince Andrew and
"And with such fine fellows to retreat and retreat! Well, good-by,

perplexity.
assumed a subtle expression, he shrugged his shoulders with an air of
the crowd of generals and officers surrounding him. Suddenly his face
nearly a minute with the steady gaze of a commander and then turned to
giving him the salute, he looked at them silently and attentively for
honor, a fine set of Grenadiers mostly wearing decorations, who were
peak, nodding his head continually. When he came up to the guard of
raised his hand to his white Horse Guard's cap with a red band and no
urging on his horse, which ambled smoothly under his weight, and he
His adjutants galloped into the yard before him. Kutuzov was impatiently

officers ran after and around them shouting, "Hurrah!"
rode behind him. Barclay was riding almost beside him, and a crowd of
street mounted on a rather small sorrel horse. A huge suite of generals
(a guard of honor) was standing, and they saw Kutuzov coming down the
Bolkonski and Denisov moved to the gate, at which a knot of soldiers

"He's coming! He's coming!" shouted a Cossack standing at the gate.

hoofs and shouts were nearing the village.
and songs and coming from the field where the review was held. Sounds of
army, growing more incoherent and more diffused, mingling with music
Bolkonski. In the midst of his explanation shouts were heard from the
Denisov rose and began gesticulating as he explained his plan to

that's certain! There's only one way--guewilla warfare!"
bweak thwough. Give me five hundwed men and I will bweak the line,
"They can't hold all that line. It's impossible. I will undertake to

plan to Prince Andrew.
we should attack their line of communication. He began explaining his
concurrently with, action on the front to bar the advance of the French,
of operation was too extended, and it proposed that instead of, or
to Kutuzov. The plan was based on the fact that the French line
proposed that plan to Barclay de Tolly and now wished to propose it
he had devised while serving at the outposts during the retreat. He had
interested him passionately and exclusively. This was a plan of campaign
that time and of his love for Natasha, and passed at once to what now
without realizing what he was doing. He smiled at the recollection of
after Natasha's singing he had proposed to a little girl of fifteen
Bolkonski belonged to a distant, romantic past, when after supper and
former strength. For Denisov, too, the memories awakened by the name of
mind, and now that they did, they did not act on him with nearly their
emotions, that for a long time past those memories had not entered his
and the recent news of his father's death--and had experienced so many
impressions--such as the retreat from Smolensk, his visit to Bald Hills,
place in his soul. Of late he had received so many new and very serious
feelings of which he had not thought lately, but which still found
suitor. This memory carried him sadly and sweetly back to those painful
Prince Andrew knew Denisov from what Natasha had told him of her first

pressed Prince Andrew's hand.
your acquaintance!" he repeated again, smiling sadly, and he again
Andwew Bolkonski?" He swayed his head. "Vewy pleased, Pwince, to make
vewy well--only not for those who get it in the neck. So you are Pwince
and after a short pause added: "Yes, it's Scythian warfare. It's all
particularly kindly attention. "Yes, I heard," said he sympathetically,
pressing Prince Andrew's hand and looking into his face with a
Lieutenant Colonel Denisov, better known as 'Vaska,'" said Denisov,
"Ah? You're Pwince Bolkonski? Vewy glad to make your acquaintance! I'm

belong to the province of Smolensk."
mention the estate and home of my birth--my father, who died of grief. I
in the retreat but of losing in that retreat all I held dear--not to
"I had the pleasure," replied Prince Andrew, "not only of taking part

campaign?" he asked.
happening. We kept wetweating and wetweating. Did you take part in the
Wussians will get a look in. As it was, devil only knows what was
Ermolov had weason to ask to be pwomoted to be a German! Now p'waps
weceives evewyone, thank God!... It's awful with those sausage eaters!
"You're also waiting for the commander in chief?" said he. "They say he

the bench and the lieutenant colonel sat down beside him.
approached Bolkonski with a slight bow. Bolkonski made room for him on
orderly's tone, dismounted, gave his horse to a dispatch runner, and
The lieutenant colonel of hussars smiled beneath his mustache at the

want?"
"What? His Serene Highness? I expect he'll be here soon. What do you

chief's orderly speaks to officers, replied:
orderly, who, with the peculiar contempt with which a commander in
but was himself a new arrival. The lieutenant colonel turned to a smart
Prince Andrew replied that he was not on his Serene Highness' staff

whether he would soon be back.
Andrew, inquired whether his Serene Highness was putting up there and
mustaches and whiskers rode up to the gate and, glancing at Prince
fine weather. A short, swarthy lieutenant colonel of hussars with thick
from Prince Andrew, availing themselves of Kutuzov's absence and of the
Two orderlies, a courier and a major-domo, stood near by, some ten paces
roar of many voices shouting "Hurrah!" to the new commander in chief.
field beyond the village came now sounds of regimental music and now the
awaiting his Serene Highness, as everyone now called Kutuzov. From the
commander in chief's carriage, and he sat down on the bench at the gate
stopped in the village at the priest's house in front of which stood the
very hour that Kutuzov was reviewing the troops for the first time. He
Prince Andrew arrived at Tsarevo-Zaymishche on the very day and at the

sent an order for him to report at headquarters.
On receiving command of the armies Kutuzov remembered Prince Andrew and


CHAPTER XV





was rallied about Princess Bolkonskaya.
But Sonya? And his plighted word? That was why Rostov grew angry when he

Mary's happiness.
father's affairs in order, and would even--he felt it--ensure Princess
he would make the countess his mother happy, would be able to put his
personally Nicholas could not wish for a better wife: by marrying her
had against his will more than once entered his head. For himself
Princess Mary, who was attractive to him and had an enormous fortune,
angry. It made him angry just because the idea of marrying the gentle
and having picked up one of the wealthiest heiresses in Russia, he grew
adventure at Bogucharovo, rallied him on having gone to look for hay
remember her gave him pleasure, and when his comrades, hearing of his
The impression the princess made on Rostov was a very agreeable one. To

brother?" And in all this Princess Mary saw the hand of Providence.
moment?" thought Princess Mary. "And that caused his sister to refuse my
"Was it not fate that brought him to Bogucharovo, and at that very

Dunyasha noticed her smiling as she looked out of the carriage window.
happiness did not appear impossible to her. It was at those moments that
Sometimes when she recalled his looks, his sympathy, and his words,

the first and last time in her life.
the end of her life to love the man with whom she had fallen in love for
be to blame if, without ever speaking of it to anyone, she continued to
with the thought that no one would ever know it and that she would not
love with a man who would perhaps never love her, she comforted herself
Ashamed as she was of acknowledging to herself that she had fallen in

"Well, supposing I do love him?" thought Princess Mary.

something with an expression of mingled joy and sorrow.
once noticed that her mistress leaned out of the window and smiled at
a cheerful one, Dunyasha, who went with her in the carriage, more than
On the rest of the way to Moscow, though the princess' position was not

question presented itself to her: did she love him?
her eyes filling with tears, and then not for the first time the strange
When she had taken leave of him and remained alone she suddenly felt

cry as she spoke of her loss, did not leave her memory.
honest eyes, with the tears rising in them when she herself had begun to
noble soul, able to understand her position and her sorrow. His kind,
to save her, and even more certain was it that he was a man of lofty and
French, and that he had exposed himself to terrible and obvious danger
there she would have perished at the hands of the mutineers and of the
for. On the contrary, it seemed to her certain that had he not been
tenderness. She could not believe that there was nothing to thank him
him with the whole expression of her face, radiant with gratitude and
But the princess, if she did not again thank him in words, thanked

please don't thank me!"
you again in happier circumstances. If you don't want to make me blush,
Good-by, Princess. I wish you happiness and consolation and hope to meet
am only happy to have had the opportunity of making your acquaintance.
said he with a sense of shame and wishing to change the subject. "I
only peasants to fight, we should not have let the enemy come so far,"
occurred. "Any police officer would have done as much! If we had had
expressions of gratitude for her deliverance, as she termed what had
"How can you speak so!" he blushingly replied to Princess Mary's

permitting himself to kiss her hand.
the inn at Yankovo he respectfully took leave of her, for the first time
miles from Bogucharovo to where the road was occupied by our troops. At
carriage drove out of the house, he mounted and accompanied her eight
the house but remained in the village awaiting her departure. When her
Unwilling to obtrude himself on the princess, Rostov did not go back to


dictionaries that were on the top.
round-faced peasant gravely, pointing with a significant wink at the
"Yes, they worked all day and didn't play!" remarked the tall,

books."
library cupboards. "Don't catch up against it! It's heavy, lads--solid
"Eh, books, books!" said another peasant, bringing out Prince Andrew's

bast matting and cover it with hay--that's the way!"
all be done properly, according to rule. Look here, put it under the
where it'll get rubbed? I don't like that way of doing things. Let it
cost money! How can you chuck it in like that or shove it under the cord
round smiling face, taking a casket from a housemaid. "You know it has
"Don't put it in so carelessly," said one of the peasants, a man with a

standing in the yard directing the men.
Princess Mary's wish from the cupboard where he had been confined, was
proprietor's goods and packing them on the carts, and Dron, liberated at
Bogucharovo house. The peasants were briskly carrying out the
Two hours later the carts were standing in the courtyard of the

you fool?" added the other--"A real fool!"
"How can one talk to the masters like that? What were you thinking of,

"Aye, when I look at you!..." said one of them to Karp.

peasants followed them.
The two bound men were led off to the master's house. The two drunken

crowd began at once to disperse through the village.
 "All our stupidity, Yakov Alpatych," came the answers, and the

wrong, lads!"
"There! What did I say?" said Alpatych, coming into his own again. "It's

bickering with one another.
all nonsense... I said then that it was not in order," voices were heard
"Why, we've not done any harm! We did it just out of foolishness. It's

houses at once, and don't let one of your voices be heard!"
"And you all listen to me!" said Rostov to the peasants. "Be off to your

belt and handed it to them, as if to aid them.
And in fact two more peasants began binding Dron, who took off his own

order, too, could not possibly meet with any opposition.
"Are you the Elder? Bind him, Lavrushka!" shouted Rostov, as if that

With a pale and frowning face Dron stepped out of the crowd.

"Where's the Elder?" demanded Rostov in a loud voice.

off their belts.
and bind Karp. The men obediently came out of the crowd and began taking
Alpatych turned to the peasants and ordered two of them by name to come

"Shall I call up our men from beyond the hill?" he called out.

behind.
Lavrushka, however, ran up to Karp and seized him by the arms from

shouted, though there was no one to bind him but Lavrushka and Alpatych.
voice not his own, gripping Karp by the collar. "Bind him, bind him!" he
"Arguing? Mutiny!... Brigands! Traitors!" cried Rostov unmeaningly in a

orders."
"It's as the old men have decided--there's too many of you giving

moment several voices began speaking together.
"We don't riot, we're following the orders," declared Karp, and at that

come off their heads.
flustered voices here and there were heard calling and caps began to
"The Elder.... He wants the Elder!... Dron Zakharych, you!" meek and

Elder?" he cried furiously.
"Caps off, traitors!" shouted Rostov in a wrathful voice. "Where's the

fierce blow jerked his head to one side.
But before the words were well out of his mouth, his cap flew off and a

"The Elder? What do you want with him?..." asked Karp.

with quick steps.
"Who is your Elder here? Hey?" shouted Rostov, coming up to the crowd

together.
Dron on the contrary retired to the rear and the crowd drew closer
his fingers into his belt and smiling a little, walked to the front.
Ilyin, Lavrushka, and Alpatych, came up to the crowd, Karp, thrusting
The two tall peasants had their say. As soon as Rostov, followed by

"That's it--not against it! You've filled your belly...."

Dron.
"To be sure, we all have to die. I'm not against the commune," said

have to die."
Dron--"and so they took my Vanka to be shaved for a soldier! But we all
your lump of a son," a little old man suddenly began attacking
"It was your son's turn to be conscripted, but no fear! You begrudged

or take away a single grain, and that's all about it!" cried another.
"We've been told to keep order, and that no one is to leave their homes

ruined or not?"
it away with you.... What does it matter to you whether our homes are
him. "It's all one to you! You'll dig up your pot of money and take
"How many years have you been fattening on the commune?" Karp shouted at

their ex-Elder.
this opinion, but as soon as he expressed it Karp and others attacked
might take it amiss that the mistress was being detained. Dron was of
Some of the peasants said that these new arrivals were Russians and
princess, a certain confusion and dissension had arisen among the crowd.
After the hussars had come to the village and Rostov had gone to see the

Rostov's rapid, firm steps and resolute, frowning face.
The peasants in the crowd were similarly impressed when they saw
Alpatych felt that this unreasonable action might produce good results.
resolute steps toward the crowd. And the nearer he drew to it the more
Without considering what he would do he moved unconciously with quick,

vent it.
meaninglessly, breathless with irrational animal fury and the need to
"I'll give them armed force... I'll 'overresist' them!" uttered Rostov

be better first to send for the military?
imprudent to "overresist" them without an armed force, and would it not
the peasants were obdurate and that at the present moment it would be
Rostov at a gliding gait and continued to impart his views. He said
forward. Alpatych, mastering his offended feelings, kept pace with
afraid of wasting his store of anger, he left Alpatych and went rapidly
a traitor yourself! I know you. I'll flay you all alive!..." And as if
about? Eh? The peasants are rioting, and you can't manage them? You're
"Decision? What decision? Old dotard!..." cried he. "What have you been

Alpatych.
Rostov stopped and, clenching his fists, suddenly and sternly turned on

"What decision have you been pleased to come to?" said he.

him with difficulty.
Alpatych at a gliding trot, only just managing not to run, kept up with

himself.
"I'll show them; I'll give it to them, the brigands!" said he to

rapid steps to the village.
Rostov glanced angrily at Ilyin and without replying strode off with

hero and commander was following quite a different train of thought.
But on glancing at Rostov's face Ilyin stopped short. He saw that his

Dunyasha...."
"Well, is she pretty? Ah, friend--my pink one is delicious; her name is


CHAPTER XIV





Rostov, knitting his brows, left the room with another low bow.

"Excuse me!" she said.

suddenly began to cry.
was all a misunderstanding and that no one is to blame for it." She
"I am very, very grateful to you," she said in French, "but I hope it

Princess Mary understood this and appreciated his delicacy.

take advantage of her misfortunes to intrude upon her.
consider himself happy to be acquainted with her, he did not wish to
Rostov's deferential tone seemed to indicate that though he would

the door.
And bowing respectfully, as if to a lady of royal blood, he moved toward
to cause you annoyance if only you will allow me to act as your escort."
when you please, and I give you my word of honor that no one shall dare
and am able to show my readiness to serve you," said Rostov, rising. "Go
"I cannot express, Princess, how glad I am that I happened to ride here

radiant look which caused the plainness of her face to be forgotten.
eyes. Princess Mary noticed this and glanced gratefully at him with that
him with an apprehensive glance of inquiry. There were tears in Rostov's
fearing he might take her words as meant to move him to pity, looked at
father's funeral, her voiced trembled. She turned away, and then, as if
When she began to tell him that all this had happened the day after her

listened to her timid story.
are in her features and expression!" thought he as he looked at her and
And what a strange fate sent me here! What gentleness and nobility there
overwhelmed with grief, left to the mercy of coarse, rioting peasants!
meeting immediately struck Rostov as a romantic event. "A helpless girl
began speaking in a voice that faltered and trembled with emotion. This
man of her own class, she glanced at him with her deep radiant look and
face, and by his walk and the first words he uttered recognized him as a
he had come, or what was happening to her. When she saw his Russian
room, when Rostov was shown in. She could not grasp who he was and why
Princess Mary was sitting helpless and bewildered in the large sitting

Rostov passed through the anteroom.
"Father! Benefactor! God has sent you!" exclaimed deeply moved voices as

away, and the women in the house began to wail.
cavalrymen were espied they were taken for Frenchmen, the coachman ran
maids, had given orders to harness and intended to start, but when the
Princess Mary, despite the dissuasions of Alpatych, her nurse, and the
At the moment when Rostov and Ilyin were galloping along the road,

serve her as before and obey her in everything.
there was an order to the contrary, but that if she stayed they would
himself in the crowd) that they could not let the princess go, that
but was told (it was chiefly Karp who did the talking, Dron not showing
they would unharness the horses. Alpatych had gone out to admonish them,
her leave the village: that there was an order not to move, and that
come in a large crowd to the barn and sent word that they would not let
the princess gave orders to harness for her journey, the peasants had
not appeared when Alpatych sent for him; and that in the morning when
that Dron had finally given up the keys and joined the peasants and had
her talk with Dron and at the meeting, had actually had so bad an effect
that the princess' offer of corn to the peasants the previous day, and
to the house, questioning him as to the state of affairs. It appeared
Rostov dismounted, gave his horse to the orderly, and followed Alpatych

"I have the honor to report to you the actual truth," said Alpatych.

"Impossible!" exclaimed Rostov.

excellency cannot get away."
horses, so that though everything has been packed up since morning, her
wish to let the mistress leave the estate, and threaten to unharness her
"I make bold to inform your honor that the rude peasants here don't

little way. "What's the matter?" he asked.
"No, there's not much to be amused at here," said Rostov, and rode on a

as he pointed at the old men with his free hand.
"Or perhaps they amuse your honor?" remarked Alpatych with a staid air,

Rostov looked at the tipsy peasants and smiled.

sake, eh?" said the peasants, smiling joyfully at him.
"Ah!... Alpatych... Ah, Yakov Alpatych... Grand! Forgive us for Christ's

the two peasants who kept as close to him as horseflies to a horse.
smile, "as it is not convenient in the presence of...?" He pointed to
you, please, ride on a little farther," said Alpatych with a melancholy
pointed to the peasants--"asks you to come up to the house.... Won't
herself in difficulties owing to the boorishness of these people"--he
Nicholas Bolkonski who died on the fifteenth of this month, finding
thrust into his bosom. "My mistress, daughter of General in Chief Prince
a shade of contempt for the youthfulness of this officer and with a hand
"May I make bold to trouble your honor?" said he respectfully, but with

advanced to Rostov, having bared his head while still at a distance.
he looked at Ilyin talking to the girl. Following Dunyasha, Alpatych
"Co-o-om-pa-ny!" roared the tipsy peasant with a beatific smile as

servant."
"This is Count Rostov, squadron commander, and I am your humble

"The princess ordered me to ask your regiment and your name."

"What do you want, my pretty?" said Ilyin with a smile.

"She'll be ours!" said Lavrushka to Ilyin, winking.

running resolutely toward him.
"The one in pink is mine, so keep off!" said Ilyin on seeing Dunyasha

man in a white hat were seen coming toward the officers.
At that moment, on the road leading from the big house, two women and a

the peasant, moving away.
"The old men have met to talk over the business of the commune," replied

added. "Is it a holiday?"
"Very large," answered Rostov. "But why have you collected here?" he

coming up.
"And is there a large force of you here?" said another, a short man,

"Then you are Russians?" the peasant asked again.

himself"--and he pointed to Lavrushka.
"The French," replied Ilyin jestingly, "and here is Napoleon

"Who do you belong to?" he asked.

One of the men came out of the crowd and went up to Rostov.

blissful smile.
"A mo-o-st me-r-r-y co-o-m-pa...!" sang one of the peasants with a

"And how like one another," said Ilyin.

"Fine fellows!" said Rostov laughing. "Is there any hay here?"

singing some incoherent song, and approached the officers.
and scanty beards emerged from the tavern, smiling, staggering, and
without doffing their caps. Two tall old peasants with wrinkled faces
Some of the men bared their heads, others stared at the new arrivals

standing.
They rode at a footpace to the barn, where a large crowd of peasants was

mortify you."
from behind, alluding to his shabby cart horse, "only I didn't wish to
"And I'd have won on my Frenchy, your excellency," said Lavrushka

stroking his heated Donets horse.
"Yes, always first both on the grassland and here," answered Rostov,

"You're first!" cried Ilyin, flushed.

the first to gallop into the village street.
incline before reaching Bogucharovo, and Rostov, outstripping Ilyin, was
Rostov and Ilyin gave rein to their horses for a last race along the

that very Bolkonski who had been engaged to his sister.
Rostov had no idea that the village he was entering was the property of

another to try Ilyin's horse.
Lavrushka about Napoleon and laughed at his stories, and raced one
they hoped to find many domestic serfs and pretty girls, they questioned
Bogucharovo, a princely estate with a dwelling house and farm where
Rostov and Ilyin were in the merriest of moods. On the way to

could get them.
to take such provisions as remained at Bogucharovo before the French
for the French vanguard; Rostov, as a careful squadron commander, wished
armies, so that it was as easy for the Russian rearguard to get to it as
For the last three days Bogucharovo had lain between the two hostile

was any hay to be had in the villages.
ride--to try a new horse Ilyin had bought and to find out whether there
their quarters at Yankovo, ten miles from Bogucharovo, and went for a
who had just returned from captivity and by an hussar orderly, left
On the seventeenth of August Rostov and Ilyin, accompanied by Lavrushka


CHAPTER XIII





her old nurse and the maidservants who came running toward her.
herself out of this silence she ran to the servants' quarters to meet
"Dunyasha," she whispered. "Dunyasha!" she screamed wildly, and tearing

silence brooding over the house and within it held her fast.
expecting every moment to see his dead face, and she felt that the
neither. With wide-open eyes she gazed at the moonlight and the shadows,
again. She tried to think of something else and to pray, but could do
that that was not he, but something mysterious and horrible, seized her
horror that had seized her when she touched him and convinced herself
in his coffin with his chin bound up with a white handkerchief. And the
saw him before her with the expression that was on his face as he lay
now?" This question suddenly presented itself to her, and in answer she
"What was he thinking when he uttered that word? What is he thinking

"Dear-est!" she repeated again.

when she stooped near to his mouth to catch what he said.
for the first time quite closely, with all its wrinkles and details,
had always seen at a distance, but the timid, feeble face she had seen
her. And not the face she had known ever since she could remember and
sobbing, with tears that relieved her soul. She now saw his face before
to her on the day of his death. "Dear-est!" she repeated, and began
to me." And Princess Mary uttered aloud the caressing word he had said
perhaps he would then have been comforted and would have said that word
I go in then? What could he have done to me? What could I have lost? And
lay down on his bed groaning and loudly exclaimed, 'My God!' Why didn't
'Fool!' He was greatly depressed. From behind the door I heard how he
was dead--and Tikhon reminded him that she was no more, and he shouted,
speaking to him about Lise as if she were alive--he had forgotten she
to talk to Tikhon who did not understand him. I remember how he began
standing close by, outside the door. It was sad and painful for him
to Tikhon he asked about me twice. He wanted to see me, and I was
would then have said to me what he said the day he died. While talking
understood him. Why didn't I enter the room?" she thought. "Perhaps he
said all he longed to say, and not Tikhon but I might have heard and
soul. Never will that moment return for him or for me when he might have
thought again now. "Now he will never tell anyone what he had in his
he let me be there instead of Tikhon?" Princess Mary had thought and
Evidently he had wanted to talk. "And why didn't he call me? Why didn't
Tikhon, speaking of the Crimea and its warm nights and of the Empress.
at the door. In a suffering and weary voice he was saying something to
to the door of the conservatory where he slept that night had listened
will. She had not slept and had stolen downstairs on tiptoe, and going
when with a foreboding of disaster she had remained at home against his
all its detail the night at Bald Hills before he had the last stroke,
thought. "He had always thought what he said then." And she recalled in
"Even then he wanted to tell me what he told me the day he died," she

eyebrows and looking uneasily and timidly at her.
muttering something with his helpless tongue, twitching his gray
being dragged along by his armpits through the garden at Bald Hills,
She vividly recalled the moment when he had his first stroke and was

seemed now present, now past, and now future.
presented themselves to her so clearly and in such detail that they
imagination at this still and mystic hour of night. And these pictures
picture of his death, which she felt she could not contemplate even in
over these images, repelling with horror only the last one, the
one after another to her memory. With mournful pleasure she now lingered
Pictures of the near past--her father's illness and last moments--rose

rise, and stillness reigned over the village and the house.
to show from behind the lime trees, a fresh white dewy mist began to
midnight the voices began to subside, a cock crowed, the full moon began
After sunset the wind had dropped. The night was calm and fresh. Toward

could remember it and weep or pray.
by cares for the present, seemed already to belong to the past. Now she
thought only of one thing, her sorrow, which, after the break caused
could not understand them however much she might think about them. She
the village, but it was not of them she was thinking. She felt that she
room hearing the sound of the peasants' voices that reached her from
For a long time that night Princess Mary sat by the open window of her


CHAPTER XII





own thoughts.
departure next morning, she went to her room and remained alone with her
house. Having repeated her order to Dron to have horses ready for her
With drooping head Princess Mary left the crowd and went back to the

says," voices in the crowd were heard saying.
and go into bondage! I dare say! 'I'll give you grain, indeed!' she
"Oh yes, an artful tale! Follow her into slavery! Pull down your houses

her look. She felt strange and awkward.
in the crowd was turned to her; evidently they were all trying to avoid
Again Princess Mary tried to catch someone's eye, but not a single eye

agree."
"We're not willing. Let them ruin us! We won't take your grain. We don't

But her voice was drowned by the voices of the crowd.

the enemy would ruin you..."
"Why don't you want to go? I promise to house and feed you, while here
"But you can't have understood me," said Princess Mary with a sad smile.

but of angry resolve.
though now it was certainly not an expression of curiosity or gratitude,
And again all the faces in that crowd bore an identical expression,

came from various sides of the crowd.
are sorry for you, but we're not willing. Go away yourself, alone..."
"Why should we give up everything? We don't agree. Don't agree.... We

"Why should we agree? We don't want the grain."

But as if this angered him, he bent his head quite low and muttered:

wanted, tell me! I will do anything," said she, catching his eye.
in front of her leaning on his stick. "If you think something more is
"Why don't you speak?" she inquired of a very old man who stood just

someone's eye.
The silence began to oppress the princess and she tried to catch

No one answered.

"But why don't you want to take it?" she asked again.

every eye she met now was immediately dropped.
No one replied and Princess Mary, looking round at the crowd, found that

"But why not?" asked the princess.

take the landlord's grain," said a voice at the back of the crowd.
"We are all very thankful for your bounty, but it won't do for us to

identical.
apprehension and distrust--but the expression on all the faces was
could not fathom whether it was curiosity, devotion, gratitude, or
All eyes were gazing at her with one and the same expression. She

mine is yours," she concluded, scanning the faces before her.
"Ours is a common misfortune and we will share it together. All that is

Again she paused. No one broke the silence.

and his son."
name of my dead father, who was a good master to you, and of my brother
"I am not doing this on my own account," she continued, "I do it in the

The princess stopped. Sighs were the only sound heard in the crowd.

nothing. You shall be given food and lodging."
Moscow, and I promise you I will see to it that there you shall want for
contrary, I ask you to go with all your belongings to our estate near
am giving you the grain to keep you here--that is not true. On the
so that you may not suffer want! And if you have been told that I
everything, my friends, and I beg you to take everything, all our grain,
is dangerous here... the enemy is near... because... I am giving you
shall grudge nothing to help you. I am myself going away because it
that the war has ruined you. That is our common misfortune, and I
feeling her heart beating quickly and violently. "Dronushka tells me
"I am very glad you have come," she said without raising her eyes, and

began her speech.
represented her father and her brother gave her courage, and she boldly
at once, did not know how to do it. But again the sense that she
distinguish any of them and, feeling that she must speak to them all
on her, and there were so many different faces, that she could not
close up to them. So many different eyes, old and young, were fixed
hats. Princess Mary lowered her eyes and, tripping over her skirt, came
The men crowded closer together, stirred, and rapidly took off their

standing on the pasture by the barn.
my place," she thought as she went out in the twilight toward the crowd
housing at our Moscow estate. I am sure Andrew would do even more in
French," thought Princess Mary. "I will offer them monthly rations and
remain here, while I myself go away leaving them to the mercy of the
"They probably think I am offering them the grain to bribe them to

Dunyasha, the nurse, and Michael Ivanovich following her.
the nurse's and Dunyasha's protests she went out into the porch; Dron,
"No, no. I'll go out to them," said Princess Mary, and in spite of

"If you order it they will go away," said he.

Dron only sighed in reply.

my message wrong. I only said that you were to give them the grain."
"But I never sent for them," declared the princess. "You must have given

princess' order.
Dron came and confirmed Dunyasha's words; the peasants had come by the

Princess Mary. "Call Dronushka."
"You're making some mistake. I never ordered them to go away," said

they don't agree to leave Bogucharovo as you ordered."
"I know it is, only listen to me for God's sake! Ask nurse too. They say

"What is a trick?" asked Princess Mary in surprise.

returns let us get away... and please don't..."
out to them. It's all a trick," said Dunyasha, "and when Yakov Alpatych
"Only, for God's sake, Princess dear, have them sent away and don't go

to let them have the grain."
"But I never told them to come," said Princess Mary. "I only told Dron

wished to have word with their mistress.
all the peasants had assembled at the barn by the princess' order and
An hour later Dunyasha came to tell the princess that Dron had come, and


CHAPTER XI





peasants.
devotion and that she was ready to do anything for him and for the
asking to be discharged. She replied that she had never doubted his
Princess Mary did not understand what he wanted of her or why he was

wrong. Discharge me, for God's sake!"
from me," said he. "I have served twenty-three years and have done no
"Discharge me, little mother, for God's sake! Order the keys to be taken

Dron looked intently at the princess while she was speaking.

theirs. We do not grudge them anything. Tell them so."
give this order in my brother's name; and tell them that what is ours is
"Give them that corn if there is enough of it. Distribute it all. I

Dron made no answer but sighed deeply.

in my brother's name," said she.
"Give it to the peasants, let them have all they need; I give you leave

did not order it to be sold."
"The landlord's grain is all safe," replied Dron proudly. "Our prince

"But we have grain belonging to my brother?" she said.

landlord.
peasants' needs and what there was in Bogucharovo that belonged to the
without scruple to forget her own grief. She began asking Dron about the
give. She was glad such cares presented themselves, enabling her
mistake in speaking about the distribution of the grain she wished to
refuse to help the peasants in need, she only feared to make some
peasants. She also knew that neither her father nor her brother would
was such a thing as "landlord's corn" which was sometimes given to the
could refrain from helping the poor. She had heard vaguely that there
was filling her soul, there could be rich people and poor, and the rich
To Princess Mary it was strange that now, at a moment when such sorrow

I'll do all I can...."
"But why didn't you tell me, Dronushka? Isn't it possible to help them?

"They're dying of hunger," said Dron. "It's not a case of carting."

"The peasants are ruined? They have no bread?" she asked.

Princess Mary listened attentively to what he told her.

days without eating. We've nothing, we've been ruined."
feeding horses--we may die of hunger ourselves! As it is, some go three
taken for the army or have died--this is such a year! It's not a case of
"It's all God's scourge," said Dron. "What horses we had have been

"Why are there none?" asked the princess.

horses; I told Yakov Alpatych so."
Dron paused. He looked askance at Princess Mary and said: "There are no

tonight or early tomorrow morning."
can do nothing. I understand nothing. I have nobody! I want to go away
"I was told it would be dangerous because of the enemy. Dear friend, I

"Why shouldn't you go away, your excellency? You can go," said Dron.

to. Is it true, as they tell me, that I can't even go away?"
"Dronushka, Alpatych has gone off somewhere and I have no one to turn

They were silent for a while.

"We are all in God's hands," said he, with a sigh.

since our misfortune..." she began, but could not go on.
fair at Vyazma every year and smilingly offer it to her, "Dronushka, now
always used to bring a special kind of gingerbread from his visit to the
"Dronushka," she said, regarding as a sure friend this Dronushka who

Princess Mary walked up and down the room and stopped in front of him.

to Princess Mary came to a halt by the doorpost.
At length Dron, the village Elder, entered the room and with a deep bow

Mary's questions and hardly refrained from sobbing as he looked at her.
stamp of inconsolable grief, replied: "Yes, Princess" to all Princess
answers. The old valet Tikhon, with sunken, emaciated face that bore the
replied to Princess Mary, so that nothing definite could be got from his
answer the old prince without expressing views of his own, he now
of agreement with which for fifteen years he had been accustomed to
with sleepy eyes, tell Princess Mary anything. With just the same smile
could the architect Michael Ivanovich, who on being sent for came in
correct. Alpatych was not at home, he had gone to the police. Neither
maids could not say in how far Mademoiselle Bourienne's statement was
Ivanovich and now for Tikhon or Dron. Dunyasha, the nurse, and the other
Agitated and flushed she paced the room, sending now for Michael

and took possession of her.
death, all at once rose before her with a new, previously unknown force
The demands of life, which had seemed to her annihilated by her father's

position.
study, trying to enter completely into his ideas, and considered her
have done she felt bound to say and do. She went into Prince Andrew's
and felt their feelings. What they would have said and what they would
father and of Prince Andrew. Involuntarily she thought their thoughts
happened to her, but she felt herself the representative of her dead
and her brother. For herself she did not care where she remained or what
not thinking her own thoughts but feeling bound to think like her father
would pretend to sympathize with my sorrow..." thought Princess Mary,
and stars, they would tell me of their victories over the Russians, and
soldiers would violate my father's newly dug grave to steal his crosses
Bogucharovo for him. I should be given a small room as a favor, the
his letters and papers. Mademoiselle Bourienne would do the honors of
Prince Andrew's study and amuse himself by looking through and reading
French, would settle in this house: M. le General Rameau would occupy
was humiliating, in her position rose vividly to her mind. "They, the
experienced before. All that was distressing, and especially all that
shudder, blush, and feel such a rush of anger and pride as she had never
protection and accepted his favor!" This idea horrified her, made her
I, the daughter of Prince Nicholas Bolkonski, asked General Rameau for
"If Prince Andrew heard that I was in the power of the French! That

appalled at the thought of being left in the hands of the French.
Mademoiselle Bourienne's voice. "We must go at once, at once!" she said,
"and tell Mademoiselle Bourienne not to come to me," she added, hearing
"Dunyasha, send Alpatych, or Dronushka, or somebody to me!" she said,

study.
a pale face went out of the room and into what had been Prince Andrew's
Princess Mary, with the paper in her hand, rose from the window and with

Mademoiselle Bourienne blushing.
"They probably recognized that I am French, by my name," replied

"From whom did you get this?" she asked.

sobs.
Princess Mary read the paper, and her face began to quiver with stifled

"and I am sure that all due respect would be shown you."
"I think it would be best to appeal to that general," she continued,

them proper protection. She handed this to the princess.
not to leave their homes and that the French authorities would afford
printed on ordinary Russian paper) of General Rameau's, telling people
Mademoiselle Bourienne took from her reticule a proclamation (not

of the soldiers or of riotous peasants would be terrible."
Bourienne. "Because, you will agree, chere Marie, to fall into the hands
but I think it would now be better to stay here," said Mademoiselle
"I've spoken to him. He hopes we should be in time to get away tomorrow,

nothing, and don't want to...."
did say something about going.... Speak to him; I can do nothing,
"Of course I would on no account wish to go away from him.... Alpatych
"Oh, if anyone knew how little anything matters to me now," she said.

talking about.
Princess Mary looked at her companion without understanding what she was

If we go we are almost sure to be taken prisoners, and God knows..."
danger--are surrounded by the French. It would be dangerous to move now.
"You know, chere Marie," said Mademoiselle Bourienne, "that we are in

all the same?" she thought, and did not reply.
where to. "Is it possible to plan or think of anything now? Is it not
Princess Mary did not answer. She did not understand who was to go or

Alpatych been to you? Has he spoken to you of going away?" she asked.
think of yourself, but with my love for you I must do so.... Has
Bourienne after a pause. "I understand that you could not, and cannot,
"Your position is doubly terrible, dear princess," said Mademoiselle

listening to the sound of her voice.
heard her, not heeding her words but occasionally looking up at her and
and that he, from above, saw her affection and gratitude. The princess
this great grief; that she felt herself blameless in regard to everyone,
sorrow, that all the old misunderstandings should sink into nothing but
only consolation was the fact that the princess allowed her to share her
the princess' sorrow and making herself a partner in it. She said her
Bourienne at once began crying again and kissed that hand, speaking of
and held out her hand with a glance of gentle inquiry. Mademoiselle
dependent on her and living in her house. She felt sorry for her
Bourienne, whom she had of late kept at a distance, but who yet was
Princess Mary vividly pictured to herself the position of Mademoiselle

thought.
is it for me, for me who desired his death, to condemn anyone?" she
the reproaches Princess Mary had mentally addressed to her. "Besides,
Bourienne and could not bear to see her, thereby showing how unjust were
But she remembered too how he had changed of late toward Mademoiselle
their former disharmony and her own jealousy recurred to her mind.
her, and immediately began to cry. The princess looked up at her. All
dress and weepers. She softly approached Princess Mary, sighed, kissed
kissed her head. She looked up. It was Mademoiselle Bourienne in a black
Someone spoke her name in a soft and tender voice from the garden and

head fall on the window sill.
hinder you," she said to herself, and sinking into a chair she let her
"Yes, you can well enjoy the evening now! He is gone and no one will

clear but windy evening.
and went to the window, involuntarily inhaling the freshness of the
suddenly stopped. Unconsciously she sat up, smoothed her hair, got up,
cushion at which Princess Mary was looking. The flow of her thoughts
shone into the open window, lighting up the room and part of the morocco
The sun had reached the other side of the house, and its slanting rays

She lay for a long time in that position.
dare to, dared not in her present state of mind address herself to God.
shown itself during her father's illness. She wished to pray but did not
her own spiritual baseness, which she had not suspected, but which had
thoughts were centered on one subject--the irrevocability of death and
leather cushion and seeing nothing but that cushion, and her confused
lay on the sofa with her face to the wall, fingering the buttons of the
The windows of the room in which she was lying looked westward. She

away and begged to be left in peace.
lying and replied through the closed door that she did not mean to go
Dron.) Princess Mary raised herself on the sofa on which she had been
asking for orders about their departure. (This was before his talk with
did not admit anyone. A maid came to the door to say that Alpatych was
After her father's funeral Princess Mary shut herself up in her room and


CHAPTER X





authorities.
the princess' carriages. Meanwhile he went himself to the police
had arrived from Bald Hills and had those horses got ready for
princess, Alpatych had his own belongings taken out of the carts which
carts should not be provided. Without saying anything of this to the
decided that the horses should be driven out into the woods and the
village, outside the drink shop, another meeting was being held, which
And so it was, for when evening came no carts had been provided. In the

carts would not be forthcoming.
doubted but felt almost certain that without the help of troops the
from Dron, Alpatych contented himself with that, though he not only
that they can possibly disobey. Having wrung a submissive "I understand"
and knew that the chief way to make them obey is to show no suspicion
Alpatych did not insist further. He had managed people for a long time

"I understand."

so, and that they must stop this and the carts must be got ready."
"Well, then, listen! I'll go to the police officer, and you tell them

barrel."
"Quite beside themselves, Yakov Alpatych; they've fetched another

abruptly.
"'Told them,' I dare say!" said Alpatych. "Are they drinking?" he asked

themselves; I have already told them..."
"What am I to do with the people?" said Dron. "They're quite beside

of, eh?"
"What is it you have got into your heads, eh?... What are you thinking

him.
Dron got up and was about to say something, but Alpatych interrupted

seeing three yards under a man is considered an attribute of wizards.
since gained him the reputation of being a wizard, and that the power of
been able to retain the old prince's favor for twenty years had long
knowledge of the right time to sow the oats, and the fact that he had
under you," he repeated, knowing that his skill in beekeeping, his
"Stop that!" cried Alpatych sternly. "I see through you and three yards

for Christ's sake!"
"Yakov Alpatych, discharge me! Take the keys from me and discharge me,

Dron suddenly fell on his knees.

hear?"
for the princess' things. And don't go to any meeting yourself, do you
homes and go to Moscow and to get carts ready for tomorrow morning
"You drop this nonsense and tell the people to get ready to leave their

his eyes.
Dron was disconcerted, glanced furtively at Alpatych and again lowered

gazing at the floor in front of Dron.
through you and three yards into the ground under you," he continued,
bosom and solemnly pointing to the floor at Dron's feet. "I can see
"Eh, Dron, drop it!" Alpatych repeated, withdrawing his hand from his

"The power is in your hands," Dron rejoined sadly.

"Eh, Dron, it will turn out badly!" he said, shaking his head.

Alpatych was not satisfied with this reply.

"I hear," Dron answered without lifting his eyes.

hear?"
Tsar about it too. Anyone who stays is a traitor to the Tsar. Do you
away and not leave them with the enemy, and there is an order from the
excellency Prince Andrew himself gave me orders to move all the people
"Now just listen, Dronushka," said he. "Don't talk nonsense to me. His

moved closer up to him.
He noticed this hesitation in Dron's look and therefore frowned and
must be hesitating between the two camps: the masters' and the serfs'.
knew that Dron, who had acquired property and was hated by the commune,
commune, by which the Elder had already been carried away. But he also
not express his personal views but the general mood of the Bogucharovo
with. Having glanced at Dron he at once understood that his answers did
degree the faculty of divining the needs and instincts of those he dealt
twenty years in vain. He was a model steward, possessing in the highest
village Elder, so Alpatych had not managed the prince's estates for
Alpatych looked intently at Dron and frowned. Just as Dron was a model

could be had even for the carriages, much less for the carting.
weak, and others had died for want of fodder. It seemed that no horses
available: some horses were carting for the government, others were too
Alpatych named others, but they too, according to Dron, had no horses
Dron replied that the horses of these peasants were away carting.

peasants he knew, from whom he told him to take the carts.
order Dron lowered his eyes and remained silent. Alpatych named certain
work in Bogucharovo and the peasants were well to do. But on hearing the
with this order, for there were two hundred and thirty households at
quitrent, Alpatych thought no difficulty would be made about complying
the things to be removed from Bogucharovo. Though the peasants paid
horses got ready for the princess' carriages and eighteen carts for
Dron on the day of the prince's funeral and told him to have twelve
Alpatych, arriving from the devastated Bald Hills estate, sent for his

crop on any single acre of the Bogucharovo fields.
cartloads he sold for the prince, nor a single shock of the whole corn
account or the number of quarters of flour in any of the endless
and though he could not read he had never forgotten a single money
sleepless nights or the hardest tasks had he shown the least fatigue,
whole time of his service Dron had never been drunk or ill, never after
respected him and jestingly called him "the Minister." During the
master. The masters, both the old prince and the young, and the steward
twenty-three years. The peasants feared him more than they did their
Bogucharovo, and had since filled that post irreproachably for
part like the rest, Dron was made village Elder and overseer of
Soon after the migration to the "warm rivers," in which he had taken

straight and strong at sixty as at thirty.
are sixty or seventy, without a gray hair or the loss of a tooth, as
big beards as soon as they are of age and go on unchanged till they
Dron was one of those physically and mentally vigorous peasants who grow

Dron, whom the old prince called by the diminutive "Dronushka."
For some thirty years Bogucharovo had been managed by the village Elder,

own family and valuables from his estate.
the French had unexpectedly advanced, and had barely time to remove his
the funeral. But this he was unable to do, for he received tidings that
old prince died the Marshal went away, promising to return next day for
not be responsible for what might happen. On the evening of the day the
becoming dangerous. He had told her that after the sixteenth he could
the Marshal had insisted on Princess Mary's leaving at once, as it was
time to waste. On the fifteenth, the day of the old prince's death,
which it had been decided not to move but to wait. Yet there was no
princess' luggage from Bogucharovo, there had been a village meeting at
very day he gave the village Elder orders to collect carts to move the
More important still, Alpatych learned that on the morning of the

they were false) paid to him in advance for hay.
brought from Visloukhovo a hundred rubles in notes (he did not know that
be paid for anything taken from them. As proof of this the peasant had
harm would be done to the inhabitants, and if they remained they would
was occupied by the French, a proclamation by a French general that no
another peasant had even brought from the village of Visloukhovo, which
French did not harm them. Alpatych also knew that on the previous day
news that the Cossacks were destroying deserted villages, but that the
recently been away driving a government transport, had returned with
Karp, who possessed great influence in the village commune and had
migrate. He learned from domestic serfs loyal to him that the peasant
received leaflets from them that passed from hand to hand, and did not
round Bogucharovo were, it was rumored, in touch with the French,
to be devastated by the Cossacks, the peasants in the steppe region
forty miles all the peasants were moving away and leaving their villages
what was happening in the Bald Hills district, where over a radius of
death, noticed an agitation among the peasants, and that contrary to
Alpatych, who had reached Bogucharovo shortly before the old prince's

undercurrents were acting strongly and nearing an eruption.
living in close touch with these people it was apparent that these
at the same time simply, naturally, and forcibly. Now in 1812, to anyone
forces ready to manifest themselves just as strangely, unexpectedly, and
But such undercurrents still existed among the people and gathered new
died down of itself just as it had sprung up, without apparent reason.
hunger on the road, many returned of their own accord, and the movement
of them were punished, some sent to Siberia, many died of cold and
by one or ran away, and drove or walked toward the "warm rivers." Many
them had ever been. They set off in caravans, bought their freedom one
wives and children streamed to the southeast, to parts where none of
As birds migrate to somewhere beyond the sea, so these men with their
selling their cattle and moving in whole families toward the southeast.
Hundreds of peasants, among them the Bogucharovo folk, suddenly began
a movement among the peasants to emigrate to some unknown "warm rivers."
others. One instance, which had occurred some twenty years before, was
contemporaries, were more clearly and strongly noticeable than among
the Russian people, the causes and meaning of which are so baffling to
peasantry of those parts the mysterious undercurrents in the life of
and also very few domestic or literate serfs, and in the lives of the
pleased. There were very few resident landlords in the neighborhood
crown or to owners whose serfs paid quitrent and could work where they
In the vicinity of Bogucharovo were large villages belonging to the

notions of Antichrist, the end of the world, and "pure freedom."
his invasion were connected in their minds with the same sort of vague
there would be no restrictions. Rumors of the war with Bonaparte and
years' time, when everything would be made free and so "simple" that
stopped it), then of Peter Fedorovich's return to the throne in seven
it was rumored that freedom had been granted them but the landowners had
Tsar's and of an oath to the Tsar Paul in 1797 (in connection with which
which they were all to be converted; then of some proclamation of the
they would all be enrolled as Cossacks; at another of a new religion to
obscure rumors were always current among them: at one time a rumor that
them the traits of character the old prince called boorishness. Various
softened their disposition but had on the contrary strengthened in
and schools and reduced the quitrent the peasants had to pay, had not
Prince Andrew's last stay at Bogucharovo, when he introduced hospitals

them for their boorishness.
to help with the harvest or to dig ponds, and ditches, but he disliked
approve of them for their endurance at work when they came to Bald Hills
disposition. They were called steppe peasants. The old prince used to
those of Bald Hills. They differed from them in speech, dress, and
absentees, and its peasants were of quite a different character from
Until Prince Andrew settled in Bogucharovo its owners had always been


CHAPTER IX





prince's cold and stiffened hand.
fixed and frightened eyes, crossing themselves, bowed and kissed the old
the coffin--the Marshal, the village Elder, peasant women--and all with
inmates of the house and strangers crowded into the drawing room round
Just as horses shy and snort and gather about a dead horse, so the

corner of the room sat a chanter reading the psalms.
juniper, a printed band was tucked in under his shriveled head, and in a
coffin, a pall was spread over it, the floor was strewn with sprays of
as if of its own accord. Toward night candles were burning round his
Heaven only knows who arranged all this and when, but it all got done
with his decorations and placed his shriveled little body on a table.
legs that were already spreading apart. Then they dressed him in uniform
not stiffen while open, and with another handkerchief tied together the
the prince, tied his head up with a handkerchief that the mouth should
In the presence of Tikhon and the doctor the women washed what had been


who held her up.
her face in her hands, Princess Mary sank into the arms of the doctor,
hostile, some dreadful, terrifying, and repellent mystery!" And hiding
is no more! He is not, but here where he was is something unfamiliar and
replaced by a feeling of horror at what lay there before her. "No, he
tenderness she had been feeling for him vanished instantly and was
to his cheek. But she stepped back immediately. All the force of the
him, and repressing the terror that seized her, she pressed her lips
"No, he's not dead--it's impossible!" she told herself and approached

Mary stop short on the threshold.
bed as before, but the stern expression of his quiet face made Princess
drew back from the bed, making way for her. He was still lying on the
room startled her. In the room were her nurse and other women. They all
She opened the door and the bright daylight in that previously darkened
I don't want any of them! And what are they doing here?" she thought.
father's door. "Why are these people with frightened faces stopping me?
The doctor tried to stop her. She pushed him aside and ran to her

"Let me alone; it's not true!" she cried angrily to him.

the Marshal, meeting her at the house door.
"Princess, it's God's will! You must be prepared for everything," said

avoid seeing the girl she ran toward the house.
not giving Dunyasha time to finish what she was saying, and trying to
"Immediately, I'm coming, I'm coming!" replied the princess hurriedly,

voice.
"Please come, Princess... The Prince," said Dunyasha in a breaking

alarm on seeing her mistress.
who was evidently looking for her, and who stopped suddenly as if in
footsteps running along the path. She rose and saw Dunyasha her maid,
long she had been there when she was aroused by the sound of a woman's
slope by the pond, where no one could see her. She did not know how
She returned to the garden and sat down on the grass at the foot of the

"Go away, Princess! Go away... go away!"

doctor came out with an agitated face and said she could not enter.
excusing herself, she went to the door of the old prince's room. The
led him to the house, offered him lunch, and sat down with him. Then,
prompt departure. Princess Mary listened without understanding him; she
had come personally to point out to the princess the necessity for her
stranger. This was the Marshal of the Nobility of the district, who
Bogucharovo and did not wish to leave it--coming toward her with a
to the house, she saw Mademoiselle Bourienne--who had remained at
When she had completed the tour of the garden, which brought her again

which heaved with convulsive sobs.
pacing the garden with hurried steps and pressing her hands to her bosom
use will peace be when he is no longer here?" Princess Mary murmured,
quicker.... I wished to be at peace.... And what will become of me? What
"Yes... I... I... I wished for his death! Yes, I wanted it to end

planted.
far as the pond, along the avenues of young lime trees Prince Andrew had
never felt till that moment. She ran out sobbing into the garden and as
except passionate love for her father, love such as she thought she had
sunny. She could understand nothing, think of nothing and feel nothing,
Princess Mary stayed on the veranda. The day had cleared, it was hot and

then he had a second and final stroke.
Emperor, angrily twitching his brows and raising his hoarse voice, and
prince again began speaking about his son, about the war, and about the
persuade her to prepare for her journey. When she had left the room the
taking her arm led her out to the veranda, soothing her and trying to
Having understood this Princess Mary sobbed still louder, and the doctor

"Put on your white dress. I like it," was what he said.

so she could not guess his words.
or Prince Andrew, of herself, of his grandson, or of his own death, and
which he had just been speaking. She thought he was speaking of Russia,
it. Princess Mary had sought the meaning of his words in the mood in
understand for a long time, till at last Tikhon understood and repeated
Then he again opened his eyes and said something none of them could

Tikhon, understanding him, wiped away the tears.
Again he closed his eyes. His sobs ceased, he pointed to his eyes, and

could no longer restrain herself and wept while she gazed at his face.
And he began to sob, and again tears flowed from his eyes. Princess Mary

destroyed her."
"Yes," he said, softly and distinctly. "Russia has perished. They've

remembered everything, he nodded his head and reopened his eyes.
answer to his doubts and to confirm the fact that now he understood and
He closed his eyes and remained silent a long time. Then as if in

"He's with the army, Father, at Smolensk."

"Where is he?"

He glanced at her with timid surprise.

"I have a letter from him," she replied.

seemed to Princess Mary.
He himself seemed aware that his demand was meaningless. So at least it

of doubt showed itself on his face as he spoke.
eyes. "Call Andrew!" he said suddenly, and a childish, timid expression
you!... forgive!... thank you!..." and tears began to flow from his
"Thank you... daughter dear!... for all, for all... forgive!... thank

He was silent awhile.

"And I was wishing for his death!" thought Princess Mary.

come in?"
caressing word such as he had never used to her before. "Why didn't you
had said, but from his look it was clear that he had uttered a tender
"Dear one... Dearest..." Princess Mary could not quite make out what he

with difficulty.
he did, as much as possible by signs, and her tongue too seemed to move
Unconsciously imitating her father, she now tried to express herself as

"No, I did not sleep," said Princess Mary, shaking her head.

"Weren't you asleep?"

He pressed her hand.

come in."
"If only I had known..." she said through her tears. "I was afraid to

"I have been calling you all night..." he brought out.

He moved his hand over her hair.

and tears.
Princess Mary pressed her head against his hand, trying to hide her sobs

understood.
more clearly than he had done before, now that he was sure of being
"Always thoughts... about you... thoughts..." he then uttered much

the right place for it.
began pressing it to different parts of his breast as if trying to find
He made a mumbling sound in confirmation of this, took her hand, and

"My mind, my mind aches?" questioned Princess Mary.

The prince shook his head, again repeated the same sounds.
he had guessed them, and inquiringly repeated: "Mary, are you afraid?"
It was quite impossible to understand these sounds. The doctor thought

"Mmm...ar...ate...ate..." he repeated several times.

he uttered.
but tried to guess what he was saying and inquiringly repeated the words
repeating the same words several times. She could not understand them,
difficulty repress the sobs that rose to her throat. He said something,
efforts with which he moved his tongue made her drop her eyes and with
Straining all her faculties Princess Mary looked at him. The comic

imploringly at her, evidently afraid that she might not understand.
and tongue moved, sounds came, and he began to speak, gazing timidly and
calmed down, not taking his eyes off her for some seconds. Then his lips
she changed her position so that his left eye could see her face he
She looked at him in dismay trying to guess what he wanted of her. When

twitched her hand, and his brows and lips quivered angrily.
so that she understood that he had long been waiting for her to come. He
Princess Mary went up and kissed his hand. His left hand pressed hers
seemed to have shriveled or melted; his features had grown smaller.
motionless. He seemed altogether so thin, small, and pathetic. His face
straight before him, his right eye was awry, and his brows and lips
their knotted purple veins were lying on the quilt; his left eye gazed
lying on his back propped up high, and his small bony hands with
Princess Mary entered her father's room and went up to his bed. He was

"Come," said the doctor.

those dreadful, wicked temptations, was a torment of joy and terror.
him, feel his eyes on her now that her whole soul was overflowing with
and leaned against the wall to keep from falling. To see him, talk to
Princess Mary's heart beat so violently at this news that she grew pale

he is asking for you..."
make out something of what he is saying. His head is clearer. Come in,
"He is a little better today," said he. "I was looking for you. One can

her.
before going to her father. The doctor came downstairs and went out to
horrified by her spiritual baseness and trying to arrange her thoughts
It was a warm, gray morning. Princess Mary stopped at the porch, still

into the vehicles.
front of it stood carriages without horses and things were being packed
She washed, dressed, said her prayers, and went out to the porch. In

cried with a feeling of loathing for herself.
"But what could have happened? What did I want? I want his death!" she

groan, said to herself with a sigh that things were still the same.
she listened to what was going on behind the door and, hearing him
clearly what chiefly concerned her about her father's illness. On waking
She woke late. That sincerity which often comes with waking showed her

morning he became quiet and she fell asleep.
would be ordered. But she drove these thoughts away with disgust. Toward
how things would be after his death, and how her new, liberated life
temptations of the devil would surge into her imagination: thoughts of
found an expression of his love of her. Occasionally amid these memories
him. She recalled all her life with him and in every word and act of his
But never had she felt so grieved for him or so much afraid of losing

the night at an unusual hour would irritate him.
sometimes involuntarily fixed on him. She knew that her going in during
She had noticed with what dissatisfaction he turned from the look she
and knew how unpleasant every sign of anxiety on his account was to him.
but not deciding to do so. Though he did not speak, Princess Mary saw
sleep and several times went to the door and listened, wishing to enter
louder than usual and that they turned him over oftener. She could not
listened at the door, and it seemed to her that his mutterings were
of Tikhon and the doctor when they turned him over. Several times she
she heard his groans and muttering, the creak of his bed, and the steps
the room next to the one where the prince lay. Several times, waking up,
She spent the night of the fourteenth as usual, without undressing, in
and giving orders, for which everyone came to her, occupied her all day.
The princess decided to leave on the fifteenth. The cares of preparation

for the consequences.
did not take her father away before the fifteenth, he could not answer
proclamations were circulating in the villages, and that if the princess
that the French were only some twenty-five miles away, that French
rural police having come to Bogucharovo urged the same thing, saying
to persuade her to get away as quickly as possible, and the head of the
provincial Marshal of the Nobility sent an official to Princess Mary
The doctor insisted on the necessity of moving the prince; the

Bogucharovo, a homestead had been looted by French marauders.
of the French came from all sides, and in one village, ten miles from
It was becoming dangerous to remain in Bogucharovo. News of the approach

her.
She could not pray, could not weep, and worldly cares took possession of
had been confined and in which her greatest comfort had been prayer.
activity, quite opposed to the spiritual world in which till now she
now taken possession of her--the life of a world of strenuous and free
of a prayer, but she could not pray. She felt that a different world had
assumed an attitude of prayer, looked at the icons, repeated the words
that the sole weapon against him was prayer, and she tried to pray. She
These were temptations of the devil and Princess Mary knew it. She knew
recurred to her as to how she would order her life now, after that.
of the devil. Thrust them aside as she would, questions continually
happiness--floated continually in her imagination like temptations
the fear of her father, and even the possibility of love and of family
that had not entered her mind for years--thoughts of a life free from
that had been forgotten or sleeping within her had awakened. Thoughts
him expecting something to happen), all the personal desires and hopes
her father's illness began (perhaps even sooner, when she stayed with
there it was. And what seemed still more terrible to her was that since
Strange as it was to her to acknowledge this feeling in herself, yet

symptoms of the approach of the end.
him not with hope of finding signs of improvement but wishing to find
sleeping at all, she watched him and, terrible to say, often watched
the very end?" Princess Mary sometimes thought. Night and day, hardly
to let him die on the road. "Would it not be better if the end did come,
hope of recovery. It was impossible for him to travel, it would not do
He was evidently suffering both physically and mentally. There was no

restlessness confirmed her opinion.
her something, and the fact that her presence always increased his
to physical causes; but Princess Mary thought he wished to tell
The doctor said this restlessness did not mean anything and was due

to public affairs, or possibly to family concerns.
might be some caprice of a sick and half-crazy man, or it might relate
and wished to say something. But what it was, no one could tell: it
going on around him or not. One thing was certain--that he was suffering
twitching, and it was impossible to tell whether he understood what was
a distorted corpse. He muttered unceasingly, his eyebrows and lips
getting neither better nor worse. He was unconscious and lay like
house Prince Andrew had built at Bogucharovo, ever in the same state,
For three weeks the old prince lay stricken by paralysis in the new

had already left for Moscow.
By the time they reached Bogucharovo, Dessalles and the little prince

him.
next day they moved the prince to Bogucharovo, the doctor accompanying
It was becoming more and more dangerous to remain at Bald Hills, and

prince had had a seizure paralyzing his right side.
The doctor, who was fetched that same night, bled him and said that the

couch he had so feared of late.
wanted. He was lifted up, carried to his study, and laid on the very
lips and made a hoarse sound. It was impossible to make out what he
of timidity and submission. On seeing his daughter he moved his helpless
was that his former stern and determined expression had altered to one
could not be sure what change there was in his face. All she could see
fell in small round spots through the shade of the lime-tree avenue,
decorations. She ran up to him and, in the play of the sunlight that
the armpits and dragging along a little old man in a uniform and
toward her, and in their midst several men were supporting by
into the avenue. A large crowd of militiamen and domestics were moving
Princess Mary ran out to the porch, down the flower-bordered path, and

running up the avenue with frightened faces.
his voice which reached her from the garden. Suddenly several men came
armed peasants and domestic serfs. She sat by the window listening to
his uniform wearing all his orders and go down the garden to review his
was already at the door. Princess Mary saw him walk out of the house in
full uniform and prepared to visit the commander in chief. His caleche
The morning after little Nicholas had left, the old prince donned his

had not gone away.
that in the depth of his soul he was glad she was remaining at home and
not to let him see her cheered Princess Mary. She knew it was a proof
she had feared, order her to be carried away by force but only told her
warned her not to dare to let him see her. The fact that he did not, as
to him. He declared that he did not wish to remember her existence and
his study telling her that if she did not go away it was all the same
it the object of her life to poison his existence, and he drove her from
his quarrel with his son, had harbored nasty suspicions of him, making
her. Trying to convict her, he told her she had worn him out, had caused
terrible storm. He repeated every injustice he had ever inflicted on
him. She refused to go away and her father's fury broke over her in a
leave him alone and for the first time in her life ventured to disobey
sleepless activity after his previous apathy, could not bring herself to
thence to Moscow. Princess Mary, alarmed by her father's feverish and
the princess and Dessalles with the little prince to Bogucharovo and
But while himself remaining, he gave instructions for the departure of

announced to his household that he would remain at Bald Hills.
one of Russia's oldest generals would be captured or killed, and he
discretion to take measures or not for the defense of Bald Hills, where
last extremity and to defend it, leaving to the commander in chief's
chief informing him that he had resolved to remain at Bald Hills to the
up from the villages and armed, and wrote a letter to the commander in
seemed to awake as from a dream. He ordered the militiamen to be called
After the return of Alpatych from Smolensk the old prince suddenly

supposed.
Princess Mary was not in Moscow and out of danger as Prince Andrew


CHAPTER VIII





took him along with him.
neighboring villages with Ilyin; he let Lavrushka have another horse and
at Yankovo. Rostov was just mounting to go for a ride round the
detachment and by evening found his master, Nicholas Rostov, quartered
found the Cossacks, inquired for the regiment operating with Platov's
not wish to relate because it seemed to him not worth telling. He
he meant to relate to his comrades. What had really taken place he did
our outposts, inventing on the way all that had not taken place but that
imagination, and "the bird restored to its native fields" galloped to
Napoleon rode on, dreaming of the Moscow that so appealed to his

its native fields."
making the Cossack a present, had him set free like a bird restored to
replaced by a naive and silent feeling of admiration. Napoleon, after
the steppes of the East. All his loquacity was suddenly arrested and
on, his eyes fixed on the conqueror whose fame had reached him across
"the Cossack, seized by amazement, did not utter another word, but rode
whipped. "As soon as Napoleon's interpreter had spoken," says Thiers,
wide, and assumed the expression he usually put on when taken to be
promptly pretended to be astonished and awe-struck, opened his eyes
Napoleon expected him to be frightened, to gratify his new masters
Lavrushka, understanding that this was done to perplex him and that

The fact was accordingly conveyed to Lavrushka.


    * "Child of the Don."


Don. *
immortally victorious name on the Pyramids, would affect this enfant du
talking to the Emperor himself, to that very Emperor who had written his
turned to Berthier and said he wished to see how the news that he was
smile," says Thiers. After riding a few paces in silence, Napoleon
Bonaparte smiled. "The young Cossack made his mighty interlocutor
The interpreter translated these words without the last phrase, and

this bit of boastful patriotism slipped out at the end.
the world, but we are a different matter..."--without knowing why or how
"We know that you have Bonaparte and that he has beaten everybody in

know who Napoleon was, added:
Lavrushka noticed this and to entertain him further, pretending not to

to be repeated.
though he was evidently in high good humor, and he ordered these words
win, but if later, God knows what will happen." Napoleon did not smile,
"If a battle takes place within the next three days the French will
Lelorgne d'Ideville smilingly interpreted this speech to Napoleon thus:

then that same battle will not soon be over."
will win. That's right. But if three days pass, then after that, well,
"It's like this," he said thoughtfully, "if there's a battle soon, yours

in everything, so he frowned and did not answer immediately.
In this question he saw subtle cunning, as men of his type see cunning

his eyes and considered.
Russians thought they would beat Bonaparte or not, Lavrushka screwed up
orderlies. Much of it true. But when Napoleon asked him whether the
So he rattled on, telling all the gossip he had heard among the

or Napoleon could deprive him of.
rods, would have done, for he had nothing that either the sergeant major
no more intimidate him than Rostov's, or a sergeant major's with the
He knew very well that this was Napoleon, but Napoleon's presence could

did his utmost to gain his new master's favor.
and surely recognized, Lavrushka was not in the least abashed but merely
Finding himself in the company of Napoleon, whose identity he had easily

prompted by vanity and pettiness.
and are keen at guessing their master's baser impulses, especially those
cunning way, are ready to render any sort of service to their master,
sorts of things, consider it necessary to do everything in a mean and
Lavrushka was one of those coarse, bare-faced lackeys who have seen all
chickens, where he engaged in looting till the French took him prisoner.
dinnerless, had been whipped and sent to the village in quest of
reality Lavrushka, having got drunk the day before and left his master
incidents of the war," says Thiers, narrating this episode. In
the presence of a monarch, talked with extreme familiarity of the
appearance had nothing about it that would reveal to an Oriental mind
"The Cossack, not knowing in what company he was, for Napoleon's plain

"Yes, a Cossack, your Honor."

"You are a Cossack?"

by his side and began questioning him.
cavalry saddle, with a merry, and tipsy face. Napoleon told him to ride
to Rostov, rode up to Napoleon in an orderly's jacket and on a French
off, and an hour later, Lavrushka, the serf Denisov had handed over
man to him. He wished to talk to him himself. Several adjutants galloped
Napoleon smiled and told them to give the Cossack a horse and bring the

is a very shrewd and garrulous fellow."
the main army and that Kutuzov has been appointed commander in chief. He
"One of Platov's Cossacks says that Platov's corps is joining up with

"Well?" asked Napoleon.


     innumerable churches shaped like Chinese pagodas."
     sacred city of Alexander's people, Moscow with its
     * "Moscow, the Asiatic capital of this great empire, the


and reined in his horse with an amused expression.
Lelorgne d'Ideville, an interpreter, he overtook Napoleon at a gallop
question a Russian prisoner captured by the cavalry. Followed by
and aides-de-camp. Berthier, his chief of staff, dropped behind to
bobtailed ambler accompanied by his Guards, his bodyguard, his pages,
On the march from Vyazma to Tsarevo-Zaymishche he rode his light bay
pagodes chinoises, * this Moscow gave Napoleon's imagination no rest.
peuples d'Alexandre, Moscou avec ses innombrables eglises en forme de
Moscou, la capitale asiatique de ce grand empire, la ville sacree des

ordered a direct advance on Moscow.
they reached Borodino, seventy miles from Moscow. From Vyazma Napoleon
of innumerable circumstances the Russians could not give battle till
then at Tsarevo-Zaymishche, but it happened that owing to a conjunction
After Smolensk Napoleon sought a battle beyond Dorogobuzh at Vyazma, and

conflicts of various wills!
manipulates lifeless objects, but everything results from innumerable
occurs under certain limits of time, and where it is not one will that
of it. How much more complex than this is the game of war, which
mistake to which he pays attention, because his opponent took advantage
mistakes and that none of his moves were perfect. He only notices the
opening, but forgets that at each stage of the game there were similar
resulted from a mistake he made and looks for that mistake in the
chessplayer having lost a game is sincerely convinced that his loss
the law of reciprocity comes in, confusing the whole matter. A good
all the past as a preparation for events that subsequently occur,
Russian commanders. Here besides the law of retrospection, which regards
who maintain that Napoleon was drawn to Moscow by the skill of the
events in the will of one man; he is as right as the Russian historians
is as right as other historians who look for the explanation of historic
hero says that he was drawn to the walls of Moscow against his will. He
historian Thiers, like other of his historians, trying to justify his
Smolensk and were drawing nearer and nearer to Moscow. Napoleon's
While this was taking place in Petersburg the French had already passed


CHAPTER VII





from him and glanced sadly at one another with a sigh at his naivete.
As soon as he said this both Prince Vasili and Anna Pavlovna turned away

that the sovereign himself should not be with the army."
possess courtly tact, "that his excellency made it an express condition
"They even say," remarked the "man of great merit" who did not yet

"Oh, a very wise man is Prince Kutuzov! I have known him a long time!"

reward him if he does right."
Kutuzov to the Emperor. "I can neither punish him if he does wrong nor
And Prince Vasili repeated the words supposed to have been spoken by

Emperor?"
Tsarevich should not be with the army. Do you know what he said to the
"I know for a fact that Kutuzov made it an absolute condition that the

whisper:
Understanding at once to whom she alluded, Prince Vasili said in a

allow anyone to put a spoke in his wheel," observed Anna Pavlovna.
"God grant only that Prince Kutuzov assumes real power and does not

"for our sovereign appreciated him so highly before."
himself, but was adored by everybody. "No, that's impossible," said he,
Kutuzov to anyone; in his opinion Kutuzov was not only admirable
"Oh, no, no!" warmly rejoined Prince Vasili, who would not now yield

"Perhaps the heart took no part in that speech," said Anna Pavlovna.

Kutuzov: 'Your Emperor and the Fatherland award you this honor.'"
They say he blushed like a girl to whom Joconde is read, when he said to
"It is said that the Emperor was reluctant to give Kutuzov those powers.

this question, observed:
wishing to flatter Anna Pavlovna by defending her former position on
The "man of great merit," who was still a novice in court circles,

"God grant it! God grant it!" said Anna Pavlovna.

before. He is a second autocrat," he concluded with a victorious smile.
the armies and the whole region--powers no commander in chief ever had
went on, "is that our sovereign has given him full powers over all
"He sees well enough," he added. "And what I am so pleased about," he

was wont to dispose of all difficulties.
deep voice and with a slight cough--the voice and cough with which he
"Eh? Nonsense! He sees well enough," said Prince Vasili rapidly, in a

his own words.
"But, Prince, they say he is blind!" said he, reminding Prince Vasili of

news with delight, he could not resist the temptation.
drawing room, and also to Anna Pavlovna herself who had received the
opinion. Though this was impolite to Prince Vasili in Anna Pavlovna's
director, could not refrain from reminding Prince Vasili of his former
The "man of great merit," despite his desire to obtain the post of

everyone in the drawing room.
we have a man!" said he, glancing sternly and significantly round at
All dissensions are at an end! I am so glad, so delighted! At last
"Well, have you heard the great news? Prince Kutuzov is field marshal!

air of a happy conqueror who has attained the object of his desires.
establishments for young ladies. Prince Vasili entered the room with the
because he wanted to be appointed director of one of the educational
"man of great merit." The latter was very attentive to Anna Pavlovna
On the ninth of August Prince Vasili at Anna Pavlovna's again met the

occupied by them.
in chief with full powers over the armies and over the whole region
commander in chief. That same day Kutuzov was appointed commander
after a short deliberation they agreed to advise his appointment as
members of the committee were aware of the Emperor's dislike of Kutuzov,
our failures were due to a want of unity in the command and though the
the progress of the war. This committee came to the conclusion that
Saltykov, Arakcheev, Vyazmitinov, Lopukhin, and Kochubey met to consider
it. But on the eighth of August a committee, consisting of Field Marshal
continued to be correct though he was not now in any hurry to express
indicate a wish to get rid of him, and therefore Prince Vasili's opinion
twenty-ninth of July Kutuzov received the title of Prince. This might
This was quite correct on the twenty-fourth of July. But on the

No one replied to his remarks.

anything. To play blindman's bluff? He can't see at all!"
man, positively blind? A fine idea to have a blind general! He can't see
general, but at a time like this how they appoint a decrepit, blind old
he made for himself at Bucharest! I don't speak of his capacity as a
asleep at a council, and has the very worst morals! A good reputation
they make a man commander in chief who cannot mount a horse, who drops
preside at that tribunal? He will get nothing for his pains! How could
it suitable that Count Kutuzov, the oldest general in Russia, should
be ecstatic about it. But he retrieved his mistake at once. "Now, is
one had to ridicule the Moscow enthusiasm, at Anna Pavlovna's one had to
Prince Vasili continued, forgetting for a moment that though at Helene's
all because we want to ape the foolish enthusiasm of those Muscovites,"
"It's all this mania for opposition," he went on. "And who for? It is

not listen to me.
election as chief of the militia would not please the Emperor. They did
Vasili interrupted, "but they did not listen to me. I told them his
"I have talked and talked at the Assembly of the Nobility," Prince

nothing but cause the Emperor annoyance.
Anna Pavlovna remarked with a melancholy smile that Kutuzov had done

to satisfy all requirements.
Treasury, cautiously ventured to suggest that Kutuzov would be the man
Petersburg militia, presiding over the enrollment of recruits at the
how he had that day seen Kutuzov, the newly chosen chief of the
visitors, usually spoken of as "a man of great merit," having described
undecided as to who ought to be appointed commander in chief. One of the
the war at Anna Pavlovna's severely condemned Barclay de Tolly, but was
Soon after the Emperor's return Prince Vasili in a conversation about

vice versa.
and said at Helene's what he should have said at Anna Pavlovna's and
in his constant comings and goings between the two camps became confused
Anna Pavlovna" as well as his daughter's "diplomatic salon," and often
connecting link between these two circles. He visited his "good friend
Prince Vasili, who still occupied his former important posts, formed a
and spoke of it as Plutarch speaks of the deeds of the ancients.
Anna Pavlovna's circle on the contrary was enraptured by this enthusiasm

ridiculed sarcastically and very cleverly, though with much caution.
reached Petersburg simultaneously with the Emperor's return--was
be settled. In that circle the Moscow enthusiasm--news of which had
visit--that not by gunpowder but by those who invented it would matters
at home in Helene's house, which every clever man was obliged to
view prevailed expressed by Bilibin--who now in Petersburg was quite
of formal demonstrations which would very soon end in peace, and the
Empress. In Helene's circle the war in general was regarded as a series
the girls' educational establishments under the patronage of the Dowager
who advised hurried preparations for a removal to Kazan of the court and
conciliation were discussed. In that circle they discountenanced those
enemy and of the war were contradicted and all Napoleon's attempts at
circle of Helene and Rumyantsev the reports of the cruelty of the
the reports most flattering to our army were circulated. In the French
army corps. The progress of the war was eagerly followed, and only
maintain the French troupe was costing the government as much as a whole
effect that one ought not to go to the French theater and that to
deep-rooted legitimists, and patriotic views were expressed to the
In Anna Pavlovna's circle only those Frenchmen were admitted who were
of hostility to one another, but each camp retained its own tendency.
excitement in these conflicting salon circles and some demonstrations
Of late, since the Emperor's return from the army, there had been some

terminated by peace.
with France, a rupture which, according to them, ought to be promptly
of the "great nation" and the "great man," and regretted our rupture
intelligent woman, they talked with the same ecstasy in 1812 as in 1808
himself honored with his visits, regarding Helene as a remarkably
Pavlovna was the representative. And in Helene's salon, which Rumyantsev
to cause unpleasantness and anxiety to the court circle of which Anna
European sovereigns a malicious conspiracy, the sole object of which was
as before and saw in them and in the subservience shown to him by the
Pavlovna's they talked with perplexity of Bonaparte's successes just
they had been--the one seven and the other five years before. At Anna
them again, but the salons of Anna Pavlovna and Helene remained just as
again quarreled with Bonaparte and had made constitutions and unmade
the salons is unchanging. Since the year 1805 we had made peace and had
Petersburg life, and especially the life of its salons. That life of
from village, country, provincial, or even Moscow life--we may allot
and those in which form prevails. To the latter--as distinguished
life one may discriminate between those in which substance prevails
Among the innumerable categories applicable to the phenomena of human


CHAPTER VI





bewails it and calls down curses upon him...
a coward, dense, dilatory, and has all bad qualities. The whole army
are we afraid? I am not to blame that the Minister is vacillating,
hatred and shame in all our subjects? What are we scared at and of whom
good and gallant Fatherland to such rabble and implanting feelings of
Russia, say to our being so frightened, and why are we abandoning our
not have happened. Tell me, for God's sake, what will Russia, our mother
hospital more than fifteen thousand men, and had we attacked this would
Consider that on our retreat we have lost by fatigue and left in the
sorry for the Emperor that he entrusts our fine army to such as he.
painful, but, loving my benefactor and sovereign, I submit. Only I am
to him but obey him like a corporal, though I am his senior. This is
than ours, and he is always advising the Minister. I am not merely civil
Imperial aide-de-camp Wolzogen. He is said to be more Napoleon's man
in a most masterly way. The whole army feels great suspicion of the
militia. For the Minister is leading these visitors after him to Moscow
desires the ruin of us all. So I write you frankly: call out the
Minister should command the army, does not love our sovereign and
that the man who advocates the conclusion of a peace, and that the
am really frantic with vexation; forgive my writing boldly. It is clear
execrable, yet to him is entrusted the fate of our whole country.... I
be good as a Minister, but as a general he is not merely bad but
One man ought to be in command, and not two. Your Minister may perhaps

Russia can and as long as there are men able to stand...
to wear the uniform. If it has come to this--we must fight as long as
would set all Russia against you and every one of us would feel ashamed
should make peace after all our sacrifices and such insane retreats! You
There is a rumor that you are thinking of peace. God forbid that you

way, or we may soon bring the enemy to Moscow...
instructions that he was retiring that night. We cannot fight in this
or horses. He gave me his word he would not retreat, but suddenly sent
have had to retire of their own accord, for they had no water for men
What would it have cost him to hold out for another two days? They would

thousand, that's war! But the enemy has lost masses...
four thousand, not more, and not even that; but even were they ten
he reports that our losses were great, it is not true; perhaps about
on our army, and as for him, he ought, it seems to me, not to live. If
would not hold out even for fourteen hours. It is disgraceful, a stain
men I held the enemy at bay for thirty-five hours and beat him; but he
troops fought, and are fighting, as never before. With fifteen thousand
might have lost half his army but could not have taken Smolensk. Our
to you on my honor that Napoleon was in such a fix as never before and
and finally wrote him, but nothing would induce him to consent. I swear
wantonly abandoned. I, for my part, begged him personally most urgently
the whole army is in despair that this most important place has been
abandonment of Smolensk to the enemy. It is pitiable and sad, and
I expect the Minister (Barclay de Tolly) has already reported the

word in it to the best of his ability.)
his letter would be read by the Emperor, and therefore weighed every
Dear Count Alexis Andreevich--(He was writing to Arakcheev but knew that


quarters at Mikhaylovna on the Smolensk road:
On the seventh of August Prince Bagration wrote as follows from his


immense number of bodies splashing about in the dirty pond.
and horror he did not himself understand, aroused by the sight of that
naked body and shuddered, not from cold but from a sense of disgust
"Flesh, bodies, cannon fodder!" he thought, and he looked at his own

would rather wash himself with water in the barn.
to clear out that the prince could hardly stop them. He decided that he
"What prince? Ours?" said many voices, and the men were in such haste

"The prince wants to bathe."

undressed, ran off to clear the men out of the pond.
"We'll clear it out for you in a minute," said Timokhin, and, still

"It's dirty," replied Prince Andrew, making a grimace.

"It's very nice, your excellency! Wouldn't you like to?" said he.

the prince, but made up his mind to address him nevertheless.
standing on the dam wiping himself with a towel, felt confused at seeing
white, muscular flesh. The officer, Timokhin, with his red little nose,
Everywhere on the bank, on the dam, and in the pond, there was healthy,

yelling, and puffing.
blackened to the wrists. There were sounds of men slapping one another,
with satisfaction as he poured the water over his head with hands
waist in the water joyfully wriggling his muscular figure and snorted
a dark noncommissioned officer who was always shaggy, stood up to his
stepped back to get a good run, and plunged into the water; another,
knew and who had a strap round the calf of one leg, crossed himself,
One fair-haired young soldier of the third company, whom Prince Andrew

it specially pathetic.
can, and the suggestion of merriment in that floundering mass rendered
floundered about in that dirty pool like carp stuffed into a watering
about in it. All this naked white human flesh, laughing and shrieking,
of soldiers with brick-red hands, necks, and faces, who were splashing
foot, flooding the dam, because it was full of the naked white bodies
laughter. The small, muddy, green pond had risen visibly more than a
he glanced round at the pool from whence came sounds of shrieks and
pond. He longed to get into that water, however dirty it might be, and
crossed the dam Prince Andrew smelled the ooze and freshness of the
of talk that came from the resting troops. There was no wind. As he
through his black coat. The dust always hung motionless above the buzz
a red ball through the dust, burned and scorched his back intolerably
place by the dam of a small pond. It was past one o'clock. The sun,
he again came out on the road and overtook his regiment at its halting
highroad along which the troops were moving. But not far from Bald Hills
Prince Andrew was somewhat refreshed by having ridden off the dusty

feet scampered merrily and quickly across the meadow grass.
little voices and holding up their skirts, their bare little sunburned
they sprang from their ambush and, chirruping something in their shrill
could not resist looking at them once more. Believing their danger past,
Prince Andrew shared their wish for the success of their enterprise. He
thing--to carry away and eat those green plums without being caught--and
that occupied him. Evidently these girls passionately desired one
interests entirely aloof from his own and just as legitimate as those
when, seeing these girls, he realized the existence of other human
desire to do so. A new sensation of comfort and relief came over him
little girl, was afraid of looking at her, and yet felt an irresistible
see that they had been observed. He was sorry for the pretty frightened
Prince Andrew turned away with startled haste, unwilling to let them

green plums they had dropped.
hand and hid with her behind a birch tree, not stopping to pick up some
the elder one with frightened look clutched her younger companion by the
the trees there, came upon Prince Andrew. On seeing the young master,
from the hot house carrying in their skirts plums they had plucked from
which he was making the bast shoe, and two little girls, running out
impassive on the face of a loved one who is dead, tapping the last on
The old man was still sitting in the ornamental garden, like a fly

avenue at a gallop.
disengaging himself, the prince spurred his horse and rode down the
Alpatych clung to Prince Andrew's leg and burst into sobs. Gently

Ryazan estate or to the one near Moscow."
must go away too, take away what you can and tell the serfs to go to the
"Well, good-by!" said Prince Andrew, bending over to Alpatych. "You

the prince.
A group of bareheaded peasants was approaching across the meadow toward

"He is my refuge! His will be done!" he exclaimed.

with a solemn gesture raised his arm.
Alpatych turned his face to Prince Andrew, looked at him, and suddenly

occupies the place?" asked Prince Andrew.
"Well, and what are you going to do? Will you stay here if the enemy

commanding officer, to hand in a complaint about it."
the night, dragoons mostly. I took down the name and rank of their
impossible to prevent it. Three regiments have been here and spent
"If you noticed some disorder in the garden," said Alpatych, "it was

"Yes, let them have it," replied Prince Andrew.

were and only asked them to allay his grief.
his face that the old man himself understood how untimely such questions
old man's bald head shining in the sun and seeing by the expression on
"What am I to say to him?" thought Prince Andrew, looking down on the

We have still six hundred quarters left," he inquired.
"Am I to let the troops have the oats, and to take a receipt for them?

into details concerning the estate management, asking for instructions.
Bogucharovo, replied that they had left on the seventh and again went
Alpatych, understanding the question to refer to their departure for

Moscow.
"When did my father and sister leave?" meaning when did they leave for

Without waiting to hear him out, Prince Andrew asked:

had gone to Bogucharovo, only a few remained.
mown down while still green. The peasants were ruined; some of them too
a remarkable crop that year, had been commandeered by the troops and
away. The hay and the spring corn, of which Alpatych said there had been
removed to Bogucharovo. Seventy quarters of grain had also been carted
on the position of affairs. Everything precious and valuable had been
Then, vexed at his own weakness, he turned away and began to report

began weeping and kissing Prince Andrew's knee.
his nose, buttoning his coat, and, hastily stepping up, without a word
hearing that Prince Andrew had come, he went out with his spectacles on
Bald Hills and was sitting indoors reading the Lives of the Saints. On
into the house. Alpatych, having sent his family away, was alone at
one window which was open. A little serf boy, seeing Prince Andrew, ran
the house among the rosebushes. The shutters were all closed, except at
been cut down and a piebald mare and her foal were wandering in front of
Prince Andrew rode up to the house. Several limes in the old garden had

bast were hanging on the broken and withered branch of a magnolia.
the seat the old prince used to like to sit on, and beside him strips of
He was deaf and did not hear Prince Andrew ride up. He was sitting on

shoe.
seen at the gate was sitting on a green garden seat, plaiting a bast
the fruit. An old peasant whom Prince Andrew in his childhood had often
fence was broken and branches of the plum trees had been torn off with
of the hothouse to the ornamental garden, he saw that the carved garden
Taras the gardener, but no one replied. Having gone round the corner
trees in tubs some were overturned and others dried up. He called for
up to the hothouse; some of the glass panes were broken, and of the
horses and calves were straying in the English park. Prince Andrew rode
stood open. Grass had already begun to grow on the garden paths, and
lodge. No one at the stone entrance gates of the drive and the door
floating on its side in the middle of the pond. He rode to the keeper's
the little washing wharf, torn from its place and half submerged, was
beetles, Prince Andrew noticed that there was not a soul about and that
of women chattering as they rinsed their linen or beat it with wooden
childhood. Riding past the pond where there used always to be dozens
march, rode to his father's estate where he had been born and spent his
He ordered his horse to be saddled and, leaving his regiment on the

he must ride there.
Andrew with a characteristic desire to foment his own grief decided that
Moscow; and though there was nothing for him to do at Bald Hills, Prince
he had received news that his father, son, and sister had left for
think about entirely apart from general questions. Two days previously
But despite this, thanks to his regiment, Prince Andrew had something to
pillage his dearly beloved Bald Hills which he had built and peopled.
and after his sick father had had to flee to Moscow, abandoning to
of August (he considered that it could and should have been defended)
Prince Andrew, especially after the abandonment of Smolensk on the sixth
In truth everything presented itself in a dark and gloomy light to

to trying to do his duty and not to be unfair.
him, and so in his relations with that former circle he confined himself
contemptuous. Everything that reminded him of his past was repugnant to
staff, he bristled up immediately and grew spiteful, ironical, and
soon as he came across a former acquaintance or anyone from the
to a different world and who could not know and understand his past. As
regiment, to Timokhin and the like--people quite new to him, belonging
of him and loved him. But he was kind and gentle only to those of his
officers. In the regiment they called him "our prince," were proud
affairs of his regiment and was considerate and kind to his men and
the foe made him forget his own sorrow. He was entirely devoted to the
abandonment made an epoch in his life. A novel feeling of anger against
and giving orders, engrossed him. The burning of Smolensk and its
regiment, the welfare of the men and the necessity of receiving
Prince Andrew was in command of a regiment, and the management of that

and fought for the water and drank it down to the mud.
mouths. When they passed through a village they all rushed to the wells
atmosphere. They marched with handkerchiefs tied over their noses and
sky. There was no wind, and the men choked in that motionless
eye at the sun, which showed like a huge crimson ball in the unclouded
through the screen of its hot fine particles one could look with naked
road. The higher the sun rose the higher rose that cloud of dust, and
worst of all in the lungs of the men and beasts as they moved along that
cloud over the troops, settling in eyes, ears, hair, and nostrils, and
was kneaded by the feet and wheels, while the rest rose and hung like a
choking, hot dust that never cooled even at night. Some of this dust
hubs of the wheels, and the infantry sank ankle-deep in that soft,
wagons moved noiselessly through the deep dust that rose to the very
deep. As soon as day dawned the march began. The artillery and baggage
dew was imperceptible on the sandy dust churned up more than six inches
freshness even at night or when the road passed through the forest; the
road, the highroad along which the troops marched, there was no such
in the forests while the dew lasted was there any freshness. But on the
hunger, finding no food on the sun-parched meadows. Only at night and
scorched and shed its grain. The marshes dried up. The cattle lowed from
Heavy night dews alone refreshed the earth. The unreaped corn was
evening the sky cleared again and the sun set in reddish-brown mist.
floated across the sky and occasionally veiled the sun, but toward
drought had continued for more than three weeks. Each day fleecy clouds
along the highroad past the avenue leading to Bald Hills. Heat and
On the tenth of August the regiment Prince Andrew commanded was marching
From Smolensk the troops continued to retreat, followed by the enemy.


CHAPTER V





him, he touched his horse and rode down the side street.
have told you"; and not replying a word to Berg who was now mute beside
"Well then," continued Prince Andrew to Alpatych, "report to them as I

"That's the owner himself," cried several voices.

"It's fine, lads! Now it's raging... It's fine!"

The man in the frieze coat raised his arms and shouted:

exhausted faces of the spectators.
around. The flames flared up again, lighting the animated, delighted,
of the barn, the burning grain in which diffused a cakelike aroma all
"Ou-rou-rou!" yelled the crowd, echoing the crash of the collapsing roof

terrible crash and something huge collapsed.
wreaths of black smoke rolled from under the roof. There was another
Something cracked in the flames. The fire died down for a moment and

please excuse me," he went on apologetically.
I have to obey orders, because I always do obey exactly.... You must
"Prince," said Berg, recognizing Prince Andrew, "I only spoke because

throw up everything and come myself to Bald Hills."
tenth I don't receive news that they have all got away I shall have to
"So tell them that I shall await a reply till the tenth, and if by the

Alpatych.
Prince Andrew looked at him and without replying went on speaking to

as Berg said, "very agreeable and well en evidence."
commander of the left flank of the infantry of the first army, a place,
it!" shouted Berg, who was now assistant to the chief of staff of the
presence and you stand by! What does this mean? You will answer for
in a voice familiar to Prince Andrew. "Houses are set on fire in your
"You are a colonel?" shouted the chief of staff with a German accent,

followed by a suite galloped up to him.
he had had time to finish giving these instructions, a chief of staff
boy's tutor, and how and where to let him know immediately. Before
to arrange for departure of the prince, the princess, his son, and the
Having written this and given the paper to Alpatych, he told him how


you will start. Send by special messenger to Usvyazh."
within a week. Set off immediately for Moscow. Let me know at once when
"Smolensk is being abandoned. Bald Hills will be occupied by the enemy


began writing in pencil on a page he tore out. He wrote to his sister:
Prince Andrew without replying took out a notebook and raising his knee

"Are we really quite lost, your excellency?" he asked again.

was to get away.
worn face. Alpatych told how he had been sent there and how difficult it
At that moment the flames flared up and showed his young master's pale

"Why are you here?" Prince Andrew repeated.

we really lost? Master!..."
"Your... your excellency," stammered Alpatych and broke into sobs. "Are

"Why are you here?" he asked.

at Alpatych from the back of the crowd.
Prince Andrew in his riding cloak, mounted on a black horse, was looking

recognizing the voice of his young prince.
"Mercy on us! Your excellency!" answered Alpatych, immediately

"Alpatych!" a familiar voice suddenly hailed the old man.

watched for it too.
crowd was evidently watching for the roof to fall in, and Alpatych
in, the wooden roof was collapsing, and the rafters were alight. The
blazing briskly. The walls were all on fire and the back wall had fallen
Alpatych went up to a large crowd standing before a high barn which was

street, while others carried bundles of hay.
man in a frieze coat dragging burning beams into another yard across the
rushing backwards and forwards near it, and he saw two of them and a
into the side street to look at the fire. Soldiers were continually
would not be able to move on for some time, Alpatych got down and turned
the flames talking and shouting could be heard. Seeing that his trap
flitted about before the fire, and through the incessant crackling of
the faces of the people crowding at the crossroads. Black figures
suddenly flared up again brightly, lighting up with strange distinctness
out. The flames now died down and were lost in the black smoke, now
house and some shops were on fire. This fire was already burning itself
In a side street near the crossroads where the vehicles had stopped, a
moving amid the rows of soldiers and of other vehicles, had to stop.
Alpatych's cart and that of the innkeeper's wife, which were slowly
amid the smoke that screened it. On the sloping descent to the Dnieper
Night had come. There were stars in the sky and the new moon shone out

it was possible to drive out.
Ferapontov's wife and children were also sitting in a cart waiting till
it completely, so that Alpatych could not pass out and had to wait.
Soldiers were passing in a constant stream along the street blocking

myself. We're done for!..." and Ferapontov ran into the yard.
"Russia is done for!" he cried. "Alpatych, I'll set the place on fire

filling their bags. On seeing Alpatych, Ferapontov turned to him:
Some of the soldiers were frightened and ran away, others went on

some bags of flour himself and throwing them into the street.
"Loot everything, lads! Don't let those devils get it!" he cried, taking

and laughter:
them, but suddenly stopped and, clutching at his hair, burst into sobs
and entered his shop. On seeing the soldiers he was about to shout at
knapsacks with flour and sunflower seeds. Just then Ferapontov returned
Ferapontov's open shop, talking loudly and filling their bags and
As Alpatych was driving out of the gate he saw some ten soldiers in

traces of their horses with trembling hands.
Inside the shed Alpatych and the coachman arranged the tangled reins and
the same kind of lamentation was heard from other parts of the street.
of which could be seen in the failing twilight--and as if in reply
began to wail as they looked at the fires--the smoke and even the flames
and the coachman. The women, who had been silent till then, suddenly
set off. Ferapontov's whole household came out too, following Alpatych
Alpatych went back to the house, called the coachman, and told him to

"I'll teach you to run into the yards!"

get away!" and then, turning to the soldiers, shouted:
Noticing him, an officer said: "The town is being abandoned. Get away,

street.
to the gate. A retreating regiment, thronging and hurrying, blocked the
ran into Ferapontov's yard before Alpatych's eyes. Alpatych went out
different directions like ants from a ruined ant-hill. Several of them
the streets soldiers in various uniforms walked or ran confusedly in
black curling clouds of smoke rose and spread from the fires. Through
widespread everywhere. The cook's moans had now subsided. On two sides
the moaning, the distant cries, and the crackle of fires which seemed
seemed to reign over the town, broken only by the rustle of footsteps,
shone strangely. Now that the terrible din of the guns had ceased a hush
clouded with smoke, through which, high up, the sickle of the new moon
and stopped in the doorway. The evening sky that had been so clear was
Toward dusk the cannonade began to subside. Alpatych left the cellar

wonder-working icon of Smolensk.
gone with others to the cathedral, whence they were fetching the
in the street. A shopman who entered told her that her husband had
in a pathetic whisper what had become of her husband who had remained
rocked and hushed her baby and when anyone came into the cellar asked
rose above the other sounds, did not cease for a moment. The mistress
whistling of projectiles, and the piteous moaning of the cook, which
porter were all sitting in the cellar, listening. The roar of guns, the
Alpatych, his coachman, Ferapontov's wife and children and the house
thigh broken by a shell splinter, had been carried into the kitchen.
Five minutes later no one remained in the street. The cook, with her

souls!..."
"Oh-h-h! Dear souls, dear kind souls! Don't let me die! My good

wailing.
with pale faces round the cook. The loudest sound in that crowd was her
sides, the frightened baby began to cry, and people crowded silently
At that moment the pitiful wailing of women was heard from different

cook.
"Scoundrel, what are you doing?" shouted the innkeeper, rushing to the

street, something exploded, and the street was shrouded in smoke.
downwards like a little bird; a flame flashed in the middle of the
Once more something whistled, but this time quite close, swooping

back, pulling down her tucked-up skirt.
"What marvels!" she exclaimed, but hearing her master's voice she turned

corner to listen to what was being said.
with sleeves rolled up, swinging her bare elbows, had stepped to the
"What are you staring at?" he shouted to the cook, who in her red skirt,

his trap. The innkeeper stood at the gate.
but not one fell close by, they all flew over. Alpatych was getting into
intermittent whistle of a shell, flew over people's heads incessantly,
the swift sinister whistle of a cannon ball, now with the agreeable
on a house close to them. Meanwhile still more projectiles, now with
Others joined those men and stopped and told how cannon balls had fallen

aside, or it would have wiped you out!"
"That's grand, it bucks one up!" laughed the first. "Lucky you jumped

"Routed up the earth like a pig," said another.

splinters!"
"What force!" remarked one. "Knocked the roof and ceiling all to

their heads. Several people came round the corner talking eagerly.
everyone tried to get a glimpse of the projectiles as they flew over
The cook and a shop assistant came to the gate. With lively curiosity

listening to the sounds and looking in silence at the people.
the shed, became quiet and with the baby in her arms went to the gate,
curiosity. Ferapontov's wife, who till then had not ceased wailing under
At first the noise of the falling bombs and shells only aroused

this bombardment.
up after four o'clock. The people did not at once realize the meaning of
being bombarded by a hundred and thirty guns which Napoleon had ordered
town and attracted little attention from the inhabitants. The town was
were hardly heard in comparison with the noise of the firing outside the
cannon balls and bursting shells falling on the town. But these sounds
bridge. From different sides came whistling sounds and the thud of
He went out into the street: two men were running past toward the

roar that set the windows rattling.
and thud was heard, followed by a boom of cannon blending into a dull
and went to the door. Suddenly the strange sound of a far-off whistling
other half brightly lit by the sun. Alpatych looked out of the window
It was by now late in the afternoon. Half the street was in shadow, the

bells was heard from the gateway as a little trap passed out.
in, and settled up with the innkeeper. The noise of wheels, hoofs, and
Alpatych collected his parcels, handed them to the coachman who had come

Marina and drowned some eighteen thousand in one day."
They say the other day Matthew Ivanych Platov drove them into the river
The orders were not to let them in. So we're in force, it seems....
his third cup of tea and getting up. "Ours must have got the best of it.
"Well, it seems to be getting quieter," remarked Ferapontov, finishing

harvesting.
tea talked of the price of corn, the crops, and the good weather for
While the horses were being harnessed Alpatych and Ferapontov over their

some tea?" he added.
Thursday--sold flour to the army at nine rubles a sack. Will you have
not Christians to ask it! Selivanov, now, did a good stroke last
to pay seven rubles a cartload to Dorogobuzh and I tell them they're
"With our business, how can we get away?" said Ferapontov. "We'd have

Alpatych replied that the Governor had not told him anything definite.

Ferapontov. "What has been decided?"
"We'll reckon up! Well, have you been to the Governor's?" asked

and asked how much he owed.
Alpatych, without answering or looking at his host, sorted his packages

"Going already?" said he.

opposite room.
waistcoat, smoothed his hair, yawned, and followed Alpatych into the
Ferapontov came out after her, but on seeing Alpatych adjusted his

at that moment and down the steps into the yard.
in her arms and her kerchief torn from her head, burst through the door
"You brute, you murderer!" screamed a thin, pale woman who, with a baby

he had left his purchases.
hear more went to the door of the room opposite the innkeeper's, where
At these words Alpatych nodded as if in approval, and not wishing to

her about so!"
gone, so why,' she says, 'don't we go?' And he began beating and pulling
'don't let me perish with my little children! Folks,' she says, 'are all
"She kept begging to go away. She's a woman! 'Take me away,' says she,

"What for?" asked Alpatych.

about so!..."
"He's done her to death. Killed the mistress!... Beat her... dragged her

just as Alpatych entered.
began running hither and thither in the passage like a frightened hen,
sobs of a woman, and the hoarse angry shouting of Ferapontov. The cook
From the host's room came the sounds of a child crying, the despairing
asleep. He woke him up, told him to harness, and went into the passage.
straight to the shed where his horses and trap were. The coachman was
Alpatych entered the innyard at a quicker pace than usual and went

barking in front of the harnessed horses.
wailing and lamenting as they said good-by. A small watchdog ran round
Loaded carts stood at the house next to Ferapontov's and women were
emerging from the gates of the yards and moving along the streets.
Carts piled high with household utensils, chairs, and cupboards kept

People were anxiously roaming about the streets.


Smolensk, 1812.)
(Instructions from Barclay de Tolly to Baron Asch, the civil governor of
those defended by two such brave armies may feel assured of victory."
you have a perfect right to reassure the inhabitants of Smolensk, for
warrior in our valiant ranks has perished. From this you will see that
shall have beaten back the enemies of our Fatherland, or till the last
compatriots of the province entrusted to your care till our efforts
22nd instant, and both armies with their united forces will defend our
our forces before Smolensk, which junction will be effected on the
the one side and Prince Bagration from the other are marching to unite
as yet and it is unlikely that it will be threatened with any. I from
"I assure you that the town of Smolensk is not in the slightest danger


to his inn. The paper handed to him by the Governor said this:
which had drawn nearer and was increasing in strength, Alpatych hurried
out of the Governor's room. Involuntarily listening now to the firing,
Eager, frightened, helpless glances were turned on Alpatych when he came

officer.
"Go," he said, nodding his head to Alpatych, and began questioning the

terror.
room and began to say something in French. The Governor's face expressed
But the Governor did not finish: a dusty perspiring officer ran into the

Moscow. I am just starting myself. Inform them..."
"Still, as the prince is unwell my advice is that they should go to
highest instructions--here..." and he handed a paper to Alpatych.
"Inform the prince and princess that I knew nothing: I acted on the

him:
A few minutes later the Governor received Alpatych and hurriedly said to

to him and took the letters.
announced with such solemnity and significance that the official turned
"To his Honor Baron Asch, from General-in-Chief Prince Bolkonski," he

and handed him two letters.
out addressed him, one hand placed in the breast of his buttoned coat,
addressed to him. Alpatych moved forward and next time the official came
again, evidently wishing to avoid the inquiring looks and questions
official with a cross hanging on his neck to follow him, and vanished
An official ran out, said some words to a merchant, called a stout
door of the Governor's room opened and they all rose and moved forward.
tradesmen, women, and officials, looking silently at one another. The
Alpatych swayed his head and went upstairs. In the waiting room were

descended the porch steps.
"They've brought us all to ruin... the brigands!" he repeated, and

the sounds of firing.
is again, do you hear?" said he, pointing in the direction whence came
things to such a pass that there are no carts or anything!... There it
"Yes, go and find out!" shouted the angry gentleman. "They've brought

me to inquire into the position of affairs," he added.
coat as he always did when he mentioned the prince.... "He has ordered
lifting his head and proudly thrusting his hand into the bosom of his
"To see the Governor by his excellency's order," answered Alpatych,

"Oh, Yakov Alpatych! What have you come for?"

police, and looking round he noticed Alpatych.
"What do I care? Let him hear! We're not dogs," said the ex-captain of

"Oh come, that's enough!" said the other.

brigands!..."
What sort of governors are they to do that? They ought to be hanged--the
your family and all the property... They've brought us to utter ruin!
though undone is but one,' as the proverb says, but with thirteen in
"It's no joke, you know! It's all very well if you're single. 'One man

ex-captain of police, was saying angrily:
porch he met two of the landed gentry, one of whom he knew. This man, an
people, Cossacks, and a traveling carriage of the Governor's. At the
In front of the Governor's house Alpatych found a large number of

one another.
everybody was asking what should be done, and all were trying to calm
about the army and about the enemy who was already attacking the town,
In the offices and shops and at the post office everyone was talking
shops, to government offices, to the post office, and to the Governor's.
service was being held in the churches as usual. Alpatych went to the
but cabs were still driving about, tradesmen stood at their shops, and
people were hurrying through the streets and there were many soldiers,
o'clock the booming of cannon was added to the sound of musketry. Many
From beyond the town firing had been heard since early morning. At eight

harvesting," thought Alpatych.
sunny morning and by eight o'clock it was already hot. "A good day for
donned a jacket he wore only in town and went out on business. It was a
All night long troops were moving past the inn. Next morning Alpatych

for his horses, and when he had had his tea he went to bed.
Yakov Alpatych heard without heeding. He asked for a samovar and for hay

asking three rubles for carting--it isn't Christian!"
given not to let them in, so that must be right. And the peasants are
"Just what I think, Yakov Alpatych. What I say is: orders have been

"Women's fuss, women's fuss!" said Alpatych.

"That's what I say. Folks are foolish! Always afraid of the French."

"Why are they leaving the town?" asked Alpatych.

have come to it," said he.
"You're welcome, Yakov Alpatych. Folks are leaving the town, but you

up to him.
before his shop which opened onto the street. On seeing Alpatych he went
Wearing a waistcoat over his cotton shirt, Ferapontov was standing

nose, similar knobs over his black frowning brows, and a round belly.
red-faced peasant in the forties, with thick lips, a broad knob of a
inn, and a corn dealer's shop in that province. He was a stout, dark,
wood from the prince, had begun to trade, and now had a house, an
Some thirty years ago Ferapontov, by Alpatych's advice, had bought a
where he had been in the habit of putting up for the last thirty years.
in the Gachina suburb across the Dnieper, at the inn kept by Ferapontov,
On reaching Smolensk on the evening of the fourth of August he put up

not interest and did not even exist for Alpatych.
Everything not connected with the execution of the prince's orders did
bounded by the will of the prince, and he never went beyond that limit.
All the interests of his life for more than thirty years had been

forgot it.
impressed Alpatych, but in thinking about his own business he soon
was being mown down by the soldiers, evidently for fodder. This fact
splendid field of oats in which a camp had been pitched and which
but these did not impress him. What struck him most was the sight of a
road. As he approached Smolensk he heard the sounds of distant firing,
Alpatych kept meeting and overtaking baggage trains and troops on the

evening on the fourth of August.
Having baited the horses twice on the way, he arrived at the town toward

prince's orders.
harvest, and asked himself whether he had not forgotten any of the
already being reaped, made his calculations as to the sowing and the
of corn, scrutinized the strips of ryefield which here and there were
As he went along he looked with pleasure at the year's splendid crop

being plowed a second time.
still-green, thickly growing oats, and at other quite black fields just
on his journey, looking round at the fields of yellow rye and the
"Women, women! Women's fuss!" muttered Alpatych to himself and started

enemy.
think of us!" cried his wife, referring to the rumors of war and the
"If there is anything... come back, Yakov Alpatych! For Christ's sake

crossed himself three times.
trying to imitate the prince now, lifted the hat from his bald head and
After giving the clerk orders about the work to be done, Alpatych, not

speaking rapidly just as the prince did, and he climbed into the trap.
"There! There! Women's fuss! Women, women!" said Alpatych, puffing and

of the coachmen helped him into the vehicle.
behind his back. His old sister-in-law popped in a small bundle, and one
His daughter placed chintz-covered down cushions for him to sit on and

domestic serfs--were seeing him off.
a cook, two old women, a little pageboy, the coachman, and various
satellites--the senior clerk, a countinghouse clerk, a scullery maid,
ringing bells; but on a long journey Alpatych liked to have them. His
with paper. The prince allowed no one at Bald Hills to drive with
The larger bell was muffled and the little bells on the harness stuffed

harnessed to a small conveyance with a leather hood.
went out accompanied by his family. Three well-fed roans stood ready
present from the prince--and carrying a stick as the prince did,
Having received all his orders Alpatych, wearing a white beaver hat--a

possible if there was danger.
instructions to hand it to the Governor and to come back as quickly as
for Princess Mary, she signed it, and it was given to Alpatych with
Bald Hills was exposed. Dessalles wrote this letter to the Governor
her know the state of affairs and the extent of the danger to which
by Alpatych to the Provincial Governor at Smolensk, asking him to let
Hills might be dangerous, he respectfully advised her to send a letter
though from Prince Andrew's letter it was evident that to remain at Bald
prince was not very well and was taking no steps to secure his safety,
Dessalles, having asked to see Princess Mary, told her that, as the
The same evening that the prince gave his instructions to Alpatych,

from Smolensk and two miles from the main road to Moscow.
Bald Hills, Prince Nicholas Bolkonski's estate, lay forty miles east


CHAPTER IV





the present! Quicker, quicker--and that they should leave me in peace!"
"Oh, quicker, quicker! To get back to that time and have done with all

coffin about his right to kiss her hand.
face on the catafalque, and the encounter he had with Zubov over her
and her words at her first gracious reception of him, and then that same
sallow-faced, short, stout woman, the Empress Mother, with her smile
first meeting with Potemkin. And he saw before him a plump, rather
as it had done then. He recalled all the words spoken at that
burning sense of jealousy of "the favorite" agitated him now as strongly
vigorous and alert, entering Potemkin's gaily colored tent, and a
camp, and himself a young general without a wrinkle on his ruddy face,
rose before him the Danube at bright noonday: reeds, the Russian
He put the letter under the candlestick and closed his eyes. And there

want anything!" he shouted.
perhaps are already there! Tikhon!" Tikhon jumped up. "No, no, I don't
"The French at Vitebsk, in four days' march they may be at Smolensk;

grasp its meaning for a moment.
the night, reading it by the faint light under the green shade, did he
putting on his spectacles he began reading. Only now in the stillness of
glass of lemonade and a spiral wax candle--moved close to the bed, and
He had the letter taken from his pocket and the table--on which stood a

something about Vitebsk. Now I'll read it."
know, Prince Andrew's letter! Princess Mary read it. Dessalles said
"Be quiet, quiet!" The prince slapped his hand on the table. "Yes, I

"About Prince Michael..."

"Tikhon, what did we talk about at dinner?"

my pocket--can't remember..."
talked some nonsense. Dessalles, that fool, said something. Something in
No, it was something, something in the drawing room. Princess Mary
keeping till I should be in bed. The bolts? No, I told him about them.
yes, there was something else important, very important, that I was
"No peace, damn them!" he muttered, angry he knew not with whom. "Ah

night. He opened his eyes as they were closing.
it were breathing heavily and jolting. This happened to him almost every
before he felt the bed rocking backwards and forwards beneath him as if
for the twenty-thousandth time and lay down. But hardly had he done so
release me!" thought he. Pressing his lips together he made that effort
bed. "Ugh, how hard it is! Oh, that this toil might end and you would
moment of making the effort to lift those legs up and turn over on the
withered yellow legs. He was not meditating, but only deferring the
bed, and appeared to be meditating as he looked contemptuously at his
coat and trousers, the prince undressed, sat down heavily on the
Frowning with vexation at the effort necessary to divest himself of his

let Tikhon undress him.
"Well, at last I've finished, now I'll rest," thought the prince, and

pushed it a few inches from the corner and then closer in again.
"That's not right! That's not right!" cried the prince, and himself

putting it up.
With the help of a footman Tikhon brought in the bedstead and began

other places: he had never slept there yet.
but the corner behind the piano in the sitting room was better than
thoughts he had had when lying there. It was unsatisfactory everywhere,
That couch was dreadful to him, probably because of the oppressive
unsatisfactory, but worst of all was his customary couch in the study.
He went about looking at every corner. Every place seemed

rooms with him to show him where to set up the bed for that night.
thoughts came to him in bed. So he called Tikhon and went through the
to sleep, but he knew he would not be able to and that most depressing
It was already late when he rose after sealing the letter. He wished

to write to the governor.
fingered his papers, closed the bureau again, and sat down at the table
Alpatych went out. The prince again went to his bureau, glanced into it,

"Well, go, go! If anything more is wanted I'll send after you."

dozed off. Alpatych made a slight movement.
did not let him go. He sat down, sank into thought, closed his eyes, and
The instructions to Alpatych took over two hours and still the prince

had to be ordered to keep the "will" in.
of a special shape the prince had himself designed, and a leather case
Next, bolts for the doors of the new building were wanted and had to be

"Then hand to the governor in person a letter about the deed."

He paced up and down for a while and glanced at his notes.

as in Michael Ivanovich's list."
gilt-edged... it must be exactly like the sample. Varnish, sealing wax,
"First, notepaper--do you hear? Eight quires, like this sample,

instructions.
up and down the room past Alpatych who stood by the door, he gave his
The prince had a list of things to be bought in Smolensk and, walking

been waiting.
in his pocket, folded up his papers, and called in Alpatych who had long
been written. He took the letter from Michael Ivanovich's hand, put it
evoked by the memory of the time when the paper he was now reading had
When Michael Ivanovich went in there were tears in the prince's eyes

to the Emperor after his death.
manuscript--his "Remarks" as he termed it--which was to be transmitted
outstretched hand, and in a somewhat dramatic attitude was reading his
open bureau with screened candles, holding a paper in his
prince, with spectacles on and a shade over his eyes, was sitting at his
When Michael Ivanovich returned to the study with the letter, the old


CHAPTER III





"Oh, yes, he has been waiting to start for some time."

"And Alpatych is being sent to Smolensk?" asked Princess Mary.

and which he called his "will.")
had been the preparation of some papers he meant to leave at his death
his will, I expect." (One of the prince's favorite occupations of late
Ivanovich went on, lowering his voice--"now he's at his desk, busy with
about the new building. He has been reading a little, but now"--Michael
smile which caused Princess Mary to turn pale. "He's worrying very much
"Always busy," replied Michael Ivanovich with a respectfully ironic

ventured to ask him what her father was doing.
room. She gave it to him and, unpleasant as it was to her to do so,
Mary for Prince Andrew's letter which had been forgotten in the drawing
In the evening Michael Ivanovich, sent by the prince, came to Princess

confusion and silence, but was afraid even to think about it.
was not only afraid to speak of it and ask Dessalles the reason of his
father had forgotten his son's letter on the drawing-room table; but she
her father, noticed his silence, and was struck by the fact that her
Princess Mary saw Dessalles' embarrassed and astonished look fixed on

went to his own room.
him about the building looked angrily at Princess Mary and Dessalles and
Michael Ivanovich went up to the plan, and the prince after speaking to

to alter it...."
his head and pointing to the plan of the building, "tell me how you mean
"Yes... yes... Well, Michael Ivanovich," he suddenly went on, raising

No one spoke for a long time.

"Doesn't he? But I didn't invent it myself."

"The prince says nothing about that," he remarked gently.

Dessalles dropped his eyes.

writes that the French were beaten at... at... what river is it?"
His face suddenly took on a morose expression. He paused. "Yes, he
"Ah, the letter? Yes..." replied the prince peevishly. "Yes... yes..."

Vitebsk...."
"But, Prince," Dessalles began timidly, "the letter mentions

turn..."
advanced into Prussia sooner, then things would have taken a different
campaign of 1807 which seemed to him so recent. "Bennigsen should have
could fail to see it," the prince continued, evidently thinking of the
"When the snow melts they'll sink in the Polish swamps. Only they

her father was saying was correct.
forgetting the geographical position of the Niemen, thought that what
Niemen when the enemy was already at the Dnieper, but Princess Mary,
Dessalles looked in amazement at the prince, who was talking of the

beyond the Niemen."
say that the theater of war is Poland and the enemy will never get
"Ha ha ha! The theater of war!" said the prince. "I have said and still

"Very possibly the theater of war will move so near to us that..."

his eyes from the plan of the building.
"I? I?..." said the prince as if unpleasantly awakened, and not taking

"What do you think of it, Prince?" Dessalles ventured to ask.

plan, evidently engrossed in his own ideas.
Princess Mary looked inquiringly at her father. He was examining the
eyes upon it, told her to read the letter aloud. When she had done so
spreading out before him the plan of the new building and fixing his
On moving to the drawing room he handed the letter to Princess Mary and,

at dinner.
and a plan. These he put down beside him--not letting anyone read them
with quick steps, accompanied by Michael Ivanovich, bringing the letter
even little Nicholas exchanged looks in silence. The old prince returned
While he was away Princess Mary, Dessalles, Mademoiselle Bourienne, and

"They can't do anything... always make some muddle," he muttered.

and went himself.
the room the old prince, looking uneasily round, threw down his napkin
Michael Ivanovich rose and went to the study. But as soon as he had left

"No, don't!" he exclaimed with a frown. "You go, Michael Ivanovich."

Mademoiselle Bourienne jumped up eagerly.

"You know--under the paperweight on the little table."
"Go and get it for me," said the old prince to Mademoiselle Bourienne.

"Oh, very interesting!" said Mademoiselle Bourienne.

position to know..."
"That must be very interesting," said Dessalles. "Prince Andrew is in a

had become habitual to him in speaking of the present war.
"He writes about this war," said the prince, with the ironic smile that

arrived.
She could not have read the letter as she did not even know it had

"No, Father," she replied in a frightened voice.

Mary--"Haven't you read it?"
"There was a letter from Prince Andrew today," he said to Princess

letter.
to have already entered Vitebsk, the old prince remembered his son's
At dinner that day, on Dessalles' mentioning that the French were said

him to move to Moscow.
the theater of war and on the army's direct line of march, and advised
pointed out to his father the danger of staying at Bald Hills, so near
as to the further progress of the war. In this letter Prince Andrew
the whole campaign, enclosed for them a plan he had drawn and forecasts
Vitebsk after the French had occupied that town, gave a brief account of
Frenchwoman at a distance. Prince Andrew's second letter, written near
prince had replied affectionately, and from that time had kept the
to say and begged to be restored to his favor. To this letter the old
dutifully asked his father's forgiveness for what he had allowed himself
first letter which came soon after he had left home, Prince Andrew had
On August 1, a second letter was received from Prince Andrew. In his

him. Then again he would spend a night in the dining room.
undressing, while--instead of Mademoiselle Bourienne--a serf boy read to
couch or on the lounge chair in the drawing room and dozed there without
bed to be set up in the glass gallery, another day he remained on the
changed his sleeping place every day. One day he would order his camp
he slept very little and, instead of sleeping in his study as usual,
serfs. The only thing that made Princess Mary anxious about him was that
He planned another garden and began a new building for the domestic
All that July the old prince was exceedingly active and even animated.

unhesitatingly believed him.
The prince's tone was so calm and confident that Princess Mary
it, and laughed at Dessalles when he mentioned it at dinner.
this war was that the old prince never spoke of it, did not recognize
The chief reason Princess Mary did not realize the full significance of

you, my friend, are missing..." and so on.
widows of live men, make beautiful conversations over our charpie, only
princesses Aline and Sophie sit whole days with me, and we, unhappy
unshakable. We pass the time as we can, but in war as in war! The
And truly though the enemy was twice stronger than we, we were
sons and saying: 'I will perish with them but we will not be shaken!'
"You heard probably of the heroic exploit of Raevski, embracing his two

news which I have inspires me yet more.
"My poor husband is enduring pains and hunger in Jewish taverns, but the

Moscow are elated by enthusiasm for our adored Emperor.
same for their language which I cannot support to hear spoken.... We in
Russian, "because I have a detestation for all the French, and the
"I write you in Russian, my good friend," wrote Julie in her Frenchified

correspondence with her, wrote patriotic letters from Moscow.
and though Julie (now Princess Drubetskaya), who had resumed
way, the rumors current among the people of an invasion by Antichrist,
and though the "God's folk" who came to see her reported, in their own
in its progress and tried to explain his own conception of it to her,
Dessalles with whom she constantly conversed was passionately interested
previous wars. She did not realize the significance of this war, though
understand the significance of this war, which seemed to her like all
the strange cruelty that impels men to kill one another, but she did not
feared for her brother who was in it, was horrified by and amazed at
Of the war Princess Mary thought as women do think about wars. She

her.
nurse, or with "God's folk" who sometimes came by the back door to see
Dessalles; the rest of the day she spent over her books, with her old
his lessons, teaching him Russian and music herself, and talking to
Princess Mary spent half of every day with little Nicholas, watching

me quarrel with him, but you see I need neither her nor you!"
lied to Prince Andrew about my relations with that Frenchwoman and made
daughter seemed to say: "There, you see? You plotted against me, you
relations with Mademoiselle Bourienne. His looks and cold tone to his
and the arrangement of the gardens and completely breaking off his
of life, devoting himself with special activity to building operations
At the end of the week the prince reappeared and resumed his former way

Mademoiselle Bourienne either. Tikhon alone attended him.
old prince not only excluded her from his room, but did not admit
Princess Mary noticed to her surprise that during this illness the

ill and did not leave his study.
After that Princess Mary did not see her father for a whole week. He was

gloat over it! Gloat over it!"
me, it hurts. I'm old and weak and this is what you wanted. Well then,
son! Satisfied, are you? That's all you wanted! Satisfied?... It hurts
"Well? Are you satisfied now?" said he. "You've made me quarrel with my

to come to his study.
The day after his son had left, Prince Nicholas sent for Princess Mary


CHAPTER II





retired, thus arriving at the very result which caused his destruction.
losses but kindling hatred of the foe. Napoleon advanced farther and we
an example to other Russians, went to Moscow thinking only of their own
been misled by their governor. And these ruined inhabitants, setting
whole people. But Smolensk was burned by its own inhabitants-who had
Smolensk was abandoned contrary to the wishes of the Emperor and of the

on both sides.
lines of communication. The battle was fought and thousands were killed
It was necessary to fight an unexpected battle at Smolensk to save our

walls of Smolensk.
them--the French stumbled upon Neverovski's division and reached the
battle, and while we were looking for the French--having lost touch with
While disputes and intrigues were going on about the future field of

seen.
as unsuitable from every point of view, the battleground he had not
and, having spent the day with him, returned to Barclay and condemned,
hating Barclay, rode to visit a friend of his own, a corps commander,
Smolensk. A general was sent to survey the position. This general,
less unity resulted. Preparations were made to fight the French before
embittered the relations between the commanders in chief, and even
The swarm of Bronnitskis and Wintzingerodes and their like still further

that I am serving Barclay. I confess I do not want to."
I was really serving my sovereign and the Fatherland, but it turns out
that a Russian cannot exist and there is no sense in anything. I thought
a regiment. I cannot stand it here. Headquarters are so full of Germans
Barclay). For God's sake send me somewhere else if only in command of
my sovereign pleases, but I cannot work with the Minister (meaning
him. He wrote to Arakcheev, the Emperor's confidant: "It must be as
less than ever. By the Emperor's orders Bagration reported direct to
took his orders from Barclay, but, having submitted, agreed with him
Despite his seniority in rank Bagration, in this contest of magnanimity,

officer Bagration.
Barclay donned his sash and came out to meet and report to his senior
Bagration drove up in a carriage to the house occupied by Barclay.

At Smolensk the armies at last reunited, much as Bagration disliked it.

Bennigsen and the Tsarevich.
adjutants general to Petersburg and plunged into an open struggle with
pretext of sending papers to the Emperor, dispatched these Polish
others of that group stirred up so much trouble that Barclay, under
demanded a general engagement. Lubomirski, Bronnitski, Wlocki, and the
Barclay stood for caution. The Tsarevich hinted at treachery and

cautious of undertaking any decisive action and avoided giving battle.
the observation of all these "eyes of the Emperor," became still more
and arouse his energy, and Barclay, feeling less free than ever under
remained with the army to keep the commander in chief under observation
enfeebled. Bennigsen, the Tsarevich, and a swarm of adjutants general
be taken, but the command of the armies became still more confused and
control of the army, and hoping that more decisive action would then
He left in order not to obstruct the commander in chief's undivided

the strength of the Russian army was trebled.
general to a patriotic war. And by this visit of the Emperor to Moscow
for him to inspire the people in the capitals and arouse the nation in
the only pretext for his departure it was decided that it was necessary
At last the Emperor left the army, and as the most convenient and indeed

indignation against the foreigners and an increase in patriotic zeal.
instead of Barclay, been in command) and on the other an ever-increasing
not have refrained from had the armies been united and had someone else,
on the one hand indecision and the avoidance of a battle (which we could
and the unpopularity of the foreign commander in chief, there resulted
command, and Barclay was unpopular; but from this confusion, division,
his power was limited. The armies were divided, there was no unity of
command entrusted to Barclay. But as Barclay did not inspire confidence
to influence Alexander, and Pfuel's whole plan was abandoned and the
aiming at becoming commander in chief, unexpectedly employed his energy
The intention was to make a stand at the Drissa camp, but Paulucci,

plans, destroyed the first army's energy and it retired.
ignorance of what steps to take, and the enormous number of advisers and
The Emperor was with the army to encourage it, but his presence and

to his own.
the command of the detested foreigner Barclay, whose rank was inferior
his army; and it looks as if he planned this in order not to come under
the enemy from flank and rear and securing from the Ukraine recruits for
best for him to retire more to the left and more to the south, worrying
as he alleged, he exposed his army to danger on this march, and it was
junction--though that was the chief aim of all at headquarters--because,
command as long as he could. Bagration was slow in effecting the
second army--tried to postpone joining up and coming under Barclay's
would come under his command), and Bagration--being in command of the
Barclay de Tolly was an unpopular foreigner disliked by Bagration (who
the angle became still more acute and we withdrew still farther, because
acute angle not only because the French advanced between our two armies;
an acute angle--we led the French on to Smolensk. But we withdrew at an
with a much stronger enemy, and necessarily withdrawing the armies at
enemy's advance, and by this effort to unite them while avoiding battle
them, with the evident intention of giving battle and checking the
were divided at the commencement of the campaign. We tried to unite
way of saving Russia. Everything came about fortuitously. The armies
the war and had no perception whatever of the inevitable, or of the one
interplay of intrigues, aims, and wishes among those who took part in
for no one believed it to be possible; it resulted from a most complex
Napoleon into the depths of the country was not the result of any plan,
think of luring Napoleon on, but quite the contrary. The luring of
advance on Moscow, nor did Alexander and the Russian commanders then
The facts clearly show that Napoleon did not foresee the danger of the

see that advance was evidently ruinous to him.
Smolensk and thought only of how to advance farther, though as we now
missed several chances of forcing an engagement. In August he was at
Napoleon having cut our armies apart advanced far into the country and

depths of the country.
more provoked at the thought that our forces were retreating into the
So thought the Emperor, and the Russian commanders and people were still

general engagement having been fought under its walls.
unite he was displeased that Smolensk was abandoned and burned without a
could he contemplate the burning of Moscow, and when our armies did
not bear the idea of letting the enemy even reach Smolensk, still less
reproached the commanders in chief for every step they retired. He could
plan, and there was no intention of retiring farther. The Emperor
soil and not to retreat. The enormous Drissa camp was formed on Pfuel's
Emperor joined the army to encourage it to defend every inch of Russian
meant to retire and lure the enemy into the depths of the country. Our
aim was to unite them, though uniting the armies was no advantage if we
At the very beginning of the war our armies were divided, and our sole

did not seek battle as eagerly as in former campaigns, but very lazily.
to extend his line, but he welcomed every step forward as a triumph and
everything was done to stop them. And not only was Napoleon not afraid
into the heart of the country, but from their first entry into Russia
not only was there no wish on the Russian side to draw the French
contradiction to such conjectures. During the whole period of the war
or such plans to the Russian commanders. All the facts are in flat
historians attribute such conceptions to Napoleon and his marshals,
of Russia, are evidently of that kind, and only by much straining can
line, and (on the Russian side) as to luring the enemy into the depths
Conjectures as to Napoleon's awareness of the danger of extending his

their innumerable conjectures many were to quite the contrary effect.
to say: "I said then that it would be so," quite forgetting that amid
issue of any event that however it may end there will always be people
the event falsified them. There are always so many conjectures as to the
contrary which were current then but have now been forgotten because
forgotten the thousands and millions of hints and expectations to the
event not occurred these hints would have been forgotten, as we have
Russian, are advanced only because they fit in with the event. Had that
But all these hints at what happened, both from the French side and the
projects, and letters which contain hints of such a line of action.
to Toll, and others again to Alexander himself--pointing to notes,
of them attribute to Pfuel, others to a certain Frenchman, others
adopted to lure Napoleon into the depths of Russia, and this plan some
us that from the commencement of the campaign a Scythian war plan was
was even then understood. Russian authors are still fonder of telling
and of making similar statements to show that the danger of the campaign
sought a battle and that his marshals advised him to stop at Smolensk,
saying that Napoleon felt the danger of extending his line, that he
In historical works on the year 1812 French writers are very fond of

that is, to doing the very thing that was bound to lead to destruction.
effort was directed to pushing on to Moscow at the end of the summer,
despite Napoleon's experience and so-called military genius, every
hinder the only thing that could save Russia, while on the French side,
did no one see this, but on the Russian side every effort was made to
and led by inexperienced commanders as the Russian army was. Not only
destroyed in conflict with a raw army of half its numerical strength,
men--the best in the world and led by the best general--could be
so evident) that this was the only way an army of eight hundred thousand
among the Russian people. But no one at the time foresaw (what now seems
by the burning of Russian towns and the hatred of the foe this aroused
a winter campaign and, on the other, the character given to the war
into the heart of Russia late in the season without any preparation for
now. No one will deny that that cause was, on the one hand, its advance
The cause of the destruction of the French army in 1812 is clear to us

who did the actual fighting.
expected--neither Napoleon, nor Alexander, nor still less any of those
further the accomplishment of a stupendous result no one of them at all
Providence compelled all these men, striving to attain personal aims, to

time but its historic results.
interests have vanished leaving no trace, and nothing remains of that
The actors of 1812 have long since left the stage, their personal

the less are they free.
fate of men of action, and the higher they stand in the social hierarchy
concealed from them but comprehensible to us. Such is the inevitable
but they all were involuntary tools of history, carrying on a work
that they knew what they were doing and did it of their own free will,
moved by fear or vanity, rejoiced or were indignant, reasoned, imagining
personal characteristics, habits, circumstances, and aims. They were
innumerable people who took part in the war acted in accord with their
his wish for a gallop across a level field; and in the same way the
commander. Rostov charged the French because he could not restrain
way, because he wished to fulfill his duty and earn fame as a great
insulted. Barclay de Tolly tried to command the army in the best
Alexander refused negotiations because he felt himself to be personally

bursts of anger in the presence of Kurakin and then of Balashev.
stimulating influence of a June morning, and could not refrain from
received, could not help donning a Polish uniform and yielding to the
to Dresden, could not help having his head turned by the homage he
Napoleon began the war with Russia because he could not resist going


CHAPTER I





BOOK TEN: 1812





feeling amazed themselves at what they had done.
without some groans gave orders to their stewards about the enrollment,
their uniforms and settled down again in their homes and clubs, and not
Next day the Emperor left Moscow. The assembled nobles all took off

at once consented to Petya's request and went himself to enter his name.
Old Rostov could not tell his wife of what had passed without tears, and

would give a thousand men and their maintenance.
furnishing a regiment, Bezukhov at once informed Rostopchin that he
an opportunity of effacing it. Having heard that Count Mamonov was
felt ashamed of his speech with its constitutional tendency and sought
ready to go all lengths and was prepared to sacrifice everything. He now
Pierre's one feeling at the moment was a desire to show that he was

"Our lives and property--take them, Your Majesty!"

sobbed outright like a child and kept repeating:
weeping. Tears filled the thin man's eyes, and the fat otkupshchik
the mayor, a man with a thin sallow face and narrow beard. Both were
merchants, one of whom Pierre knew, a fat otkupshchik. The other was
voice. When Pierre saw the Emperor he was coming out accompanied by two
before tears gushed from his eyes and he concluded in a trembling
As became known later, he had scarcely begun to address the merchants
come out from the merchants' hall with tears of emotion in his eyes.
There he remained about ten minutes. Pierre was among those who saw him
From the hall of the nobility the Emperor went to that of the merchants.

everything in his own way.
stood at the back, and, though he had heard hardly anything, understood
"Yes, most precious... a royal word," said Count Rostov, with a sob. He

rapturous exclamations were heard from all sides.
The Emperor ceased speaking, the crowd began pressing round him, and

Gentlemen, let us act! Time is most precious..."
surpassed my expectations. I thank you in the name of the Fatherland!
"I never doubted the devotion of the Russian nobles, but today it has

with emotion:
Pierre distinctly heard the pleasantly human voice of the Emperor saying
There was a rustling among the crowd and it again subsided, so that

"Gentlemen!" said the Emperor with a quivering voice.

resolution just arrived at.
nobility. He was answered by a voice which informed him of the
threatening the empire and of the hopes he placed on the Moscow
what he did hear he understood that the Emperor spoke of the danger
stood rather far off and could not hear all that the Emperor said. From
nobles. Every face expressed respectful, awe-struck curiosity. Pierre
The Emperor entered the hall through a broad path between two lines of

the whole throng hurried to the entrance.
"The Emperor! The Emperor!" a sudden cry resounded through the halls and

stretch their legs and converse in couples.
with apparent relief, and began walking up and down, arm in arm, to
chairs made a scraping noise as the gentlemen who had conferred rose
out of every thousand serfs, as the Smolensk gentry had done. Their
nobility and gentry, that they would furnish ten men, fully equipped,
The secretary was told to write down the resolution of the Moscow

mournful effect.
agree," or for variety, "I too am of that opinion," and so on had even a
noise the sound of their old voices saying one after another, "I
The whole consultation passed more than quietly. After all the preceding
A conference took place confined to the magnates sitting at the table.

ourselves... That is the least we can do!"
to the merchants' hall--"but our business is to supply men and not spare
us and the merchants. Millions will pour forth from there"--he pointed
there is little need for discussion. The Emperor has deigned to summon
"I am straight from the palace. Seeing the position we are in, I think
"Our sovereign the Emperor will be here in a moment," said Rostopchin.

the room, stepping briskly to the front of the crowd of gentry.
wearing the uniform of a general with sash over his shoulder, entered
At that moment Count Rostopchin with his protruding chin and alert eyes,


CHAPTER XXIII





"Gentlemen, you are crushing me!..."
"He is the enemy of mankind!" cried another. "Allow me to speak...."

one man.
"Yes, Moscow will be surrendered! She will be our expiation!" shouted

immediately diverted by an exclamation at the other side of the table.
One of the old men nearest to him looked round, but his attention was

other voices.
when we know what is needed!" said he, trying to be heard above the
"I only said that it would be more to the purpose to make sacrifices

blame and wished to justify himself.
too. He did not renounce his opinions, but felt himself in some way to
tones and looks more than in the substance of the speeches--infected him
they were ready to go to all lengths--which found expression in the
hot. Pierre, however, felt excited, and the general desire to show that
faces for the most part only expressed the fact that they found it very
knew, sat and turned to look first at one and then at another, and their
some thought and hastened to utter it. The old magnates, whom Pierre
to supply it. Others in that heat and crush racked their brains to find
Those standing behind noticed what a speaker omitted to say and hastened
chairs, the orators spoke one after another and sometimes two together.
to the table. Pressed by the throng against the high backs of the
boston at the clubs. With an incessant hum of voices the crowd advanced
Pierre had seen in their own homes with their buffoons, or playing
seventy-year-old magnates, uniformed and besashed almost all of whom
The crowd drew up to the large table, at which sat gray-haired or bald

of the crowd.
"Yes, yes, at thunderclaps!" was repeated approvingly in the back rows

flashes and thunderclaps, but "we will not be that child."
repulsed by hell," and that he had seen a child smiling at lightning
of "author! author!" were heard in the crowd), said that "hell must be
Glinka, the editor of the Russian Messenger, who was recognized (cries

the same tone. Many spoke eloquently and with originality.
latter. Many other orators spoke after the excited nobleman, and all in
tangible object to love and a tangible object to hate. Pierre became the
after the many subsequent speeches, but to animate it the crowd needed a
displeased by the substance of his speech, which had even been forgotten
from him as from a common enemy. This happened not because they were
but he was rudely interrupted, pushed aside, and people turned away
to the big table. Not only was Pierre's attempt to speak unsuccessful,
re-formed, and then moved with a hum of talk into the largest hall and
to signify his approval of them all, and the group increased, dispersed,
shouted and talked at the same time, so that Count Rostov had not time
order to be able to improve it, but he was unable to speak. Many voices
serfs, or himself, only one ought to know the state of affairs in
Pierre wished to say that he was ready to sacrifice his money, his

"That's right, quite right! Just so!"

phrase, said:
persons, briskly turning a shoulder to the orator at the end of a
Count Rostov at the back of the crowd was expressing approval; several

sound of his opponent's voice.
words, apart from what meaning they conveyed, were less audible than the
Pierre wished to reply, but could not get in a word. He felt that his

Russia!"
our Fatherland! We will show Europe how Russia rises to the defense of
throne, and the Fatherland! We must cease raving if we are sons of
are Russians and will not grudge our blood in defense of our faith, the
bloodshot eyes. Several approving voices were heard in the crowd. "We
one of us will go, for our father the Tsar!" he shouted, rolling his
and children." The nobleman smote his breast. "We will all arise, every
Russia, to desecrate the tombs of our fathers, to carry off our wives
acting: there is war in Russia! The enemy is advancing to destroy
"Yes, and this is not a time for discussing," he continued, "but for

interrupted Adraksin.
cardplayer, and who, also transformed by his uniform, came up to Pierre,
of age, whom Pierre had formerly met at the gypsies' and knew as a bad
Another voice, that of a nobleman of medium height and about forty years

decreases..."
according to the enemy's movements and the number of men increases and
Emperor could not answer such a question. The troops are moved
about that, and secondly, if the Russian nobility had that right, the
"In the first place, I tell you we have no right to question the Emperor

Adraksin shouted at Pierre:
different man. With a sudden expression of malevolence on his aged face,
of the uniform or from some other cause Pierre saw before him quite a
Stepanovich Adraksin. Adraksin was in uniform, and whether as a result
a boston player who had always been well disposed toward him, Stepan
three sides. The most vigorous attack came from an old acquaintance,
But scarcely had Pierre uttered these words before he was attacked from

forces now are, and then..."
know the number of our troops and the position in which our army and our
should ask the Emperor--most respectfully ask His Majesty--to let us
"I think that before discussing these questions," Pierre continued, "we

senator, and in general with whatever speech he had last heard.
with them as he had been pleased with those of the naval officer, the
smile and the freedom of Pierre's remarks. Only Count Rostov was pleased
Many persons withdrew from the circle, noticing the senator's sarcastic


    * "Food for cannon."


from us any co-co-counsel."
and chair a canon * we are ready to make of ourselves--and not to obtain
merely owners of serfs whom we are willing to devote to his service,
subject, "that the Emperor himself would not be satisfied to find in us
we can assist our Fatherland! I imagine," he went on, warming to his
their sympathy and enthusiasm but also to consider the means by which
I suppose that the nobility have been summoned not merely to express
opponent") "with the gentleman... whom I have not the honor of knowing,
he wished to say, "Mon tres honorable preopinant"--"My very honorable
formally.) "Though I don't agree with the gentleman..." (he hesitated:
the senator, but thought it necessary on this occasion to address him
"Excuse me, your excellency," he began. (He was well acquainted with

himself in bookish Russian.
began to speak eagerly, occasionally lapsing into French or expressing
interrupted him. He himself did not yet know what he would say, but he
into the deliberations of the nobility. Pierre stepped forward and
against the senator who was introducing this set and narrow attitude
Pierre suddenly saw an outlet for his excitement. He hardened his heart

the militia--we can leave to the supreme authority...."
the Emperor has honored us. But to judge what is best--conscription or
We have been summoned to reply to the appeal with which our sovereign
at the present moment to adopt conscription or to call out the militia.
have been summoned here not to discuss whether it's best for the empire
"I imagine, sir," said he, mumbling with his toothless mouth, "that we

to maintaining an argument, he began in low but distinct tones:
speaker, interrupted him. Evidently accustomed to managing debates and
head, with a shrewd though angry expression, standing near the first
opened his mouth when one of the senators, a man without a tooth in his
but not yet sure what stirred him or what he would say. Scarcely had he
Pierre wanted to speak himself. He pushed forward, feeling stirred,
Count Rostov's mouth watered with pleasure and he nudged Pierre, but

the orator with animation.
the Emperor) "need only say the word and we'll all die fo' him!" added
in more wecwuits, and the sov'weign" (that was the way he referred to
The nobility don't gwudge theah lives--evewy one of us will go and bwing
neithah soldiers no' peasants, and we'll get only depwavity fwom them.
our farming! Bettah have another conscwiption... o' ou' men will wetu'n
"And was our militia of any use to the Empia? Not at all! It only wuined

Count Ilya Rostov smiled blandly and nodded approval.

sons and thieves and wobbahs...."
the militia in the yeah 'seven? All that did was to enwich the pwiests'
sov'weign the Empewah in other ways. Have we fo'gotten the waising of
of the pwovince of Moscow thinks fit, it can show its loyalty to our
Empewah? Ah we to take Smolensk as our patte'n? If the noble awistocwacy
"What if the Smolensk people have offahd to waise militia for the

indicative of dissipation and the exercise of authority.
a man calling out to his servant, "Heah! Bwing me my pipe!" It was
swallowing his r's and generally slurring his consonants: the voice of
sonorous, musical, and aristocratic baritone voice, pleasantly
quite different from his own. The naval officer spoke in a particularly
and convinced himself that the man was indeed a liberal, but of views
with him. Pierre pushed his way into the middle of the group, listened,
quietest of men walked away disapprovingly or expressed disagreement
and from the fact that some people Pierre knew as the meekest and
boldly, as was evident from the expression on the faces of the listeners
to what the speaker was saying. The retired naval man was speaking very
listened with a kindly smile and nods of approval, as he always did,
with all of whom he was acquainted. He too approached that group and
Catherine's time, was sauntering with a pleasant smile among the crowd,
the speaker and listened. Count Ilya Rostov, in a military uniform of
pressing round him. Pierre went up to the circle that had formed round
naval officer, was speaking in one of the rooms, and a small crowd was
A middle-aged man, handsome and virile, in the uniform of a retired

indefinite. Then all preferred listening to speaking.
what the nobility had been convened for, the talk became undecided and
provinces... and so on; but as soon as the war was touched on, or
honor, whether they should group themselves by districts or by whole
the Emperor entered, when a ball should be given in the Emperor's
heard questions of where the marshals of the nobility were to stand when
about discussing it. Besides the ordinary topics of conversation, Pierre
The Emperor's manifesto was read, evoking enthusiasm, and then all moved

finding any confirmation of the ideas that occupied him.
strolled about watching and listening to conversations, but nowhere
something important which he had long awaited was drawing near, he
people--strengthened this idea. And imagining that in this direction
the sovereign was coming to the capital for consultation with his
Revolution. The words that had struck him in the Emperor's appeal--that
graven in his soul: thoughts of the Contrat social and the French
a whole series of ideas he had long laid aside but which were deeply
merchant-class--les etats generaux (States-General)--evoked in him
this extraordinary gathering not only of nobles but also of the
uniform that had become too tight for him. He was agitated;
Pierre was there too, buttoned up since early morning in a nobleman's

Zinaida Dmitrievna's health, and so on.
same time the everyday interests in a boston card party, Peter the cook,
contradiction: the general expectation of a solemn event, and at the
of the crowd Petya had seen in the Square, there was a striking
themselves to someone younger. On all these faces, as on the faces
places and were silent, or, if they walked about and talked, attached
were especially striking. For the most part they sat quietly in their
dim-eyed, toothless, bald, sallow, and bloated, or gaunt and wrinkled,
diverse and familiar personalities, both old and young. The old men,
of being in uniform imparted something strange and fantastic to these
the ordinary uniform of the nobility, and the general characteristic
of Emperor Paul, others again in the new uniforms of Alexander's time or
houses, were in uniform--some in that of Catherine's day, others in that
All these nobles, whom Pierre met every day at the Club or in their own

but most of the gentry were strolling about the room.
high-backed chairs at a large table under the portrait of the Emperor,
an incessant movement and buzz of voices. The chief magnates sat on
of blue cloth and wearing medals. In the noblemen's hall there was
their uniforms, in the second bearded merchants in full-skirted coats
The great halls were full. In the first were the nobility and gentry in

were standing outside the Sloboda Palace.
Two days later, on the fifteenth of July, an immense number of carriages


CHAPTER XXII





there would be least danger.
yielded--went to inquire how he could arrange for Petya to serve where
run away. And next day, Count Ilya Rostov--though he had not yet quite
and firmly that if he was not allowed to enter the service he would
also entering the regiment. On returning home Petya announced resolutely
the Kremlin, but called on his friend Obolenski, who was fifteen and was
the enjoyment of that day was over. He did not go straight home from
Happy as Petya was, he felt sad at having to go home knowing that all

said by various people.
"There! I said if only we waited--and so it was!" was being joyfully

to disperse.
The Emperor went in, and after that the greater part of the crowd began

"Hurrah!" with a voice already hoarse.
seized a biscuit, and as if fearing to be too late, again shouted
her hand did not reach them. Petya pushed her hand away with his knee,
though she was lying on the ground--she grabbed at some biscuits but
catching at a biscuit; the old woman did not consider herself defeated
must not give way. He sprang forward and upset an old woman who was
but he had to have a biscuit from the Tsar's hand and he felt that he
danger of being crushed, he rushed at the biscuits. He did not know why,
the balcony. Petya's eyes grew bloodshot, and still more excited by the
a plateful of biscuits brought him and began throwing them down from
people in the crowd rushed at the coachman. Seeing this the Emperor had
a jerkin, who stood nearest, sprang forward and snatched it up. Several
off, fell on the balcony parapet, and then to the ground. A coachman in
A largish piece of the biscuit the Emperor was holding in his hand broke

with joy.
it, and again the women and men of weaker mold, Petya among them, wept
"Angel! Dear one! Hurrah! Father!..." cried the crowd, and Petya with

toward the balcony.
and went out onto the balcony. The people, with Petya among them, rushed
The dinner was nearly over, and the Emperor, munching a biscuit, rose

"The people are still hoping to see Your Majesty again."

While the Emperor was dining, Valuev, looking out of the window, said:

glimpses of whom could be seen through the windows.
to dine with the Emperor and the court footmen who served at table,
not what, and envying alike the notables he saw arriving at the entrance
the Emperor dined--looking in at the palace windows, expecting he knew
that diminishing, but still considerable, crowd before the palace while
was drenched with perspiration, yet he did not go home but stood with
to disperse. It was already late, and Petya had not eaten anything and
The crowd ran after the Emperor, followed him to the palace, and began

army.
"Hurrah!" and resolved that tomorrow, come what might, he would join the
on him--though it happened not to be the Emperor--frantically shouted
tears of joy that filled his eyes, concentrated all his enthusiasm
fixing on one of those four men, whom he could not clearly see for the
him, but no one answered him, everybody was too excited; and Petya,
"Which is he? Which?" asked Petya in a tearful voice, of those around

cathedral doors. "Hurrah! hurrah!" shouted the crowd again.
again. At last four men in uniforms and sashes emerged from the
again raised, and those who had run to look at the cannon ran back
cathedral, and after them others in a more leisurely manner: caps were
officers, generals, and gentlemen-in-waiting came running out of the
his protection stopped him. The firing was still proceeding when
have run there, but the clerk who had taken the young gentleman under
impetuously toward the embankment to watch the firing. Petya too would
to celebrate the signing of peace with the Turks, and the crowd rushed
Suddenly the sound of a firing of cannon was heard from the embankment,

intensified his sense of the importance of the occasion.
when he was being crushed, together with that of rapture, still further
by his love for him. The feeling of pain and fear he had experienced
the cannon--still agitated as before by the thought of the Emperor and
they did not interest him now. He sat on his elevation--the pedestal of
were such as might have had a particular charm for Petya at his age, but
nuts. All these conversations, especially the joking with the girls,
Two young citizens were joking with some serf girls who were cracking
the word "plenary" (of the service), a word Petya did not understand.
were officiating that day with the bishop. The clerk several times used
who had rescued Petya was talking to a functionary about the priests who
cost; another was saying that all silk goods had now got dear. The clerk
wife was showing a rent in her shawl and telling how much the shawl had
fond), and ordinary conversation could again be heard. A tradesman's
gingerbread, and poppyseed sweets (of which Petya was particularly
Turks--the crowd outside spread out and hawkers appeared, selling kvas,
arrival and of thanksgiving for the conclusion of peace with the
was a combined service of prayer on the occasion of the Emperor's
While the service was proceeding in the Cathedral of the Assumption--it

petition. If he could only see the Emperor he would be happy!
would be returning that way. Petya no longer thought of presenting his
a place by the cannon from where he hoped to see the Emperor who
passed, and at the cost of that temporary unpleasantness he had obtained
Petya soon came to himself, the color returned to his face, the pain had

saying.
people! Poor dear, he's as white as a sheet!"--various voices were heard
"One might easily get killed that way! What do they mean by it? Killing

be) who had crushed him.
platform of the cannon, and reproached those others (whoever they might
him attended to him, unbuttoned his coat, seated him on the raised
crowd turned toward him and pressed round him. Those who stood nearest
the Tsar-cannon. Several people were sorry for Petya, and suddenly a
out again more evenly, and the clerk led Petya--pale and breathless--to
The Emperor entered the Cathedral of the Assumption. The crowd spread

to? Gently!... They've crushed him, crushed him!"
"You've crushed the young gentleman!" said the clerk. "What are you up

the pressure of the crowd with the other.
chanter--was holding him under the arm with one hand while warding off
head and wearing a shabby blue cassock--probably a church clerk and
man of clerical appearance with a tuft of gray hair at the back of his
before his eyes and he lost consciousness. When he came to himself, a
and ribs and was squeezed so hard that suddenly everything grew dim
the Assumption--and Petya unexpectedly received such a blow on his side
procession: the Emperor was passing from the palace to the Cathedral of
in front were pushing back those who had pressed too close to the
spread out on it; but just then the crowd swayed back--the police
in front he caught glimpses of an open space with a strip of red cloth
to struggle desperately forward, and from between the backs of those
him myself--that would be too bold." But in spite of this he continued
"So this is what the Emperor is!" thought Petya. "No, I can't petition

forward and everybody shouted "hurrah!"
on both sides of him other people with similarly ferocious faces pushed
if he were prepared that instant to kill himself and everyone else, but
ferociously, pushed forward, elbowing his way and shouting "hurrah!" as
Quite beside himself, Petya, clinching his teeth and rolling his eyes

forward.
For a moment the crowd stood still, but then it made another rush

"Hurrah!" was heard on all sides.

with her fingers.
"Father! Angel! Dear one!" she kept repeating, wiping away her tears

her cheeks.
tradesman's wife standing beside Petya sobbed, and the tears ran down
All the faces bore the same expression of excitement and enthusiasm. A

nothing except the people about him.
hurrah!" Petya stood on tiptoe and pushed and pinched, but could see
that he could scarcely breathe, and everybody shouted, "Hurrah! hurrah!
and everyone rushed forward in one direction. Petya was being pressed so
For a while the crowd was less dense, but suddenly all heads were bared,

voices of the crowd that filled the whole Kremlin.
himself in the square he clearly heard the sound of bells and the joyous
but everywhere--on the slopes and on the roofs. As soon as Petya found
was already full of people. There were people not only in the square,
carrying Petya with it, streamed forward into the Kremlin Square which
manly thing to do. When the carriages had all passed in, the crowd,
asking his help, but came to the conclusion that that would not be a
drove past was an acquaintance of the Rostovs', and Petya thought of
or move to another place, because of the crowd. One of the generals who
admitted to the Emperor. But it was impossible to smarten oneself up
now to approach the gentlemen-in-waiting in that plight he would not be
He felt that he no longer looked presentable, and feared that if he were

collar which he had arranged so well at home to seem like a man's.
Petya wiped his perspiring face with his hands and pulled up the damp

gateway.
to such effect that he pushed Petya into a very filthy corner of the
"Anybody can shove," said the footman, and also began working his elbows

standing still? Then why push?"
"What are you shoving for, young lordling? Don't you see we're all

him:
was the first against whom he directed his efforts, angrily shouted at
working his way with his elbows, but the woman just in front of him, who
without waiting for all the carriages to pass, and he began resolutely
time in the gateway, Petya tried to move forward in front of the others
footman, two tradesmen, and a discharged soldier. After standing some
rumbling beneath the archway. Beside Petya stood a peasant woman, a
determination he had to give in, and stop while carriages passed in,
patriotic intentions with which he had come that in spite of all his
was so pressed to the wall by people who probably were unaware of the
out his elbows in a menacing way. But within the Trinity Gateway he
the Kremlin he even began to avoid being crushed and resolutely stuck
to walk with the sedateness and deliberation of a man. As he approached
ever-increasing crowds moving toward the Kremlin, the less he remembered
But the farther he went and the more his attention was diverted by the
and by his sedate deliberate walk he wished to appear a grown-up man.
at his youthfulness--and yet in the arrangement of his collar and hair
in reaching the Emperor--he even thought how surprised everyone would be
It was on the very fact of being so young that Petya counted for success

gentleman-in-waiting.
dressing, Petya had prepared many fine things he meant to say to the
no hindrance to loyalty, and that he was ready to... While
in spite of his youth wished to serve his country; that youth could be
to be always surrounded by gentlemen-in-waiting) that he, Count Rostov,
to explain frankly to some gentleman-in-waiting (he imagined the Emperor
avoid notice. Petya decided to go straight to where the Emperor was and
to anyone, took his cap and left the house by the back door, trying to
gesticulated, shrugged his shoulders, and finally, without saying a word
collar to look like a grown-up man. He frowned before his looking glass,
morning Petya was a long time dressing and arranging his hair and
domestic serfs begged permission to go to have a look at him. That
Next day the Emperor arrived in Moscow, and several of the Rostovs'

notice anything.
silent, morose, and with tear-stained face, everybody pretended not to
and there locked himself in and wept bitterly. When he came in to tea,
After the definite refusal he had received, Petya went to his room


CHAPTER XXI





Pierre made up his mind not to go to the Rostovs' any more.

kissed her hand and went out.
to smile but could not: his smile expressed suffering, and he silently
They looked at each other with dismayed and embarrassed faces. He tried

"Why? No, tell me!" Natasha began resolutely and suddenly stopped.

I have business...."
"Because it is better for me to come less often... because... No, simply

and only blushed till the tears came, and lowered his eyes.
"Because I love you!" was what he wanted to say, but he did not say it,

challengingly into Pierre's eyes.
"Why are you going? Why are you upset?" asked Natasha, and she looked

"Well, then, au revoir!" said the count, and went out of the room.

Pierre hurriedly.
"Yes, I had forgotten... I really must go home... business..." said

here."
good-naturedly, pointing to Natasha, "only brightens up when you're
often come nowadays as it is, and this girl of mine," said the count
"Home? Why, you meant to spend the evening with us.... You don't

"No, I think I'll go home."

him to this condition.
continually glancing at him with a more than cordial look, had reduced
Pierre was agitated and undecided. Natasha's unwontedly brilliant eyes,

"Well, Peter Kirilych, let's go and have a smoke," he said.

them in his study before having a nap.
count moved to go out of the room, taking the papers, probably to reread
and you want to go into the army! There, there, I tell you," and the
"Nonsense, I tell you. Your mother's milk has hardly dried on your lips

"And I tell you--Peter Kirilych here will also tell you..."

wife, who had turned pale and was staring fixedly at her son.
"Petya! Be quiet, I tell you!" cried the count, with a glance at his

"But you said yourself that we would sacrifice everything."

"That'll do, that'll do--nonsense...."

"when our Fatherland is in danger."
stopped short, flushed till he perspired, but still got out the words,
going too. Besides, all the same I can't study now when..." Petya
"It's not nonsense, Papa. Fedya Obolenski is younger than I, and he's

study."
"Come, come!" said he. "Here's a fine warrior! No! Nonsense! You must

But the count had already recovered from his excitement.

"That comes of your talking!" said she.

turned angrily to her husband.
The countess, in dismay, looked up to heaven, clasped her hands, and

can't... that's all...."
but I say definitely that you must let me enter the army, because I
"Well, Papa, I tell you definitely, and Mamma too, it's as you please,

that was now deep and now shrill:
to his father with a very flushed face and said in his breaking voice
At this moment, Petya, to whom nobody was paying any attention, came up

"Never mind what it's for...."

"But did you notice, it says, 'for consultation'?" said Pierre.

all go.... We're not Germans!"
"A joke indeed!" put in the count. "Let him but say the word and we'll

tone. "Everything seems funny to you, but this isn't at all a joke...."
"Not a patriot at all, but simply..." Natasha replied in an injured

"There! Here's a patriot for you!" said Shinshin.

with her better spirits.
looked at Pierre with the unconscious coquetry that had returned to her
"What a darling our Papa is!" she cried, kissing him, and she again

father.
count's patriotism, Natasha jumped up from her place and ran to her
Before Shinshin had time to utter the joke he was ready to make on the

and begrudge nothing."
added, "Let the Emperor but say the word and we'll sacrifice everything
repeatedly, as if a strong vinaigrette had been held to his nose; and he
"Yes, that's it!" cried the count, opening his moist eyes and sniffing


from bondage glorify the name of Russia!"
hopes to bring upon us recoil on his own head, and may Europe delivered
freshly formed to defeat him wherever he may appear. May the ruin he
of all our levies, both those now barring the enemy's path and those
and in other parts of our realm for consultation, and for the direction
"We ourselves will not delay to appear among our people in that Capital


being paid to her, read the last words:
Sonya, with a quiver in her voice due chiefly to the attention that was
Emperor placed on Moscow and especially on its illustrious nobility,
After reading about the dangers that threatened Russia, the hopes the

even the manifesto itself should no better pretext present itself.
gave him the opportunity: Sonya's reading, any remark of the count's, or
smile on his lips, was evidently preparing to make fun of anything that
threatening her son would not soon be over. Shinshin, with a sarcastic
in the manifesto. In all these words she saw only that the danger
shook her head disapprovingly and angrily at every solemn expression
Pierre felt her eyes on him and tried not to look round. The countess

now at Pierre.
Natasha sat erect, gazing with a searching look now at her father and

with closed eyes, heaving abrupt sighs at certain passages.
Sonya read painstakingly in her high-pitched voice. The count listened


comes to despoil our beloved country."
"The enemy has entered the borders of Russia with immense forces. He

"To Moscow, our ancient Capital!


to read the appeal.
with a serious face asked Sonya, who was considered an excellent reader,
After dinner the count settled himself comfortably in an easy chair and

one can answer for himself."
know, I am very far from having military tastes, but in these times no
yet everything is so strange, so strange! I can't make it out. I don't
"Oh yes, the war," he said. "No! What sort of warrior should I make? And

to grasp what was said. He looked at the count.
Pierre had been silent and preoccupied all through dinner, seeming not

Pierre.
you too will have to mount a horse," remarked the old count, addressing
"And how about you, Count Peter Kirilych? If they call up the militia,

the streets."
master to teach him Russian. It is becoming dangerous to speak French in
"And have you heard?" Shinshin asked. "Prince Golitsyn has engaged a

she should not speak French so much. It's not the time for it now."
"People are being arrested..." said the count. "I've told the countess

"not a spire at all, but only an old German ruin."
story), and how Rostopchin let him go and assured the people that he was
and accused of being a French "spyer" (so Count Rostopchin had told the
Moscow, and of how some German fellow had been brought to Rostopchin
illness of the old Georgian princess, of Metivier's disappearance from
chevalier of St. George, Shinshin told them the town news, of the
At dinner, at which champagne was drunk to the health of the new

enjoyment from that reading.
"No, after dinner," said the old count, evidently expecting much

lining. Pierre was about to begin reading.
found them in Pierre's hat, where he had carefully tucked them under the
But Sonya, who had gone to look for the papers in the anteroom, had

"Oh! And my coachman has gone."

"But you'll be late for dinner."

certainly..."
"No, really! I'll drive home, I must have left them there. I'll

searching for the papers he glanced at her several times.
features, which had been gloomy, suddenly lighted up, and while still
sat down looking silently at Pierre. As soon as she entered, Pierre's
Natasha entered with a softened and agitated expression of face and

"There he is, always losing everything!" remarked the countess.

"On my word, I don't know what I've done with it," he said.

room.
Natasha, who had left off singing but had not yet come into the drawing
who entered the room and glanced uneasily around, evidently expecting
them. Still slapping his pockets, he kissed the hand of the countess
Pierre began feeling in his pockets for the papers, but could not find

"The Emperor's appeal? Oh yes!"

"O Lord, O Lord!" exclaimed the count. "Where is the manifesto?"

Pierre.
"We are again retreating. They say we're already near Smolensk," replied

"Yes, yes, thank God! Well, and what news from the army?"

you!"
talking of a levy of ten men per thousand. Oh yes, let me congratulate
there's to be an Extraordinary Meeting of the nobility, and they are
"Yes, I've got it," said Pierre. "The Emperor is to be here tomorrow...

She says it's very fine."
countess has been to Mass at the Razumovskis' and heard the new prayer.
"Well, mon cher, have you got the manifesto?" asked the old count. "The

all up today."
"Oh yes, your plan. To join the hussars? I'll mention it, I'll bring it

only hope," said Petya.
"Well, what about my plan? Peter Kirilych, for heaven's sake! You are my

Petya pulled him by the arm to attract his attention.

was saying.
Pierre walked up and down the drawing room, not listening to what Petya

hussars.
He had asked Pierre to find out whether he would be accepted in the
Petya had come rushing out to talk to his namesake about this affair.

his friend Obolenski had lately, in secret, agreed to join the hussars.
resembled Natasha. He was preparing to enter the university, but he and
Petya was now a handsome rosy lad of fifteen with full red lips and

Just then Petya came running in from the drawing room.

down the room.
before her eyes, began singing again, and again began walking up and
Tears suddenly rose in her eyes, she turned away, lifted her music

because..."
there then, and now too, I don't know what would have become of me,
generous, or better than you; nobody could be! Had you not been
rapturously--"that's a different thing. I know no one kinder, more
"Yes, you... you..." she said, uttering the word you

time to say them.
of him and the same words rose to his lips. But she did not give him
hand; and the same feeling of pity, tenderness, and love took possession
the best man in the world and free, he would ask on his knees for her
when, trying to comfort her, he had said that if he were not himself but
By association of ideas, Pierre was at once carried back to the day

were in his place..."
"I think..." Pierre replied, "that he has nothing to forgive.... If I

toward me? What do you think? What do you think?"
her--"Will he ever forgive me? Will he not always have a bitter feeling
was speaking hurriedly, evidently afraid her strength might fail
hastily), "is in Russia, and in the army again. What do you think?"--she
saw in that same army order that he, Bolkonski" (she whispered the name
She spoke rapidly and did not notice how Pierre flushed at her words. "I
don't know how important you are to me, how much you've done for me...."
to do anything you disapproved of. I believe in you completely. You
"I don't know myself," Natasha answered quickly, "but I should not like

"No... Why should it be? On the contrary... But why do you ask me?"

eyes inquiringly on him.
"Count, is it wrong of me to sing?" she said blushing, and fixing her

Natasha stopped him.

he added, and was about to go to the drawing room.
"Oh yes, I sent that announcement. But I don't want to interrupt you,"

has received a St. George's Cross? I am so proud of him."
animation Pierre had not seen in her for a long time. "You know Nicholas
"How glad I am you've come! I am so happy today," she said, with the old

"That's capital!"

"it is, at least, something to do."
"I want to try to sing again," she said, adding as if by way of excuse,

face, she blushed and came rapidly up to him.
opened the door, but when, turning quickly, she saw his broad, surprised
church, walking about the room singing. She had her back to him when he
opened the door softly and saw her, in the lilac dress she had worn at
illness, and so the sound of her voice surprised and delighted him. He
exercises in the music room. He knew that she had not sung since her
her, while taking off his cloak, he heard her. She was practicing solfa
The first person he saw in the house was Natasha. Even before he saw

anteroom.
stick. Pierre, from club habit, always left both hat and stick in the
eagerly forward to help him off with his cloak and take his hat and
at the Rostovs' he stayed till midnight. The Rostovs' footman rushed
not even ask whether he was to wait. He knew that when his master was
He went up the stairs, puffing and muttering something. His coachman did

bulk with evident ease.
not been so tall, so broad of limb, and so strong that he carried his
He had grown so stout this year that he would have been abnormal had he

Pierre came early so as to find them alone.

on Sundays.
A few intimate friends were dining with the Rostovs that day, as usual


CHAPTER XX





anything, but wait for what was bound to come to pass.
predestined from eternity, and that therefore he ought not to undertake
power of the beast that spoke great and blasphemous things had been
666; that his part in the great affair of setting a limit to the
vague idea that he was L'russe Besuhof who had the number of the beast,
reason for not carrying out his intention to enter the army lay in the
patriotism, he somehow felt ashamed to take the step. But the chief
saw the great mass of Muscovites who had donned uniform and were talking
peace and the abolition of war, and secondly, by the fact that when he
Freemasons to which he was bound by oath and which preached perpetual
had he not been hindered, first, by his membership of the Society of
He had long been thinking of entering the army and would have done so

since the beginning of the war.
been conscious of ever since the appearance of the comet, and especially
force that feeling of agitation and expectation in Pierre which he had
Emperor's being expected to arrive next day--all aroused with fresh
to be in both the Russian capitals by the autumn, and the talk of the
Moscow and of a leaflet in circulation stating that Napoleon promised
things were going in the army, the rumors of the discovery of spies in
hurry, the meeting with the courier who talked casually of how badly
His conversation with Count Rostopchin and the latter's tone of anxious

and the other orders to take with him when he went to dinner.
and Nicholas' letter to the Rostovs, keeping the appeal, the bulletin,
son's having received a decoration, so he sent that printed army order
Pierre could not refrain from making them happy by the news of their
Chasseurs. Though he did not want to remind the Rostovs of Bolkonski,
of Prince Andrew Bolkonski, appointed to the command of a regiment of
courage shown in the Ostrovna affair, and in the same order the name
Nicholas Rostov, awarded a St. George's Cross of the Fourth Class for
one of them, in the lists of killed, wounded, and rewarded, the name of
most recent bulletin. Glancing through the army orders, Pierre found in
Moscow, which had just been printed, the last army orders, and his own
took that letter, and Rostopchin also gave him the Emperor's appeal to
Among these letters was one from Nicholas Rostov to his father. Pierre

courier. "I have a sackful of letters to parents."
"Do, please, for heaven's sake, relieve me of something!" said the

Moscow balls.
fresh from the army, an acquaintance of his own, who often danced at
morning, when he went to call at Rostopchin's he met there a courier
well, both the appeal to the people and the news from the army. In the
promised the Rostovs to bring them, from Count Rostopchin whom he knew
On the eve of the Sunday when the special prayer was read, Pierre had


    * Forty-two.


great achievement and great happiness.
of Moscow habits in which he felt himself held captive and lead him to a
mature and culminate, to lift him out of that spellbound, petty sphere
comet, 666, L'Empereur Napoleon, and L'russe Besuhof--all this had to
a moment. His love for Natasha, Antichrist, Napoleon, the invasion, the
the Apocalypse he did not know, but he did not doubt that connection for
How, or by what means, he was connected with the great event foretold in
answer he sought. L'russe Besuhof made 666. This discovery excited him.
word Empereur. By omitting the e, though incorrectly, Pierre got the
represented by e, the very letter elided from the article le before the
up the numbers got 671. This was only five too much, and five was
also be given in the answer. So he wrote Le russe Besuhof and adding
answer to the question were contained in his name, his nationality would
without obtaining the desired result. Then it occurred to him: if the
substituting a z for the s and adding de and the article le, still
sum of the numbers did not come right. Then he changed the spelling,
wrote down his own name in French, Comte Pierre Besouhoff, but the
were either more or less than 666. Once when making such calculations he
Alexandre, La nation russe and added up their numbers, but the sums
answer to the question that engrossed him. He wrote the words L'Empereur
same system of using letters as numbers and adding them up, to find an
end to the power of the beast, that is, of Napoleon, and tried by the
pleased Pierre very much and he often asked himself what would put an
in the year 1812 when the French emperor was forty-two. This prophecy
which it followed that the limit fixed for Napoleon's power had come
great things and blasphemies," the same number 666 was obtained; from
quarante-deux, * which was the term allowed to the beast that "spoke
in the Apocalypse. Moreover, by applying the same system to the words
sum of them is 666, and that Napoleon was therefore the beast foretold
Writing the words L'Empereur Napoleon in numbers, it appears that the


                       160
                        z
            100  110  120  130  140  150
             t    u    v    w    x    y
      20   30   40   50   60   70   80   90
       l    m    n    o    p    q    r    s
      1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10
      a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   i   k

tens, will have the following significance:
Hebrew, in which the first nine letters denote units and the others
The French alphabet, written out with the same numerical values as the


months.
blasphemies; and power was given unto him to continue forty and two
And there was given unto him a mouth speaking great things and


And in the fifth verse of the same chapter:

threescore and six.
the beast: for it is the number of a man; and his number is Six hundred
Here is wisdom. Let him that hath understanding count the number of


In chapter 13, verse 18, of the Apocalypse, it is said:

Revelation of St. John.
Pierre the following prophecy concerning Napoleon, drawn from the
approaching catastrophe. One of his brother Masons had revealed to
whole life, and he impatiently sought everywhere for signs of that
continue long, that a catastrophe was coming which would change his
possession of him. He felt that the condition he was in could not
ever-increasing restlessness, which he could not explain, took
no longer aroused in him the former feeling of careful pity, an
from the seat of war and Natasha's health began to improve and she
irresistibly. But latterly, when more and more disquieting reports came
acquaintances he had made in Moscow formed a current that bore him along
there were other hours he had to spend somehow, and the habits and
and dissipated life, because besides the hours he spent at the Rostovs'
Pierre still went into society, drank as much and led the same idle

no one will ever know it." And his soul felt calm and peaceful.
smiled at me yesterday and asked me to come again, and I love her, and
country and the Tsar confer honors upon him, what does that matter? She
"Well, supposing N. N. swindled the country and the Tsar, and the

presented itself to him, he said to himself:
beauty and love which it was worth living for. Whatever worldly baseness
activity in which no one could be justified or guilty--a realm of
transferred him instantly to another, a brighter, realm of spiritual
the questions that had haunted him, but because his conception of her
seen her, and all his doubts vanished--not because she had answered
transient and incomprehensible--but he remembered her as he had last
not ask himself why men struggled so about these things when all is so
human baseness or folly, he was not horrified as formerly, and did
himself took part in, trivial conversations, when he read or heard of
reply to the former question, but by her image. When he listened to, or
amid every occupation, was now replaced, not by another question or by a
itself. That terrible question "Why?" "Wherefore?" which had come to him
earthly things, that had incessantly tormented him, no longer presented
horizon--from that day the problem of the vanity and uselessness of all
be fixed in the sky and felt that something new was appearing on his own
grateful look fresh in his mind, had gazed at the comet that seemed to
From the day when Pierre, after leaving the Rostovs' with Natasha's


CHAPTER XIX





that God heard her prayer.
give them all, and her too, peace and happiness. And it seemed to her
sins, and she prayed to God to forgive them all, and her too, and to
punishment that overtakes men for their sins, and especially of her own
felt in her heart a devout and tremulous awe at the thought of the
righteousness of the prayer that was being read on bended knees. She
of them that she might pray for them. But neither could she doubt the
foot when but a few minutes before she had been wishing she had more
by love. But she could not pray that her enemies might be trampled under
for the strengthening of the heart by faith and hope, and its animation
shared with all her heart in the prayer for the spirit of righteousness,
fully understanding what she was asking of God in that prayer. She
tenderness and emotion with which her heart was overflowing, but without
the destruction of "Thy Jerusalem," and she prayed to God with the
Amalek, of Gideon over Midian, and of David over Goliath, and about
strongly. She listened to every word about the victory of Moses over
In Natasha's receptive condition of soul this prayer affected her

end. Amen."
glory, to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, now and forever, world without
and the victory of them that put their trust in Thee, and to Thee be all
the feet of Thy faithful servants! For Thou art the defense, the succor,
in Thy mercy; smite down our enemies and destroy them swiftly beneath
and grant us Thy salvation; make the hearts of Thy servants to rejoice
the Lord and we are Thy people. Show Thy mercy upon us this day, O Lord,
be put to shame and perish, and may all the nations know that Thou art
blessing, that those who hate us and our Orthodox faith may see it and
not be confounded in our hope of Thy mercy, and give us a token of Thy
"O Lord our God, in whom we believe and in whom we put our trust, let us

the destiny of those Thou hast sanctified.
to our fathers, and let not the scepter of the wicked be exalted against
spirit in the righteous defense of the heritage Thou gavest to us and
hope, inspire us with true love one for another, arm us with unity of
a right spirit within us, strengthen us all in Thy faith, fortify our
our transgressions and iniquities! Create in us a clean heart and renew
unworthiness, and in Thy great goodness and Thy many mercies regard not
which are from of old; turn not Thy face from us, but be gracious to our
"God of our fathers! Remember Thy bounteous mercy and loving-kindness

great and small; Thou art God, and man cannot prevail against Thee!
feet and be laid low by our hosts! Lord, Thou art able to save both
in secret be turned against them; let them fall before Thy servants'
they be ensnared when they know it not, and may the plots they have laid
wind, and may Thy mighty Angel confound them and put them to flight; may
they be before the faces of Thy faithful warriors as dust before the
confound and put to shame those who have devised evil against us, may
for the fight. Take up the spear and shield and arise to help us;
have armed themselves in Thy Name, and gird their loins with strength
Goliath. Preserve his army, put a bow of brass in the hands of those who
gavest Moses the victory over Amalek, Gideon over Midian, and David over
Thine almighty hand, and give him victory over his enemy, even as Thou
counsels, his undertakings, and his work; strengthen his kingdom by
righteousness, and let it preserve us, Thy chosen Israel! Bless his
mindful of his uprightness and meekness, reward him according to his
our most gracious sovereign lord, the Emperor Alexander Pavlovich; be
"Lord God! Hear us when we pray to Thee; strengthen with Thy might

triumph? How long shall they wield unlawful power?
desecrate our holy shrines. How long, O Lord, how long shall the wicked
beloved Russia; to defile Thy temples, to overthrow Thine altars, and to
together to overthrow Thy kingdom, to destroy Thy dear Jerusalem, Thy
waste the whole world, rises against us; these lawless men are gathered
have mercy upon us! This foe confounding Thy land, desiring to lay
blessing on Thy humble people, and graciously hear us, spare us, and
"Lord God of might, God of our salvation! Look this day in mercy and

read and which acts so irresistibly on a Russian heart.
voice, clear, not grandiloquent but mild, in which only the Slav clergy
"Lord God of might, God of our salvation!" began the priest in that

for the deliverance of Russia from hostile invasion.
surprise. Then came the prayer just received from the Synod--a prayer
Everybody followed his example and they looked at one another in
biretta on his head, adjusted his hair, and knelt down with an effort.
of the sanctuary screen. The priest came out with his purple velvet
knelt on when praying on Trinity Sunday, and placed it before the doors
Natasha knew so well, the deacon brought out a small stool, the one he
Unexpectedly, in the middle of the service, and not in the usual order

and shining eyes and prayed God to help her.
The countess looked round several times at her daughter's softened face

from her regrets, desires, remorse, hopes, and sins.
invisible power at any moment to take her and deliver her from herself,
herself but letting her slender arms hang down as if expecting some
me!" prayed Natasha, with impatient emotion in her heart, not crossing
nothing; teach me what to do and how to use my will! Take me, take
submit myself to Thy will!" she thought. "I want nothing, wish for
"Commit ourselves to God," Natasha inwardly repeated. "Lord God, I

the Lord!"
breast and said, "Let us commit ourselves and our whole lives to Christ
When he had finished the Litany the deacon crossed the stole over his

any rate loved the governing Synod and prayed for it.
that even if she did not understand, still she could not doubt, and at
she bowed very low and made the sign of the cross, saying to herself
devotion to God. When they prayed for the Imperial family and the Synod,
as men for whom her feelings were as nothing compared with her awe and
she feel able to think clearly and calmly of Prince Andrew and Anatole,
hate her she gladly prayed for him as for an enemy. Only at prayer did
remembered Anatole who had done her so much harm--and though he did not
father, and always at the thought of enemies and those who hated her she
enemies the creditors and all who had business dealings with her
people who hated her, in order to pray for them. She included among her
prayed for those who hate us, she tried to think of her enemies and
them, and feeling all the strength of her love for them. When they
Sonya, realizing for the first time how wrongly she had acted toward
she prayed for the members of her own family, her father and mother and
all the wrongs she had done him. When they prayed for those who love us,
remembered Prince Andrew, prayed for him, and asked God to forgive her
Denisov. When they prayed for all traveling by land and sea, she
When they prayed for the warriors, she thought of her brother and

Natasha.
"For the world of angels and all the spirits who dwell above us," prayed

"For the peace that is from above, and for the salvation of our souls."

by brotherly love--let us pray!" thought Natasha.
"As one community, without distinction of class, without enmity, united

"In peace let us pray unto the Lord."

solemn voice to recite the words of the prayer...
and, making the sign of the cross on his breast, began in a loud and
holding his thumb extended, drew his long hair from under his dalmatic
The deacon came out onto the raised space before the altar screen and,

forever, forever!" she pleaded.
"Teach me what I should do, how to live my life, how I may grow good

feeling agitated her.
understand, made Natasha's breast heave, and a joyous but oppressive
pronounced some words. Tears, the cause of which she herself did not
the curtain was slowly drawn, and from behind it a soft mysterious voice
souls of the worshipers. The gates of the sanctuary screen were closed,
mild solemnity which has so elevating and soothing an effect on the
A comely, fresh-looking old man was conducting the service with that

her.
vileness, horrified that the former purity of her soul was again lost to
and suddenly, at the sound of the service, she felt horrified at her own
with vexation that she was herself being judged and was judging others,
crossing herself properly but in a cramped manner, and again she thought
dresses, condemned the bearing of a lady standing close by who was not
nods with acquaintances near her. From habit she scrutinized the ladies'
and are no good to anyone." She stood by her mother's side and exchanged
know I am good," she thought, "but yet my best years are slipping by
I'm young, and I know that now I am good. I used to be bad, but now I
same surroundings in which it used to be so easy to live. I'm pretty,
the Sunday before, "and always the same life that is no life, and the
again--another week past," she thought, recalling that she had been here
particularly so on this bright, hot summer day in town. "It's Sunday
On the contrary it tormented her more than anything else of late, and
was pretty, but this no longer gave her satisfaction as it used to.
greater the pain and shame in her soul. She knew for certain that she
walked--as women can walk--with the more repose and stateliness the
in a crowd, Natasha in her lilac silk dress trimmed with black lace
sinking heart, wretched as she always was now when she found herself
who looked at her was thinking only of what had happened to her. With a
she was always imagining that. It always seemed to her that everyone
She heard, or thought she heard, the names of Kuragin and Bolkonski. But

"She's much thinner, but all the same she's pretty!"

"That's Rostova, the one who..."

young man speaking about her in too loud a whisper.
behind a liveried footman who cleared the way for them, she heard a
summer. As Natasha, at her mother's side, passed through the crowd
who usually left town for their country estates had not gone away that
chapel, for, as if expecting something to happen, many wealthy families
notabilities, all the Rostovs' acquaintances, were at the Razumovskis'
is most strongly felt on a bright, hot day in town. All the Moscow
summer languor, that content and discontent with the present, which
the cobblestones, and the brilliant, hot sunshine were all full of that
trousers of a battalion marching to parade, the rattling of wheels on
of the trees on the boulevard, the sounds of the band and the white
hawkers, the light and gay summer clothes of the crowd, the dusty leaves
got out of their carriage at the chapel, the sultry air, the shouts of
as usual. It was a hot July day. Even at ten o'clock, when the Rostovs
That Sunday, the Rostovs went to Mass at the Razumovskis' private chapel

and appeal, which he would obtain from Count Rostopchin.
to come to dinner next day, Sunday, and bring a copy of the manifesto
but was not yet in print, and Pierre, who was at the Rostovs', promised
On the eleventh of July, which was Saturday, the manifesto was received

an army of a million and only a miracle could save Russia.
in danger, it was said that Smolensk had surrendered, that Napoleon had
Russia. It was said that the Emperor was leaving the army because it was
exaggerated reports became current about them and about the position of
up to the eleventh of July no manifesto or appeal had been received,
the people, and of his coming himself from the army to Moscow. And as
began to spread in Moscow; people spoke of an appeal by the Emperor to
At the beginning of July more and more disquieting reports about the war


CHAPTER XVIII





nails and spat a little for luck as she returned to the drawing room.
The countess, with a cheerful expression on her face, looked down at her

up very much."
last medicine has done her a very great deal of good. She has freshened
coin in his palm. "She will soon be singing and frolicking about. The
"Be quite easy," he continued playfully, as he adroitly took the gold

particular about it.
he, evidently sincerely satisfied with his success. "Only, please be
"She must certainly go on taking them morning and evening," said

powders he had prescribed a fortnight previously.
The doctor who came to see her that day ordered her to continue the

that lay before her.
many months she felt calm and not oppressed by the thought of the life
white muslin, she returned home after communion, for the first time for
But the happy day came, and on that memorable Sunday, when, dressed in

so great that she felt she should never live till that blessed Sunday.
Ivanovna, joyously playing with the word, called it, seemed to Natasha
day. And the happiness of taking communion, or "communing" as Agrafena
During the whole week she spent in this way, that feeling grew every

happiness.
of correcting her faults, the possibility of a new, clean life, and of
Natasha experienced a feeling new to her, a sense of the possibility
sweeping the street, and everybody within the houses was still asleep,
early hour when she met no one but bricklayers going to work or men
herself most of all were those of repentance. On her way home at an
everything, to have mercy upon her. The prayers to which she surrendered
at her own vileness, simply asked God to forgive her everything,
crossed herself, bowed low, and when she did not understand, in horror
oneself to God, whom she felt guiding her soul at those moments. She
understand all, that it is only necessary to believe and to commit
the wish to understand everything is pride, that it is impossible to
own. When she did not understand, it was sweeter still to think that
personal feeling became interwoven in the prayers with shades of its
she tried to follow with understanding. When she understood them her
falling from the window, she listened to the words of the service which
illuminated by the candles burning before it and by the morning light
at that unusual morning hour, gazing at the dark face of the Virgin
humility before something great and incomprehensible, seized her when
screen before the choir on the left side, and a feeling, new to her, of
the customary place before an icon of the Blessed Virgin, let into the
never many people in the church; Natasha always stood beside Belova in
Ivanovna, the priest was a man of very severe and lofty life. There were
own parish, but at a church where, according to the devout Agrafena
By Agrafena Ivanovna's advice Natasha prepared herself not in their
air, went out into the deserted streets lit by the clear light of dawn.
her shabbiest dress and an old mantilla, Natasha, shivering in the fresh
afraid of being late for Matins. Hastily washing, and meekly putting on
at three in the morning, but generally found her already awake. She was
entrusted her to Belova. Agrafena Ivanovna used to come to wake Natasha
fear and concealing it from the doctor, she agreed to Natasha's wish and
might help her daughter more than medicines and, though not without
the medical treatment, in the depths of her heart she hoped that prayer
The countess was pleased with Natasha's zeal; after the poor results of

Matins, or Mass.
going to church every day for a week and not once missing Vespers,
three services in their own house, but as Agrafena Ivanovna did, by
not as they generally prepared for it in the Rostov family by attending
morning, Natasha insisted on fasting and preparing for the sacrament,
Despite the doctor's orders that she should not go out early in the
and prepare for Holy Communion, and Natasha gladly welcomed the idea.
the shrines of the Moscow saints. She suggested that Natasha should fast
country neighbor of the Rostovs, came to Moscow to pay her devotions at
Before the end of the fast of St. Peter, Agrafena Ivanovna Belova, a

several instances.
romantic friendship between a man and a woman of which she had known
part, still less on his, or even to the kind of tender, self-conscious,
that the relations between him and herself could lead to love on her
which she had experienced with Kuragin that it never entered her head
Natasha felt very strongly with him that moral barrier the absence of
a crying child. It was not because Pierre was a married man, but because
her, were spoken as all sorts of meaningless words are spoken to comfort
and it seemed plain to her that those words, which had then so comforted
so strongly agitated, Pierre never spoke to Natasha of his feelings;
on his knees for her hand and her love--uttered at a moment when she was
After those involuntary words--that if he were free he would have asked
which she imagined must be the same toward everyone as it was to her.
noticed this and attributed it to his general kindness and shyness,
something they spoke of would awaken memories distressing to her. She
especially when he wanted to do something to please her, or feared that
noticed embarrassment and awkwardness on his part in her presence,
to everyone that there was no merit in his kindness. Sometimes Natasha
seemed to her to be an effort, it seemed so natural for him to be kind
she was not even grateful to him for it; nothing good on Pierre's part
felt this delicacy and so found great pleasure in his society. But
same time more seriously than did Count Bezukhov. Natasha unconsciously
impossible to treat her with more delicacy, greater care, and at the
to see them was glad to see only one person, Pierre. It would have been
sometimes laughed. She hardly ever left the house and of those who came
be with him better than with the others, and when alone with him she
the house and felt at ease only with her brother Petya. She liked to
anyone, but wanted nothing for herself. She kept away from everyone in
passing. Natasha apparently tried not to be a burden or a hindrance to
But there was nothing to come. There was no joy in life, yet life was
this was not enough. She knew that, and asked herself, "What next?"
imagined, but worse, much worse, than anybody else in the world. But
It comforted her to reflect that she was not better as she had formerly

on.
for any enjoyment would not return again. Yet it was necessary to live
the time had not deceived her--that that state of freedom and readiness
single day of that time! But it was gone forever. Her presentiment at
and most painfully. What would she not have given to bring back even a
holidays spent with Nicholas at Otradnoe were what she recalled oftenest
of hope. The previous autumn, the hunting, "Uncle," and the Christmas
the old interests of her carefree girlish life that had been so full
sentinel within her and forbade her every joy. Besides, she had lost all
man was more to her than Nastasya Ivanovna, the buffoon. Something stood
coquet ever entered her head. She said and felt at that time that no
in face of her sorrow. Without any need of self-restraint, no wish to
Laughter and singing in particular seemed to her like a blasphemy,
uselessly have ruined her young life which might have been so happy.
times which could never return, tears of vexation that she should so
choked her: tears of remorse, tears at the recollection of those pure
sing. As soon as she began to laugh, or tried to sing by herself, tears
never laughed without a sound of tears in her laughter. She could not
forms of pleasure--balls, promenades, concerts, and theaters--but she
Natasha was calmer but no happier. She not merely avoided all external


CHAPTER XVII





and she began to recover physically.
to press so painfully on her heart, it gradually faded into the past,
grief began to be overlaid by the impressions of daily life, it ceased
the country life to which she was accustomed, youth prevailed. Natasha's
such things made a large collection, and in spite of being deprived of
of the little bottles and boxes of which Madame Schoss who was fond of
In spite of the many pills she swallowed and the drops and powders out

country that summer of 1812.
stifling atmosphere of the town, and the Rostovs did not move to the
she could not get on without medical treatment, so they kept her in the
little, coughed, and was always low-spirited. The doctors said that
The symptoms of Natasha's illness were that she ate little, slept

with a more tranquil mind.
slipped a gold coin into his hand and always returned to the patient
the countess, trying to conceal the action from herself and from him,
one must wait and see, that the malady was chiefly mental, but... And
there was danger, he had hopes of the effect of this last medicine and
assumed a grave air and thoughtfully shaking his head said that though
gone into another room, to which the countess hurriedly followed him, he
regardless of her grief-stricken face joked with her. But when he had
The doctor came every day, felt her pulse, looked at her tongue, and

treatment and did not value her life.
show, by disregarding the orders, that she did not believe in medical
and that it was all nonsense. And it was even pleasant to be able to
at certain hours, though she declared that no medicine would cure her
were being made for her sake, and to know that she had to take medicine
Even to Natasha herself it was pleasant to see that so many sacrifices
slightly harmful pills in the little gilt box had to be administered?
still kept awake at night so as not to miss the proper time when the
carry out all the doctor's injunctions with precision, and that she
not undressed during the first three nights, in order to be ready to
What would Sonya have done without the glad consciousness that she had

that foreign word, incomprehensible to others as well as to herself.
pneumonia," she would go on, deriving much comfort from the utterance of
the right time! You mustn't trifle with it, you know, or it may turn to
in her vexation, "if you won't obey the doctor and take your medicine at
"You'll never get well like that," she would say, forgetting her grief

for not strictly obeying the doctor's orders?
countess have done had she not been able sometimes to scold the invalid
but Frise had, and Mudrov had diagnosed them even better? What would the
the details of how Metivier and Feller had not understood the symptoms,
her abroad for consultations there, and had he not been able to explain
illness continued he would not grudge yet other thousands and would take
grudge thousands more to benefit her, or had he not known that if her
known that it was costing him a thousand rubles, and that he would not
the count have borne his dearly loved daughter's illness had he not
supplied an occupation and consolation to the family circle? How would
other details of life ordered by the doctors, the carrying out of which
to give by the clock, the warm drinks, the chicken cutlets, and all the
have looked, if nothing had been done, if there had not been those pills
What would Sonya and the count and countess have done, how would they

intervals of precisely two hours, neither more nor less.
and seventy kopeks, and if she took those powders in boiled water at
the Arbat and got a powder and some pills in a pretty box for a ruble
that it would soon pass if only the coachman went to the chemist's in
of use to Natasha because they kissed and rubbed her bump, assuring her
mother's sympathy while she rubs the bump comforts it. The doctors were
remedy for its pain, and the hope of relief and the expression of its
cannot believe that the strongest and wisest of its people have no
spot rubbed or kissed, and it feels better when this is done. The child
and runs at once to the arms of its mother or nurse to have the aching
wants to have a place rubbed that has been hurt. A child knocks itself
satisfied the need seen in its most elementary form in a child, when it
something should be done, which is felt by those who are suffering. They
that eternal human need for hope of relief, for sympathy, and that
pseudo-healers, wise women, homeopaths, and allopaths. They satisfied
of those who loved her--and that is why there are, and always will be,
indispensable because they satisfied a mental need of the invalid and
were given in small doses), but they were useful, necessary, and
the most part harmful (the harm was scarcely perceptible, as they
usefulness did not depend on making the patient swallow substances for
really useful, as in fact they were to the whole Rostov family. Their
was kept out of their minds by the fact that they saw they were
years of their lives on that business. But, above all, that thought
lives was to cure, and they received money for it and had spent the best
that he is unable to work his charms) because the business of their
thought could not occur to the doctors (as it cannot occur to a wizard
innumerable combinations of the maladies of those organs. This simple
so on mentioned in medical books, but a disease consisting of one of the
medicine--not a disease of the lungs, liver, skin, heart, nerves, and
has his own peculiar, personal, novel, complicated disease, unknown to
known, for every living person has his own peculiarities and always
Natasha was suffering from, as no disease suffered by a live man can be
idea never occurred to any of them that they could not know the disease
variety of medicines for all the diseases known to them, but the simple
French, German, and Latin, blamed one another, and prescribed a great
her. Doctors came to see her singly and in consultation, talked much in
feel, was in danger. They could not think of anything but how to help
or sleep, grew visibly thinner, coughed, and, as the doctors made them
in how far she was to blame for what had happened. She could not eat
background. She was so ill that it was impossible for them to consider
her conduct and the breaking off of her engagement, receded into the
her parents, the consideration of all that had caused the illness,
Natasha's illness was so serious that, fortunately for her and for

their own and settled down in town.
household, and the whole family moved from Marya Dmitrievna's house to
well yet and still weak, went to Moscow with Petya and the rest of the
On receiving news of Natasha's illness, the countess, though not quite


CHAPTER XVI





battalion, and when a brave officer was needed he was chosen.
Ostrovna he was brought into notice, received command of an hussar
service, as often happens, turned in his favor. After the affair at
no clear solution of what puzzled him so, the wheel of fortune in the
But while Nicholas was considering these questions and still could reach

Cross.... I can't make it out at all."
I kill him? My hand trembled. And they have given me a St. George's
And how frightened he was! He thought that I should kill him. Why should
country's sake? And how was he to blame, with his dimple and blue eyes?
that's all there is in what is called heroism! And did I do it for my
understand. "So others are even more afraid than I am!" he thought. "So
a reputation for bravery, and there was something he could not at all
his amazement had gained him the St. George's Cross and even given him
Rostov was always thinking about that brilliant exploit of his, which to

over in his mind.
He drank reluctantly, tried to remain alone, and kept turning something
without being dull or angry, was silent, thoughtful, and preoccupied.
All that day and the next his friends and comrades noticed that Rostov,

Rostov still had the same indefinite feeling, as of shame.
glanced at Rostov with a feigned smile and waved his hand in greeting.
him; The sword cut on his arm could scarcely be called a wound. He
his foreign uniform on an hussar packhorse and looked anxiously about
a look at his Frenchman with the dimple on his chin. He was sitting in
Rostov saw the prisoners being led away and galloped after them to have

paused when I raised it."
oh yes, that French officer with the dimple. And I remember how my arm
that's not it." Something else, resembling remorse, tormented him. "Yes,
general. "Ilyin? No, he's safe. Have I disgraced myself in any way? No,
on earth is worrying me?" he asked himself as he rode back from the
that same vaguely disagreeable feeling of moral nausea. "But what
therefore have struck him all the more pleasantly, but he still felt
discipline. Ostermann's flattering words and promise of a reward should
felt sure his commander was sending for him to punish him for breach of
Ostermann, Rostov, remembering that he had charged without orders,
and would recommend him for a St. George's Cross. When sent for by Count
thanked him, and said he would report his gallant deed to the Emperor
Count Ostermann-Tolstoy met the returning hussars, sent for Rostov,

the capture of that officer and the blow he had dealt him.
confused, which he could not at all account for, had come over him with
an unpleasant feeling of depression in his heart. Something vague and
back with their prisoners. Rostov galloped back with the rest, aware of
French infantry were firing as they ran. The hussars galloped hastily
a third was being helped by an hussar to mount his horse. In front, the
horse; another was perched up behind an hussar with his arms round him;
wounded, but though his face was bleeding, he would not give up his
saddle. On all sides, the hussars were busy with the dragoons; one was
Some hussars who galloped up disengaged his foot and helped him into the
stirrup and did not remove his frightened blue eyes from Rostov's face.
surrender!" He hurriedly but vainly tried to get his foot out of the
Before Rostov had decided what to do with him, the officer cried, "I
face at all suited to a battlefield, but a most ordinary, homelike face.
young, with a dimple in the chin and light-blue eyes--was not an enemy's
Rostov with shrinking terror. His pale and mud-stained face--fair and
up with fear as if he every moment expected another blow, gazed up at
the ground, the other being caught in the stirrup. His eyes, screwed
had vanquished. The French dragoon officer was hopping with one foot on
Rostov reined in his horse, and his eyes sought his foe to see whom he
arm above the elbow--as from the shock to his horse and from fright.
officer fell, not so much from the blow--which had but slightly cut his
The instant he had done this, all Rostov's animation vanished. The

raised his saber and struck the Frenchman with it.
knocking it over, and at the same instant Rostov, without knowing why,
its breast against the hindquarters of the officer's horse, almost
and urging it on with his saber. In another moment Rostov's horse dashed
uniform an officer, was going at a gallop, crouching on his gray horse
immediately overtake the enemy he had selected. That Frenchman, by his
almost before he had righted himself in his saddle he saw that he would
him. On the way he came upon a bush, his gallant horse cleared it, and
galloping back. Rostov, picking out one on a gray horse, dashed after
horse fell in among the hussars. Nearly all the French dragoons were
flung himself to the ground to avoid being knocked over, and a riderless
dragoons' disordered lines. One Uhlan stopped, another who was on foot
gave rein to his Donets horse and galloped to intersect the path of the
feeling with which he had galloped across the path of a wolf, Rostov
foremost began to turn, while those behind began to halt. With the same
them. The dragoons were now close at hand. On seeing the hussars, the
drew nearer to our Uhlans and the French dragoons who galloped after
instinctively changed to a gallop, which grew faster and faster as they
Hardly had they reached the bottom of the hill before their pace
deployed squadron, rode at full trot downhill toward the dragoons.
and immediately, hearing behind him the tramp of the horses of his
not restrain himself. He touched his horse, gave the word of command,
stimulatingly around him and his horse was so eager to go that he could
it slip it would not return. The bullets were whining and whistling so
withstand an attack--knew there was only that moment and that if he let
near and that they were galloping in disorder; he knew they could not
did when hunting, without reflecting or considering. He saw the dragoons
him. Rostov himself did not know how or why he did it. He acted as he
word of command, the whole squadron, sharing his feeling, was following
the front of his squadron, and before he had time to finish giving the
Rostov, without waiting to hear him out, touched his horse, galloped to

"A fine thing too!" replied the captain, "and really..."

"Andrew Sevastyanych!" said Rostov. "You know, we could crush them...."

eyes fixed on the cavalry below them.
around. A captain, standing beside him, was gazing like himself with
be done now, at that very moment, or it would be too late. He looked
latter could not withstand them, but if a charge was to be made it must
instinctively that if the hussars struck at the French dragoons now, the
Rostov gazed at what was happening before him as at a hunt. He felt

arms and their sabers in the air.
at the foot of the hill, jostled and overtook one another, waving their
pursuing them. He could already see how these men, who looked so small
nearer in disorderly crowds came the Uhlans and the French dragoons
sight of these blue French dragoons pursuing our Uhlans. Nearer and
Rostov, with his keen sportsman's eye, was one of the first to catch


CHAPTER XV





be seen.
behind them, in a large group, blue French dragoons on gray horses could
to the left, and among the orange-colored Uhlans on chestnut horses and
Uhlans were galloping back, not to the place they had occupied but more
confused happened there amid the smoke, and five minutes later our
of the Uhlans. They swooped down close to the French dragoons, something
before him from the hill, and with his whole soul followed the movement
of firing. Drawing himself up, he viewed the field of battle opening out
pleasurable and exhilarating effect on Rostov than the previous sounds
The sounds, which he had not heard for so long, had an even more

spent without taking effect.
Uhlans, bullets came from the front, whining and whistling, but fell
the hill to support the battery. As they took the places vacated by the
As soon as the Uhlans descended the hill, the hussars were ordered up

the left.
and trotted downhill toward the French cavalry which was seen below to
to pass. The Uhlans started, the streamers on their spears fluttering,
The infantry in front of them parted into platoons to allow the cavalry

"Form column! Prepare to charge!"

After Ostermann had gone, a command rang out to the Uhlans.

the guns.
halted, spoke to the commander of the regiment, and rode up the hill to
began. Count Ostermann with his suite rode up behind the squadron,
The hussars remained in the same place for about an hour. A cannonade

them.
again it sounded as if someone were walking on detonators and exploding
now several quickly one after another. Again all was silent and then
of the merriest music. Trap-ta-ta-tap! cracked the shots, now together,
At these sounds, long unheard, Rostov's spirits rose, as at the strains

briskly exchanging shots with the enemy in the dale.
columns and guns. Our advanced line, already in action, could be heard
sunbeams. In front, beyond a hollow dale, could be seen the enemy's
the wonderfully clear air, brightly illuminated by slanting morning
Higher up the hill, on the very horizon, our guns were visible through
the right stood our infantry in a dense column: they were the reserve.
our position, halted behind our Uhlans who were in the front line. To
And the hussars, passing along the line of troops on the left flank of

front.
heard ahead. "Forward by the left. Walk, march!" came the order from in
"Halt! Dress your ranks!" the order of the regimental commander was

and the men to flush.
empty and deserted village again ascended. The horses began to lather
had also quickened their pace--rode down a hill, and passing through an
The squadron overtook and passed the infantry and the battery--which

Vitebsk with orders to advance at a trot along the road.
that firing, Count Ostermann-Tolstoy's adjutant came galloping from
Before Rostov had had time to consider and determine the distance of

if in reply to it, came the sound of guns ahead of them.
edge. Everything grew bright and glittered. And with that light, and as
reappeared brighter still from behind the top of the cloud, tearing its
behind a long narrow cloud that hung above it. A few minutes later it
all was still. The whole sun appeared on the horizon and disappeared
after the storm; drops still continued to fall, but vertically now, and
the wind fell, as if it dared not spoil the beauty of the summer morning
As soon as the sun appeared in a clear strip of sky beneath the clouds,

help him.
terror and death the cornet was suffering and knew that only time could
great agitation. He knew from experience the tormenting expectation of
glanced with pity at the excited face of Ilyin, who talked much and in
calm and careless an air as though he were merely out for a ride. He
handing a pipe he had finished to an hussar riding behind him, with as
touching his horse's side with his foot, or, without turning round,
occasionally plucking leaves from a branch that met his hand, sometimes
it had come of itself. Now he rode beside Ilyin under the birch trees,
himself with cowardice, he had not been able to do this, but with time
first period of his service, hard as he tried and much as he reproached
seem most likely to interest him--the impending danger. During the
accustomed when going into action to think about anything but what would
he had learned how to manage his thoughts when in danger. He had grown
used to being under fire (one cannot grow used to danger), but because
not the least feeling of fear. He was fearless, not because he had grown
Formerly, when going into action, Rostov had felt afraid; now he had

impending danger.
of the horse, of the morning, of the doctor's wife, but not once of the
outgallop him. To ride this horse was a pleasure to him, and he thought
dun-colored, with light mane and tail, and when he rode it no one could
he had lately procured himself a large, fine, mettlesome, Donets horse,
a regimental but a Cossack horse. A judge of horses and a sportsman,
When campaigning, Rostov allowed himself the indulgence of riding not

between two rows of birch trees.
always closely followed by Ilyin, rode along the side of the road
side. The soldiers' faces were more and more clearly visible. Rostov,
wet, swayed in the wind and flung down bright drops of water to one
wet with the night's rain; the drooping branches of the birches, also
which always grows by country roadsides became clearly visible, still
before the wind. It was growing lighter and lighter. That curly grass
Tattered, blue-purple clouds, reddening in the east, were scudding

on in front.
trees on each side, following the infantry and a battery that had gone
mud, defiled in fours and moved along the broad road planted with birch
clanking sabers and subdued talk, their horses' hoofs splashing in the
Rostov riding in front gave the order "Forward!" and the hussars, with
was heard to "mount" and the soldiers crossed themselves and mounted.
Half an hour later the squadron was lined up on the road. The command

sixteen.
"A charming woman!" said Ilyin, with all the gravity of a boy of

following him.
"She really is a dear little thing," said Rostov to Ilyin, who was

audible.
of which his wife's nightcap was visible and her sleepy breathing
under the apron of which his feet were sticking out, and in the middle
under the wet and glistening leather hood of the doctor's cart, from
the tavern in the twilight of the dawn, Rostov and Ilyin both glanced
damp and cold, especially in clothes that were still moist. As they left
breaking, the rain had ceased, and the clouds were dispersing. It felt
Rostov went off to his squadron without waiting for tea. Day was
getting ready and again boiled some muddy water in the samovar. But
of Ostrovna. Still laughing and talking, the officers began hurriedly
quartermaster appeared with an order to move on to the little town
It was nearly three o'clock but no one was yet asleep, when the


CHAPTER XIV





resumed, to the accompaniment of unreasoning, merry, childlike laughter.
to sleep, but some remark would arouse him and conversation would be
covered trap. Several times Rostov, covering his head, tried to go
they ran out into the porch and reported what was taking place in the
remarks, recalling the doctor's uneasiness and his wife's delight, now
wet cloaks, but they did not sleep for a long time; now they exchanged
the officers lay down in the tavern, covering themselves with their
his wife with him, and had settled down with her in their covered cart,
which they hurriedly sought plausible pretexts. When he had gone, taking
still merrier, and some of them could not refrain from laughter, for
Seeing his gloomy face as he frowned at his wife, the officers grew

waiting for the game to end.
nights," replied the doctor, and he sat down morosely beside his wife,
"No, gentlemen, you have had your sleep, but I have not slept for two

"I'll stand guard on it myself!" said Ilyin.

doctor!"
"But I'll send an orderly.... Two of them!" said Rostov. "What an idea,

to sleep in their covered cart, or everything in it would be stolen.
alarm, awaiting her sentence) that the rain had ceased and they must go
told his wife (who had ceased to smile so happily, and looked at him in
still more attractive to them. Returning from the yard, the doctor
Hendrikhovna blushed till her eyes filled with tears and thereby became
had left the room all the officers burst into loud laughter and Mary
to be allowed to pass as they were blocking the way. As soon as he
depressed. Without greeting the officers, he scratched himself and asked
entertaining or amusing in what was going on. His face was sad and
some time, listening to what was being said, and evidently found nothing
suddenly appeared from behind Mary Hendrikhovna. He had been awake for
They had hardly begun to play before the doctor's disheveled head

"As it is, she is Queen, and her word is law!"

"Well, but supposing Mary Hendrikhovna is 'King'?" asked Ilyin.

the samovar for the doctor when the latter awoke.
Hendrikhovna's hand, and that the "Booby" should go to refill and reheat
was agreed that whoever became "King" should have the right to kiss Mary
lots to settle who should make up her set. At Rostov's suggestion it
proposed that they should play "Kings" with Mary Hendrikhovna. They drew
When they had emptied the samovar, Rostov took a pack of cards and

all up."
"This is my cup," said he. "Only dip your finger in it and I'll drink it

Mary Hendrikhovna, asking her to stir it with her finger.
Ilyin put a few drops of rum into the bucket of water and brought it to

"Too hot!" she replied, blushing with pleasure.

Rostov.
"Use your finger, Mary Hendrikhovna, it will be still nicer," said

meanwhile had pounced on.
Mary Hendrikhovna assented and began looking for the spoon which someone

my tea."
"It is not the sugar I want, but only that your little hand should stir

had a double meaning.
everything she said and everything the others said was very amusing and
"But you take it without sugar?" she said, smiling all the time, as if

it.
his tumbler, and adding some rum to it asked Mary Hendrikhovna to stir
Hendrikhovna should stir the sugar for everyone in turn. Rostov received
else, but it took too long to dissolve, so it was decided that Mary
There was only one spoon, sugar was more plentiful than anything

husband moved in his sleep behind her.
she might to hide it, and perturbed as she evidently was each time her
such brilliant and polite young men, beamed with satisfaction, try as
mood of courting Mary Hendrikhovna. She, seeing herself surrounded by
left their game and came over to the samovar, yielding to the general
her that evening. Even those playing cards behind the partition soon
nails. All the officers appeared to be, and really were, in love with
Hendrikhovna's plump little hands with their short and not overclean
take turns in order of seniority to receive one's tumbler from Mary
only six tumblers of water, but this made it all the pleasanter to
not make out whether the tea was strong or weak, and the samovar held
There were only three tumblers, the water was so muddy that one could

cutting off a leg or an arm for me."
the doctor. Perhaps he'll take pity on me someday, when it comes to
"Oh, no, Mary Hendrikhovna," replied the officer, "one must look after

"He is sleeping well as it is, after a sleepless night."
"Leave him alone," said Mary Hendrikhovna, smiling timidly and happily.

off her husband's face, lest he should wake up.
over the window to keep out the draft, and yet another waved the flies
under her little feet to keep them from the damp, another hung his coat
clean handkerchief to wipe her charming hands, another spread a jacket
Hendrikhovna to preside, they all crowded round her. One offered her a
produced and a cellaret and half a bottle of rum, and having asked Mary
fixed on two saddles and covered with a horsecloth, a small samovar was
A fire was made up in the dilapidated brick stove. A board was found,

changed their wet things for dry ones.
Rostov and Ilyin, helped by Lavrushka who had brought their kits,
loan of a petticoat to be used as a curtain, and behind that screen
account yield their position. Mary Hendrikhovna obliged them with the
of a solitary candle on an empty box, and these officers would on no
completely filled by three officers who sat playing cards by the light
going into a tiny recess behind a partition to change, but found it
dry clothes without offending Mary Hendrikhovna's modesty. They were
Rostov and Ilyin hastened to find a corner where they could change into

"Don't mess Mary Hendrikhovna's dress!" cried other voices.

drawing room so wet."
"What swells they are! Why, the water streams from them! Don't make our

"And why do you stand there gaping?"

"Dear me, how jolly we are!" said Rostov laughing.

and laughter.
Rostov and Ilyin, on entering the room, were welcomed with merry shouts
in the front corner. Her husband, the doctor, lay asleep behind her.
German, in a dressing jacket and nightcap, was sitting on a broad bench
already some five officers. Mary Hendrikhovna, a plump little blonde
In the tavern, before which stood the doctor's covered cart, there were


CHAPTER XIII





"Here. What lightning!" they called to one another.

"Rostov, where are you?"

darkness that was occasionally rent by distant lightning.
right through it--set off with Ilyin in the lessening rain and the
follow with the things, and--now slipping in the mud, now splashing
Rostov threw his cloak over his shoulders, shouted to Lavrushka to

the hussar officers.
hussar regiment went and his jealousy had become a standing joke among
the early days of their marriage, took her about with him wherever the
of means or because he did not like to part from his young wife in
German woman he had married in Poland. The doctor, whether from lack
Mary Hendrikhovna was the wife of the regimental doctor, a pretty young

dry there, and Mary Hendrikhovna's there."
there's a tavern where ours have already gathered. We can at least get
"Hurrah! Rostov, come quick! I've found it! About two hundred yards away

to the shanty.
Five minutes later Ilyin, splashing through the mud, came running back

Ilyin went out and Zdrzhinski rode away.

seems less heavy."
water is running on my seat! I'll go and look for shelter. The rain
relish Zdrzhinski's conversation. "My stockings and shirt... and the
"I can't stand this any more," said Ilyin, noticing that Rostov did not

pretend not to doubt it. And he acted accordingly.
that this tale redounded to the glory of our arms and so one had to
thoughts, for in such matters, too, he had gained experience. He knew
to think, as he listened to Zdrzhinski. But he did not express his
have tried to put them somewhere under cover," Nicholas continued
there, or even Ilyin, who's a stranger to me but a nice lad, but would
his own children in the battle? I would not have taken my brother Petya
Thermopylae. So why should he have made such a sacrifice? And why expose
they took the Saltanov dam or not, as we are told was the case at
And besides, the fate of the Fatherland did not depend on whether
Raevski's tender paternal feelings when their own skins were in danger?
would not have been much stimulated by it, for what had they to do with
with whom Raevski came onto the dam. And even those who did see it
men nearest to him," thought he, "the rest could not have seen how or
his sons there, it could have had no effect except perhaps on some dozen
and crowding on the dam that was being attacked that if Raevski did lead
in silence. "In the first place, there must have been such a confusion
his habit, and crowded Rostov in the narrow shanty. Rostov looked at him
extending over his cheeks, bent low over the face of his hearer, as was
tale, nor did he like Zdrzhinski himself who, with his mustaches
all as we can imagine or relate it. And so he did not like Zdrzhinski's
that, he had experience enough to know that nothing happens in war at
military exploits, as he himself had done when recounting them; besides
of 1807 Rostov knew by experience that men always lie when describing
intention of contradicting it. Since the campaigns of Austerlitz and
looked like a man ashamed of what he was hearing, though with no
nothing to encourage Zdrzhinski's enthusiasm but, on the contrary,
charged with them beside him. Rostov heard the story and not only said
Raevski had led his two sons onto the dam under terrific fire and had
of antiquity had been performed by General Raevski. He recounted how
the Saltanov dam being "a Russian Thermopylae," and of how a deed worthy
Zdrzhinski, the officer with the long mustache, spoke grandiloquently of

girl might have done.
before. Ilyin tried to imitate Rostov in everything and adored him as a
relation to Nicholas that Nicholas had been to Denisov seven years
of sixteen who had recently joined the regiment, was now in the same
glance at Ilyin, who was pressing close to him. This officer, a lad
trickled down his neck, listened inattentively, with an occasional
Rostov, smoking his pipe and turning his head about as the water

heard at the staff.
And the officer gave them details of the Saltanov battle, which he had

exploit?"
"I have come from the staff, Count. Have you heard of Raevski's

rain, entered Rostov's shelter.
onto his cheeks, who after riding to the staff had been overtaken by the
shelter. An officer of their regiment, with long mustaches extending
officer named Ilyin, his protege, was sitting in a hastily constructed
horses. The rain was descending in torrents, and Rostov, with a young
was already in ear but had been completely trodden down by cattle and
The two Pavlograd squadrons were bivouacking on a field of rye, which

for its storms.
storm of rain and hail. In general, the summer of 1812 was remarkable
On the twelfth of July, on the eve of that action, there was a heavy

for the first time.
On the thirteenth of July the Pavlograds took part in a serious action

proper.
and thence again beyond Drissa, drawing near to the frontier of Russia
of old beer. From Sventsyani they retired farther and farther to Drissa,
men of his squadron who, unknown to him, had appropriated five barrels
he changed his sergeant major and was unable to manage all the drunken
Sventsyani, because on the first day of their arrival at that small town
carriages, and carpets from the Polish proprietors. Rostov remembered
advantage of the order to collect provisions, took also horses,
and because many complaints were made against the troops, who, taking
drunken camp, a name the whole army gave to their encampment there,
away with them. Sventsyani was remembered by the hussars only as the
to retreat to Sventsyani and destroy any provisions they could not carry
reviewed by the Emperor and other high commanders. Then came an order
acquaintance with the Polish landowners, preparing for reviews and being
the task nearest to hand. First they camped gaily before Vilna, making
soldier and not to think of the general trend of affairs, but only of
to enter anyone's head, he tried to be as cheerful as befits a good
pretty young Polish lady. If the thought that things looked bad chanced
because they had to leave billets they had grown accustomed to, or some
they were going or why. If they regretted having to retreat, it was only
intriguing; in the body of the army they did not ask themselves where
It was only at headquarters that there was depression, uneasiness, and

was a very simple and agreeable business.
retreat during the finest period of summer and with sufficient supplies
headquarters. For the Pavlograd hussars, however, the whole of this
a complicated interplay of interests, arguments, and passions at
political and strategic. Each step of the retreat was accompanied by
The troops retired from Vilna for various complicated reasons of state,

relinquish them.
military service, though he knew that sooner or later he would have to
regiment, devoted himself entirely to the pleasures and interests of
of a war, and Rostov, conscious of his advantageous position in the
infected with the merrily excited mood that goes with the commencement
new officers arrived, new men and horses, and above all everybody was
The campaign began, the regiment was moved into Poland on double pay,

numbers, he was again allotted his old squadron.
and when the regiment was put on war footing with an increase in
from his commanders. During his absence he had been promoted captain,
Ukraine excellent horses which pleased him and earned him commendation
by his comrades, was sent to obtain remounts and brought back from the
On his return from his furlough Nicholas, having been joyfully welcomed

regiment and was able to find pleasure in that life.
as was natural to him, felt contented with the life he led in the
to remain with his regiment. And since it had to be so, Nicholas Rostov,
election..." thought he. But now the campaign was beginning, and he had
dozen leashes of smart borzois, agriculture, neighbors, service by
allured him. "A splendid wife, children, a good pack of hounds, a
rural joys and peace such as he had never known before, and which now
holidays and Sonya's love, had opened out to him a vista of tranquil
autumn in Otradnoe with the hunting, and the winter with the Christmas
Rostov from returning home as he had promised and marrying Sonya. The
It was, in fact, only the commencement of the campaign that prevented

breast."
throw up everything and fly to you, to press you forever to my ardent
the war is over, if I am still alive and still loved by you, I will
Fatherland. But this shall be our last separation. Believe me, directly
in my own, if I preferred my own happiness to my love and duty to the
campaign, I should feel dishonored, not only in my comrades' eyes but
me from returning to the country. But now, at the commencement of the
"Adored friend of my soul!" he wrote. "Nothing but honor could keep

wishes. To Sonya he wrote separately.
engagement broken off, and that he would do all he could to meet their
army, but wrote to his parents that he was sorry Natasha was ill and her
even make any attempt to get leave of absence or to retire from the
the army and return home. On receiving this letter, Nicholas did not
Natasha's having rejected him) and again asked Nicholas to retire from
breaking off of her engagement to Prince Andrew (which they explained by
his parents in which they told him briefly of Natasha's illness and the
Before the beginning of the campaign, Rostov had received a letter from


CHAPTER XII





for permission to serve in the army.
forever by not asking to remain attached to the sovereign's person, but
like to serve, and Prince Andrew lost his standing in court circles
At the review next day the Emperor asked Prince Andrew where he would

himself only when Paulucci called him and everyone was leaving.
So thought Prince Andrew as he listened to the talking, and he roused

can one serve with assurance of being useful."
shouts, 'We are lost!' or who shouts, 'Hurrah!' And only in the ranks
military action depends not on them, but on the man in the ranks who
invented for them long ago because they have power! The success of a
and unjust. It is understandable that a theory of their 'genius' was
should be humane, should love, or pity, or think of what is just
patience), and only then will he be a brave leader. God forbid that he
is doing is very important (otherwise he will not have sufficient
inquiring doubt. He should be limited, firmly convinced that what he
and best human attributes--love, poetry, tenderness, and philosophic
special qualities, on the contrary he needs the absence of the highest
field of Austerlitz. Not only does a good army commander not need any
Bonaparte himself! I remember his limited, self-satisfied face on the
men. Bagration was the best, Napoleon himself admitted that. And of
generals I have known were, on the contrary, stupid or absent-minded
attributing to it qualities of genius it does not possess. The best
invested with pomp and power and crowds of sychophants flatter power,
to the right and who to the left? It is only because military men are
can order bread to be brought up at the right time and say who is to go
And why do they all speak of a 'military genius'? Is a man a genius who
advantages of any suggestions can be seen only at the moment of trial.
one plan, Armfeldt another, and they are all good and all bad, and the
and Pfuel says that is what constitutes its strength; Toll proposes
the worthlessness of the Drissa camp lies in having the river behind it,
says we have got the French army between two fires; Michaud says that
no one knows when? Armfeldt says our army is cut in half, and Paulucci
significance of which is determined at a particular moment which arrives
can be defined and everything depends on innumerable conditions, the
there be in a matter in which, as in all practical matters, nothing
thousand run from eight thousand, as at Austerlitz. What science can
is worth thirty thousand, as at Schon Grabern, while at times fifty
and jolly lad who shouts, 'Hurrah!'--a detachment of five thousand
at the front to shout, 'We are cut off!' and start running, but a brave
force of this or that detachment. Sometimes--when there is not a coward
the enemy's armies will be in a day's time, and no one can gauge the
ascertained? No one was or is able to foresee in what condition our or
be defined, especially when the strength of the acting forces cannot be
matter the conditions and circumstances of which are unknown and cannot
to him an obvious truth. "What theory and science is possible about a
therefore there can be no such thing as a military genius--now appeared
idea that there is not and cannot be any science of war, and that
long since and often occurred to him during his military activities--the
felt nothing but amazement at what they were saying. A thought that had
polyglot talk and to these surmises, plans, refutations, and shouts,
conclusion from all that had been said. Prince Andrew, listening to this
personalities, and the less was it possible to arrive at any general
the more heated became the disputes, culminating in shouts and
The discussions continued a long time, and the longer they lasted

was slipping away from him.
theory by a huge experiment and proving its soundness to the whole world
evidently in despair that the sole remaining chance of verifying his
concealed the fact under a show of irritation and contempt, he was
brushed on the temples and sticking up in tufts behind. Though he
and grumpy German sarcasm he was pitiable, with his hair smoothly
himself felt, that his fall was at hand. And despite his self-confidence
in Pfuel's own expressions, it was clear that the others knew, and Pfuel
speak of him to the Emperor, but above all from a certain desperation
the courtiers addressed him and the way Paulucci had allowed himself to
respect, Pfuel evoked pity in Prince Andrew. From the tone in which
everyone else who opposed his theory. But besides this feeling of
proposals. Pfuel alone seemed to consider Napoleon a barbarian like
from every side, and invoked his terrible name to shatter each other's
Everything was assumed to be possible for Napoleon, they expected him
genius, which, though concealed, was noticeable in every rejoinder.
at the council of war in 1805: there was now a panic fear of Napoleon's
of all except Pfuel had one common trait that had not been noticeable
respect by his boundless devotion to an idea. Besides this, the remarks
ridiculous, and unpleasantly sarcastic, but yet he inspired involuntary
theory arrived at by years of toil, should be carried out. He was
hatred against anyone, and only desired that the plan, formed on a
evidently he alone was not seeking anything for himself, nursed no
determined, and absurdly self-confident as he was. Of all those present,
Of all these men Prince Andrew sympathized most with Pfuel, angry,

Russian. Prince Andrew listened and observed in silence.
Armfeldt addressed Pfuel in German. Toll explained to Volkonski in
Paulucci and Michaud both attacked Wolzogen simultaneously in French.

"Well, of course, what more is there to explain?"

his own supporter, Wolzogen:
heated in a fight who strikes those on his own side, shouted angrily at
Pfuel and saying, "Is it not so, your excellency?" But Pfuel, like a man
continued to explain his views in French, every now and then turning to
a problem that has already been proved. Wolzogen took his place and
a mathematician who ceases to prove in various ways the accuracy of
demonstrated, and at last contemptuously ceased to demonstrate, like
had not been precisely executed. He kept laughing sarcastically, he
were now any difficulties the whole fault lay in the fact that his plan
that could happen, had been foreseen in his scheme, and that if there
was rapidly demonstrating that not only all that had happened, but all
and began translating for him, hardly able to keep pace with Pfuel, who
Wolzogen came to the assistance of his chief, who spoke French badly,
Paulucci, who did not know German, began questioning him in French.

outflank it, the enemy would inevitably be destroyed.
everything had been foreseen, and that if the enemy were really going to
eventuality could alter the efficiency of the Drissa camp, that
He went up to the map and speaking rapidly began proving that no

is the difficulty? Nonsense, childishness!"
adhered to," said he, drumming on the table with his bony fingers. "What
is nothing to mend! The principles laid down by me must be strictly
knew better than I did, and now you come to me! How mend matters? There
"Everything has been spoiled, everything muddled, everybody thought they

began to speak:
that he asked his opinion, Pfuel rose and, suddenly growing animated,
But when Volkonski said, with a frown, that it was in the Emperor's name

everything better than I do."
a retreat, also good! Why ask me?" said he. "Why, you yourselves know
exposed rear, or why not this Italian gentleman's attack--very fine, or
"Why ask me? General Armfeldt has proposed a splendid position with an

opinion, he merely said:
Prince Volkonski, who was in the chair, called on him to give his
himself by replying to such nonsense as he was now hearing. So when
contemptuously and turned away, to show that he would never demean
(his "bridge" in court relations), were silent. Pfuel only snorted
During all these discussions Pfuel and his interpreter, Wolzogen

(as he called the Drissa camp) in which we were situated.
could alone extricate us from the present uncertainty and from the trap
to Toll, Paulucci suggested an advance and an attack, which, he urged,
totally different from Armfeldt's or Pfuel's plan of campaign. In answer
read to them. In these voluminous notes Toll suggested another scheme,
his side pocket a well-filled notebook, which he asked permission to
more warmly than anyone else, and in the course of the dispute drew from
defended them. Young Count Toll objected to the Swedish general's views
what character the war would take. Some disputed his arguments, others
good as another, that could be made as long as it was quite unknown
opportunity to air it. It was one of the millions of proposals, one as
put--which, in fact, his plan did not answer--as to avail himself of the
plan long ago and now expounded it not so much to answer the questions
there await the enemy. It was plain that Armfeldt had thought out that
opinion), but he urged that at this point the army should unite and
inexplicable (unless he wished to show that he, too, could have an
away from the Petersburg and Moscow roads. The reason for this was
presented itself, unexpectedly proposed a perfectly new position
The first to speak was General Armfeldt who, to meet the difficulty that

outflank the Drissa camp.
false) had been received during the night of a movement by the French to
present. What had happened was that news (which afterwards proved to be
questions on which he wished to hear the opinion of the gentlemen
drawing room with some maps which he spread on a table, and put
of chief of the Emperor's staff. He came out of the study into the
Prince Peter Mikhaylovich Volkonski occupied the position, as it were,

council was assembled.
Paulucci, whom he had known in Turkey, into the drawing room where the
Prince Andrew, taking advantage of the Emperor's permission, accompanied
Mikhaylovich Volkonski and Baron Stein, and the door closed behind them.
The Emperor went into the study. He was followed by Prince Peter

for me."
"I am very glad to see you! Go in there where they are meeting, and wait

graciously.
not hearing them, the Emperor, recognizing Bolkonski, addressed him
Without heeding the end of the Italian's remarks, and as though

lunatic asylum or the gallows!"
"the man who advised the Drissa camp--I see no alternative but the
continued Paulucci, desperately, apparently unable to restrain himself,
Andrew scanned his unfamiliar face, "as to that person, sire..."
said Paulucci, as the Emperor mounted the steps and noticing Prince
"And as for the man who advised forming this camp--the Drissa camp,"

Italian, oblivious of decorum, followed him and continued to speak.
evidently wishing to end the conversation, but the flushed and excited
left, was listening with a dissatisfied air. The Emperor moved forward
him with particular warmth and the Emperor, with his head bent to the
who looked fatigued, was dismounting. Marquis Paulucci was talking to
Chernyshev and Prince Andrew went out into the porch, where the Emperor,
to make some preparations and to be ready to receive the sovereign.
went. The Emperor was following him, and Bennigsen had hastened on
pausing, went into the study, giving instructions to his adjutant as he
Count Bennigsen entered hurriedly, and nodding to Bolkonski, but not
Prince Andrew's eyes were still following Pfuel out of the room when


CHAPTER XI





voice were at once heard from there.
He passed into the next room, and the deep, querulous sounds of his

expressed this most eloquently.
of hair sticking up behind and the hastily brushed hair on his temples
and who is not displeased that it should be so. The unbrushed tufts
war, with the air of a man who knows beforehand that all will go wrong,
He said a few words to Prince Andrew and Chernyshev about the present

the accuracy of his theory.
resulting from deviations in practice from the theory only proved to him
he would not listen to it. He was even pleased by failures, for failures
application. His love of theory made him hate everything practical, and
their theory that they lose sight of the theory's object--its practical
go to the devil!" Pfuel was one of those theoreticians who so love
gleeful sarcasm he would remark, "There, I said the whole affair would
the sole cause of the whole disaster, and with characteristically
the contrary, the deviations made from his theory were, in his opinion,
proof of the fallibility of his theory in the disasters of that war. On
campaign that ended in Jena and Auerstadt, but he did not see the least
In 1806 Pfuel had been one of those responsible, for the plan of

therefore could not serve as material for science.
could not be called wars, they did not accord with the theory, and
which so many blunders were committed by both sides that these wars
warfare seemed to him absurd and barbarous--monstrous collisions in
Great's wars, and all he came across in the history of more recent
oblique movements deduced by him from the history of Frederick the
Pfuel was evidently of that sort. He had a science--the theory of

absolute truth.
truth--science--which he himself has invented but which is for him the
repulsive than any other, because he imagines that he knows the
German's self-assurance is worst of all, stronger and more
anything, since he does not believe that anything can be known. The
is self-assured just because he knows nothing and does not want to know
he is excitable and easily forgets himself and other people. A Russian
an Englishman is undoubtedly correct. An Italian is self-assured because
Englishman always knows what he should do and knows that all he does as
citizen of the best-organized state in the world, and therefore as an
attractive to men and women. An Englishman is self-assured, as being a
regards himself personally, both in mind and body, as irresistibly
knowledge of absolute truth. A Frenchman is self-assured because he
on the basis of an abstract notion--science, that is, the supposed
martyrdom as only Germans are, because only Germans are self-confident
and immutably self-confident men, self-confident to the point of
form a clear conception of the man. Pfuel was one of those hopelessly
Pfuel, Prince Andrew, thanks to his Austerlitz experiences, was able to
and criticize his camp in his absence. From this short interview with
disturbed that day, evidently by the fact that they had dared to inspect
Pfuel, always inclined to be irritably sarcastic, was particularly

room from which the sound of voices was heard.
a fine tactical war"; and, laughing contemptuously, went on into the
Prince Andrew as past him--and said, with a laugh: "That must have been
war had terminated so fortunately. Pfuel barely glanced--not so much at
Pfuel, remarking that Prince Andrew was just back from Turkey where the
what he said and would have passed on, but Chernyshev introduced him to
"something absurd will come of it."... Prince Andrew did not catch
have been "stupid fellow"... or "the whole affair will be ruined," or
abruptly and in a bass voice, as self-assured Germans do--it might
planned in accord with his theory. He muttered something to himself
the sovereign was inspecting the fortifications that he, Pfuel, had
hurriedly in reply to Chernyshev, and smiled ironically on hearing that
to business in front of a map, where he would feel at home. He nodded
as quickly as possible, finish with the bows and greetings, and sit down
the Emperor was. One could see that he wished to pass through the rooms
holding up his sword, he addressed Chernyshev and asked in German where
around, as if afraid of everything in that large apartment. Awkwardly
little tufts. He entered the room, looking restlessly and angrily
brushed smooth in front of the temples, but stuck up behind in quaint
much wrinkled and his eyes deep set. His hair had evidently been hastily
broad in the hips, and with prominent shoulder blades. His face was
Pfuel was short and very thin but broad-boned, of coarse, robust build,

such an extent.
theorist in whom all the characteristics of those others were united to
typical than any of them. Prince Andrew had never yet seen a German
theorist-generals whom Prince Andrew had seen in 1805, but he was more
him something of Weyrother, Mack, and Schmidt, and many other German
Andrew, though he saw him now for the first time. There was about
which fitted him badly like a fancy costume, seemed familiar to Prince
At first sight, Pfuel, in his ill-made uniform of a Russian general,

minute to speak to Chernyshev.
after himself and, in passing through to the drawing room, stopped a
had an opportunity of getting a good look at him, for Pfuel arrived soon
Andrew had heard, was the mainspring of the whole affair. Prince Andrew
who was not a military man at all, and Pfuel himself, who, as Prince
referred to as a renegade French subject), Michaud, Toll, Count Stein
Armfeldt, Adjutant General Wolzogen, Wintzingerode (whom Napoleon had
personally. To this semicouncil had been invited the Swedish General
as it were, a council to elucidate certain questions for the Emperor
view of the impending difficulties. It was not a council of war, but,
indefiniteness), but certain persons whose opinions he wished to know in
the Emperor's wish, not a military council (the Emperor preferred
and occasionally in French. In that drawing room were gathered, by
Through the first door came the sound of voices conversing in German
what had been the drawing room, and another, on the right, to the study.
work or by feasting. Two doors led from the room, one straight on into
there and sat dozing on the rolled-up bedding, evidently exhausted by
the folding bedstead of Bennigsen's adjutant. This adjutant was also
an organ in it on which some rugs were piled, and in one corner stood
in his hand. This room had probably been a music room; there was still
Chernyshev was sitting at a window in the first room with a French novel

suitability of which serious doubts were beginning to be felt.
time that day to inspect the fortifications of the Drissa camp, of the
accompanied by General Bennigsen and Marquis Paulucci, had gone a second
aide-de-camp, received Bolkonski and informed him that the Emperor,
Bennigsen nor the Emperor was there, but Chernyshev, the Emperor's
house of moderate size, situated on the very banks of the river. Neither
Prince Andrew arrived at Bennigsen's quarters--a country gentleman's

Russian army.
destruction, was an absurdity, threatening the destruction of the
a chef-d'oeuvre of tactical science which would ensure Napoleon's
this fortified camp constructed by Pfuel, and till then considered
Drissa fortifications with the Emperor and had pointed out to him that
found to be false. And that morning Colonel Michaud had ridden round the
movement by Napoleon which might endanger the army--news subsequently
News was received at the Emperor's quarters that very day of a fresh

present himself at Bennigsen's quarters at six that evening.
personally, to question him about Turkey, and that Prince Andrew was to
day at dinner, informed Bolkonski that the sovereign wished to see him
This letter had not yet been presented to the Emperor when Barclay, one


CHAPTER X





as a pretext for quitting the army.
presence in Moscow--was suggested to the Emperor, and accepted by him,
Russia's triumph in so far as it was produced by the Tsar's personal
defend their country--the very incitement which was the chief cause of
That arousing of the people by their sovereign and his call to them to

leave the army.
a warlike spirit in the people of the capital--that the Emperor should
suggested--on the plea that it was necessary for the sovereign to arouse
by the Emperor to discuss the general course of affairs, he respectfully
agreed to sign. In this letter, availing himself of permission given him
this party, wrote a letter to the Emperor which Arakcheev and Balashev
Shishkov, the Secretary of State and one of the chief representatives of
Just at the time Prince Andrew was living unoccupied at Drissa,

authority of the monarch.
would be better than the very best one trammeled by the presence and
personal safety, and that the worst commander in chief if independent
paralyzed the action of fifty thousand men required to secure his
and his court to leave the army; that the mere presence of the Emperor
army, and that the only way out of the position would be for the Emperor
harmful in an army; that a sovereign should reign but not command the
and unsteady fluctuation of relations, which is in place at court but
and from the consequent presence there of an indefinite, conditional,
chiefly from the Emperor's presence in the army with his military court
The men of this party said and thought that what was wrong resulted

escape from this muddle, indecision, intricacy, and weakness.
was going on at the staff at headquarters and to consider means of
those conflicting opinions, were able to take a detached view of what
experienced and capable in state affairs, who, without sharing any of
to raise its voice. This was the party of the elders, reasonable men
the army, another, a ninth party, was being formed and was beginning
From among all these parties, just at the time Prince Andrew reached

those who were disputing honestly.
over to the new one and by their hum drowned and obscured the voices of
drones, without having finished their buzzing on a previous theme, flew
obscurity to the common task. Whatever question arose, a swarm of these
preoccupied with personal interests imparted great confusion and
of race among these people--this eighth and largest party of those
intrigue, egotism, conflict of views and feelings, and the diversity
a peculiarly threatening character to everything, amid this vortex of
uncertainties of the position, with the menace of serious danger giving
was all the harder for the Emperor to turn it elsewhere. Amid the
drone population of the army began blowing hard that way, so that it
favor, and directly they noticed it turning in any direction, this whole
promotions, and in this pursuit watched only the weathercock of imperial
All the men of this party were fishing for rubles, decorations, and

or less forcible and correct.
newly emerging opinion and for this object would produce arguments more
Emperor, would stubbornly insist on the correctness or falsity of some
eye. A fifth, to achieve his long-cherished aim of dining with the
overwhelmed with work would often come accidentally under the Emperor's
moment people would be too busy to refuse him. A fourth while seemingly
a special gratuity for his faithful services, well knowing that at that
in the absence of opponents, between two councils would simply solicit
that he was prepared to sacrifice himself for the common good. A third,
challenging those who did not agree with him to duels, thereby proving
and would dispute and shout at the council, beating his breast and
advocating the very thing the Emperor had hinted at the day before,
gain some advantage would attract the Emperor's attention by loudly
that he had no opinion at all on the matter. Another who wished to
merely to avoid responsibility or to please the Emperor, would declare
today agree with Pfuel, tomorrow with his opponent, and the day after,
other times. A man who simply wished to retain his lucrative post would
headquarters, it was possible to succeed in many ways unthinkable at
conflicting and intersecting intrigues that eddied about the Emperor's
and pleasure for themselves as possible. In the troubled waters of
Bennigsen, but only the one most essential thing--as much advantage
or anywhere else, neither Barclay nor the Emperor, neither Pfuel nor
peace nor war, neither an advance nor a defensive camp at the Drissa
others as ninety-nine to one, consisted of men who desired neither
The eighth and largest group, which in its enormous numbers was to the

raised to the highest pitch.
necessary, would himself lead the troops, whose spirits would thereby be
staff, and, consulting experienced theoreticians and practical men where
himself at the head of the army, gather round him a commander in chief's
should abandon his diffidence and openly announce that he would place
modesty, and only desired and insisted that their adored sovereign
for refusing the command of the army, yet blamed him for such excessive
capabilities as well. These men, though enchanted with the sovereign
in 1805, and who saw in him not only all the virtues but all human
man, adoring him sincerely and disinterestedly, as Rostov had done
passionately devoted to the Emperor, not merely as a monarch but as a
particularly many round Alexander--generals and imperial aides-de-camp
be found, especially around young sovereigns, and of whom there were
The seventh party consisted of the sort of people who are always to

only such man."
man whose authority would be willingly recognized, and Bennigsen is the
who made his mark in 1807, and to whom Napoleon himself did justice--a
What is wanted is not some Barclay or other, but a man like Bennigsen,
rate be understood all the sooner that things cannot go on like this.
of blunders. "The more mistakes that are made the better. It will at any
retirement to Drissa was a most shameful reverse and an unbroken series
Let the others make mistakes now!" said they, arguing that our
twist about as you may, you will have to come to Bennigsen eventually.
rate there was no one more active and experienced than Bennigsen: "and
The sixth party, the Bennigsenites, said, on the contrary, that at any

incapacity already in 1807."
be superseded by Bennigsen all will be lost, for Bennigsen showed his
any defeats, we owe this entirely to Barclay. If Barclay is now to
organized and strong and has withdrawn to Drissa without suffering
he will show what he can do, as he did in Finland. If our army is well
for war cannot be conducted successfully without unity of command, and
honest, practical man and we have nobody better. Give him real power,
chief. "Be he what he may" (they always began like that), "he is an
Tolly, not so much as a man but as minister of war and commander in
The fifth party consisted of those who were adherents of Barclay de

reasons of state, was in favor of peace.
also in Petersburg and from the chancellor, Rumyantsev, who, for other
This view was very general in the upper army circles and found support

before we are turned out of Petersburg."
reasonable thing left to do is to conclude peace as soon as possible,
We have abandoned Vilna and Vitebsk and shall abandon Drissa. The only
They said: "Nothing but sorrow, shame, and ruin will come of all this!
recognized his strength and their own weakness, and frankly said so.
and the defect of frankness in their opinions. They feared Napoleon,
the general confusion. The men of this party had both the quality
unexpectedly finding himself in the front line had narrowly escaped amid
uniform as to a review, expecting to crush the French gallantly; but
he had ridden out at the head of the Guards, in his casque and cavalry
Tsarevich, who could not forget his disillusionment at Austerlitz, where
Of a fourth opinion the most conspicuous representative was the

this third party.
nor the other could be attained, yet it seemed best to the adherents of
movements of the other armies. Though, by this course, neither one aim
of the camp at Drissa, according to Pfuel's plan, but on changing the
to say, and then choose a middle course. They insisted on the retention
to what Pfuel's opponents and practical men of experience in warfare had
therefore one should not trust them absolutely, but should also listen
it had to be acknowledged that the theorists are often one sided, and
knowledge and in that respect Pfuel was a genius, but at the same time
Bonaparte now), needs most deeply devised plans and profound scientific
particularly against such a genius as Bonaparte (they called him
to seem to have some generally say. They said that undoubtedly war,
belonged, thought and said what men who have no convictions but wish
The members of this party, chiefly civilians and to whom Arakcheev
the courtiers who tried to arrange compromises between the other two.
To the third party--in which the Emperor had most confidence--belonged

Russia, and not let the army get discouraged.
or stick pins into maps, but to fight, beat the enemy, keep him out of
remembering Suvorov, said that what one had to do was not to reason,
had petitioned the Emperor to make him a German. The men of that party,
famous joke of Ermolov's was being circulated, that as a great favor he
(who was beginning to come to the front), and others. At that time a
more one-sided in the dispute. They were Russians: Bagration, Ermolov
action, this section also represented nationalism, which made them still
and freedom from all prearranged plans. Besides being advocates of bold
this party were those who had demanded an advance from Vilna into Poland
always happens, was met by representatives of the other. The members of
The second party was directly opposed to the first; one extreme, as

others, chiefly Germans.
this party belonged the foreign nobles, Wolzogen, Wintzingerode, and
ignorance, or evil intention in every deviation from that theory. To
laws defined by a pseudo-theory of war, and they saw only barbarism,
a retirement into the depths of the country in accordance with precise
movements, outflankings, and so forth. Pfuel and his adherents demanded
who believed in a science of war with immutable laws--laws of oblique
The first party consisted of Pfuel and his adherents--military theorists

subdivisions of tendencies and parties:
and proud sphere, Prince Andrew noticed the following sharply defined
Among the opinions and voices in this immense, restless, brilliant,

were there.
many secondary personages accompanying the army because their principals
characteristic of people employed in a country not their own--there were
ideas every day--especially the foreigners, who did so with a boldness
Besides these Russians and foreigners who propounded new and unexpected

able to do.
theorist, self-confident to the point of despising everyone else) was
a more comprehensible way than Pfuel himself (who was a harsh, bookish
of the war. With Pfuel was Wolzogen, who expressed Pfuel's thoughts in
believe in the efficacy of that plan, was directing the whole business
the plan of campaign against Napoleon and, having induced Alexander to
Emperor, and lastly and chiefly Pfuel was there because he had drawn up
adjutants general were there because they always accompanied the
Paulucci was there because he was bold and decided in speech. The
full of self-confidence, a quality that always influenced Alexander.
esteem personally. Armfeldt virulently hated Napoleon and was a general
because his advice was useful and the Emperor Alexander held him in high
was there because it suited him to be. The ex-Minister Stein was there
as an adviser and ready at hand to replace Barclay. The Grand Duke
the honors of the district, but was in reality a good general, useful
Bennigsen was a landlord in the Vilna province who appeared to be doing
custodian to enforce order and acted as the sovereign's bodyguard.
the men around him were his assistants. Arakcheev was a faithful
assume the title of commander in chief, but disposed of all the armies;
courtiers), was clear to everyone. It was this: the Emperor did not
from a courtier's point of view (and in an Emperor's vicinity all became
significance of the presence of the Emperor and of all these people,
executed or not. But this was only the external condition; the essential
from the man who gave it or from the Emperor and whether it had to be
not know whether a certain order received in the form of advice emanated
Arakcheev, or Prince Volkonski, or was given this or that advice and did
know in what capacity he was questioned by Bennigsen, the Grand Duke,
and often a corps commander, or even the commander in chief, did not
no military appointment in the army, their position gave them influence,
and Sardinian emigre; Wolzogen--and many others. Though these men had
the chief author of the plan of campaign; Paulucci, an adjutant general
Stein, a former Prussian minister; Armfeldt, a Swedish general; Pfuel,
Tsarevich Constantine Pavlovich; Count Rumyantsev, the Chancellor;
of War; Count Bennigsen, the senior general in rank; the Grand Duke
Emperor without any definite appointments: Arakcheev, the ex-Minister
but not the army staff. Besides these, there were in attendance on the
aides-de-camp, diplomatic officials, and a large number of foreigners,
Quartermaster General Prince Volkonski, as well as generals, imperial
staff. In attendance on him was the head of the imperial staff,
with him not a commander in chief's staff but the imperial headquarters
but only that he would be with the army. The Emperor, moreover, had
orders issued it was stated, not that the Emperor would take command,
Emperor was with the first army, but not as commander in chief. In the
army under Bagration, and thirdly, the one commanded by Tormasov. The
into three armies. First, the army under Barclay de Tolly, secondly, the
While the Emperor had still been at Vilna, the forces had been divided

himself the following of the state of affairs.
of the army and of the men and parties engaged in it, and he deduced for
position and acquaintances, tried to fathom the character of the control
To clear up this last point for himself, Prince Andrew, utilizing his
foreseen--are met, and on how and by whom the whole matter is handled.
depends on the way unexpected movements of the enemy--that cannot be
war the most deeply considered plans have no significance and that all
seen in the Austrian campaign, he had come to the conclusion that in
for him undecided. Already from his military experience and what he had
question whether the camp was advantageous or disadvantageous remained
talks with experts, tried to form a definite opinion about it. But the
whole fortified camp and, by the aid of his own knowledge and by
days, while no duties were required of him, Prince Andrew rode round the
distraction caused by the thought of Kuragin. During the first four
a gigantic war, and he was glad to be free for a while from the
was occupied by the interests of the center that was conducting
gone to Petersburg, but Prince Andrew was glad to hear this. His mind
Prince Andrew had hoped to find with the army, was not there. He had
but asked him meanwhile to remain on his staff. Anatole Kuragin, whom
would mention him to the Emperor for a decision as to his employment,
Bolkonski stiffly and coldly and told him in his foreign accent that he
de Tolly was quartered nearly three miles from the Emperor. He received
villages on both sides of the river, over a radius of six miles. Barclay
courtiers accompanying the army were living in the best houses of the
village in the vicinity of the camp, the immense number of generals and
the bank of the Drissa. As there was not a single town or large
Prince Andrew found Barclay de Tolly, to whom he had been assigned, on

extend farther than the western, the Polish, provinces.
invasion of the Russian provinces, and no one thought the war would
of affairs in the Russian army, but no one anticipated any danger of
large French forces. Everyone was dissatisfied with the general course
junction with the first one from which it was said to be cut off by
camp at Drissa; the second army was retreating, trying to effect a
June. The first army, with which was the Emperor, occupied the fortified
Prince Andrew reached the general headquarters of the army at the end of


CHAPTER IX





Prince Andrew's mind.
things, lacking coherence, presented themselves one after another to
all connected, while now they had all tumbled to pieces. Only senseless
These conditions of life had been the same before, but then they were

laugh at me!"
to meet that man whom I despise, so as to give him a chance to kill and
deceived. And I am off to the army. Why? I myself don't know. I want
and rejoices in life, in which like everybody else he will deceive or be
man feels he is guilty, but cannot change himself. My boy is growing up
left to be victimized by an old man who has outlived his wits. The old
avenue from the house at Bald Hills. "She, poor innocent creature, is
"Then it must be so!" thought Prince Andrew as he drove out of the

took leave of her.
never to blame," were the last words he heard from his sister when he
"Good-by, Andrew! Remember that misfortunes come from God, and men are

longer he stayed now the more embittered their differences would become.
from the army and would certainly write to his father, but that the
him, but Prince Andrew replied that he would probably soon be back again
unhappy her father would be if Andrew left without being reconciled to
Princess Mary begged him to stay one day more, saying that she knew how

Kuragin who he knew was now in the army.
he began thinking of the glad vindictive moment when he would meet
ago to have punished him," he thought. And giving her no further reply,
"If Mary is already persuading me forgive, it means that I ought long

anger suddenly swelled up in his heart.
till that moment he had not been thinking of Kuragin, all his unexpended
a man should not and cannot forgive and forget," he replied, and though
"If I were a woman I would do so, Mary. That is a woman's virtue. But

punish. And then you will know the happiness of forgiving."
someone has wronged you, forget it and forgive! We have no right to
not by men. Men are His instruments, they are not to blame. If you think
at the place where a familiar portrait hangs. "Sorrow is sent by Him,
Andrew's head with the confident, accustomed look with which one looks
work of men. Men are His tools." She looked a little above Prince
understand you" (she looked down). "Don't imagine that sorrow is the
elbow and looking at him with eyes that shone through her tears. "I
"Andrew! One thing I beg, I entreat of you!" she said, touching his

had ruined his own happiness.
Mademoiselle Bourienne, the cause of her misery, but also to the man who
She understood that when speaking of "trash" he referred not only to

people misery!" he said with a malignity that alarmed Princess Mary.
"Ah, my God! my God! When one thinks who and what--what trash--can cause

began to fall. Prince Andrew turned away and began pacing the room.
As soon as she began to speak of that, her lips trembled and her tears

Bourienne says he has been asking about you...."
when you are going to this terrible war, and he is so old? Mademoiselle
"Why do you say that?" replied Princess Mary. "Why do you say that,

can't."
"Thank God that I can," replied Prince Andrew. "I am very sorry you

"So you've decided to go, Andrew?" asked his sister.

soon as possible.
and he hastened to escape from these memories and to find some work as
been happy, weariness of life overcame him with its former intensity,
especially on returning to the old conditions of life amid which he had
As soon as Prince Andrew had given up his daily occupations, and

of the room.
Prince Andrew, without replying, put him down from his knee and went out

"Well, go on!" said his son.

his knee.
which he had hoped to reawaken by caressing the boy and taking him on
he sought and did not find in himself the former tenderness for his son
and was horrified to find neither. What meant still more to him was that
at leaving home for the first time in his life on bad terms with him,
sought in himself either remorse for having angered his father or regret
pretty child, his son whom he held on his knee, but of himself. He
into a reverie without finishing the story. He thought not of this
and Prince Andrew began telling him the story of Bluebeard, but fell
curly-headed like his mother and glowing with health, sat on his knee,
before leaving, Prince Andrew went to his son's rooms. The boy,
Tikhon, but asked several times whether his son had gone. Next day,
leave his room and admitted no one but Mademoiselle Bourienne and
to stay another day. That day he did not see his father, who did not
Prince Andrew wished to leave at once, but Princess Mary persuaded him


trace of you remain here!..."
but then he suddenly jumped up and cried: "Be off, be off! Let not a
low voice and, as it seemed to Prince Andrew, with some embarrassment,
"Ah, he has passed judgment... passed judgement!" said the old man in a

that Frenchwoman."
say, that Mary is not to blame, but those to blame--the one to blame--is
bitter tone, "but you challenged me, and I have said, and always shall
"Father, I did not want to judge," said Prince Andrew, in a hard and

Eh?"
"What companion, my dear boy? Eh? You've already been talking it over!

not get accustomed.
disclosed the fresh gap between his teeth to which Prince Andrew could
The old man at first stared fixedly at his son, and an unnatural smile

fit to be my sister's companion."
misunderstandings they are caused by that worthless woman, who is not
always liable to do of late--"I can only say that if there are any
you ask me," continued Prince Andrew, becoming irritable--as he was
blame her for it at all. I know how she loves and respects you. Since
there is any misunderstanding and discord between you and Mary, I can't
speak about it, but as you ask me I will give you my frank opinion. If
censuring his father for the first time in his life), "I did not wish to
"If you ask me," said Prince Andrew, without looking up (he was

unreasonable character.
And he began explaining why he could not put up with his daughter's
must explain it, and he must hear me out," thought the old prince.
and attaches this Frenchwoman to himself? He doesn't understand, so I
old fool who, without any reason, keeps his own daughter at a distance
say nothing to me about his sister? Does he think me a scoundrel, or an
her and that she deserved it. "Why does Prince Andrew, who sees this,
life was very hard, but he also knew that he could not help tormenting
old prince knew very well that he tormented his daughter and that her
indulgence and silly talk she was spoiling little Prince Nicholas. The
Mary: that she purposely worried and irritated him, and that by
The old prince said that if he was ill it was only because of Princess

was the only person really attached to him.
superstitions and her dislike of Mademoiselle Bourienne, who, he said,
began unexpectedly to talk about Princess Mary, blaming her for her
tell him of the young Count Kamensky's campaign, the old prince
when Prince Andrew went to him and, trying to rouse him, began to
and retired to his apartments directly after dinner. In the evening,
was taciturn, and the old prince noticing this also became morosely dumb
feel awkward. Involuntarily feeling this at dinner on the first day, he
sake an exception was being made and that his presence made them all
were ill at ease and Prince Andrew felt that he was a visitor for whose
During his stay at Bald Hills all the family dined together, but they

maids.
Princess Mary, Dessalles, little Nicholas, and all the old nurses and
the old prince, Mademoiselle Bourienne, and the architect; to the other
his sake and only met because he was there. To the one camp belonged
divided into two alien and hostile camps, who changed their habits for
changed since Prince Andrew had seen them last. The household was
all remained as of old, the inner relations of all these people had
immutability in the enchanted, sleeping castle. But though externally
as the little princess used to do. He alone did not obey the law of
unconsciously lifted the upper lip of his pretty little mouth just
become rosier, had curly dark hair, and, when merry and laughing, quite
happening in the world. Little Nicholas alone had changed. He had grown,
ever, only showing still more irritability and skepticism as to what was
noticeable gap on one side of his mouth; in character he was the same as
had changed in appearance only by the loss of a tooth, which left a
intelligent, conscientious, and pedantic preceptor. The old prince
talking broken Russian to the servants, but was still the same narrowly
brought from Switzerland, was wearing a coat of Russian cut and
more self-confident, Prince Andrew thought. Dessalles, the tutor he had
existence and full of joyous hopes for the future. She had merely become
the same coquettish, self-satisfied girl, enjoying every moment of her
her life in fear and constant suffering. Mademoiselle Bourienne was
getting on in years, uselessly and joylessly passing the best years of
somewhat older. Princess Mary was still the same timid, plain maiden
the same walls, sounds, and smell, and the same timid faces, only
same stillness reigned there, and inside there was the same furniture,
sleeping castle. The same old stateliness, the same cleanliness, the
the avenue leading to the house as if he were entering an enchanted,
He entered through the gates with their stone pillars and drove up
the way of life there unchanged and still the same in every detail.
on reaching Bald Hills it struck him as strange and unexpected to find
and seen so much (having traveled both in the east and the west), that
years there had been so many changes in his life, he had thought, felt,
being only two miles off the Smolensk highroad. During the last three
Drissa, Prince Andrew visited Bald Hills which was directly on his way,
Before joining the Western Army which was then, in May, encamped at

readily let him go and gave him a mission to Barclay de Tolly.
Bolkonski's activity which seemed to reproach his own idleness, very
to transfer him to the Western Army. Kutuzov, who was already weary of
days and nights with a Wallachian woman--Prince Andrew asked Kutuzov
Bucharest--where Kutuzov had been living for two months, passing his
In the year 1812, when news of the war with Napoleon reached

ambitious activity.
Turkey by means of restless, plodding, and rather vainglorious and
poisoned the artificial tranquillity which he managed to obtain in
avenged, that his rancor was still unspent, weighed on his heart and
snatching at food. And the consciousness that the insult was not yet
be able to resist calling him out, any more than a ravenous man can help
to a conflict with him--he knew that when he did meet him he would not
the proofs he deduced to convince himself that it was not worth stooping
be before he met Kuragin, despite his contempt for him and despite all
to Russia after him, but all the same he knew that however long it might
Kuragin in Turkey, Prince Andrew did not think it necessary to rush back
Kutuzov by his willingness and accuracy in work. Not having found
he applied himself to business with zeal and perseverance and surprised
simplest and most familiar. As a general on duty on Kutuzov's staff,
Of the activities that presented themselves to him, army service was the

which all was clear, but nothing eternal or mysterious.
had suddenly turned into a low, solid vault that weighed him down, in
that lofty, infinite canopy of heaven that had once towered above him
eagerly the more those past interests were closed to him. It was as if
matters unrelated to his past interests, and he seized on these the more
they had revealed. He was now concerned only with the nearest practical
but he even dreaded to recall them and the bright and boundless horizons
had filled his solitude at Bogucharovo and then in Switzerland and Rome,
field of Austerlitz and had later enlarged upon with Pierre, and which
thoughts that had first come to him as he lay gazing at the sky on the
so highly were still more so. Not only could he no longer think the
trying to him, and the freedom and independence he had once prized
conceal its effects--the surroundings in which he had been happy became
faith with him--which he felt the more acutely the more he tried to
Prince Andrew found life easier to bear. After his betrothed had broken
the latter returned to Russia. In a new country, amid new conditions,
failed to meet Kuragin in Turkey, for soon after Prince Andrew arrived,
personally in order to find a fresh pretext for a duel. But he again
compromise the young Countess Rostova and so he wanted to meet Kuragin
He thought that if he challenged him without some fresh cause it might
Prince Andrew did not think it proper to write and challenge Kuragin.

appointment on the headquarters staff, left for Turkey.
been appointed commander in chief. So Prince Andrew, having received an
accompany him to the army in Moldavia, to which the old general had
always well disposed toward him, and Kutuzov suggested that he should
Petersburg Prince Andrew met Kutuzov, his former commander who was
the Minister of War and went to join the army in Moldavia. While in
his track. Anatole Kuragin promptly obtained an appointment from
city. Pierre had warned his brother-in-law that Prince Andrew was on
Petersburg he inquired for Kuragin but the latter had already left the
Anatole Kuragin whom he felt it necessary to encounter. On reaching
Petersburg, on business as he told his family, but really to meet
After his interview with Pierre in Moscow, Prince Andrew went to


CHAPTER VIII





and the war began...
Every detail of the interview was communicated to the Russian monarch,
The letter taken by Balashev was the last Napoleon sent to Alexander.

go!"
in reply to Balashev's bow. "Let him have mine, he has a long way to
ready for the general?" he added, with a slight inclination of his head
adorer and courtier of anyone but himself, Napoleon. "Are the horses
anything?" said he, as if it was ridiculous, in his presence, to be the
"Well, adorer and courtier of the Emperor Alexander, why don't you say

honor and mark of favor at the French court.
To have one's ear pulled by the Emperor was considered the greatest

only.
face and, taking him by the ear, pulled it gently, smiling with his lips
Balashev, he raised his hand to the forty-year-old Russian general's
as if he were doing something not merely important but pleasing to
Balashev and with a slight smile, as confidently, quickly, and simply
the room in silence, and then, suddenly and unexpectedly, went up to
Again Napoleon brought out his snuffbox, paced several times up and down

responsibility?"
and not to command armies! Why has he taken on himself such a
the good of that? War is my profession, but his business is to reign
"And why has the Emperor Alexander taken command of the armies? What is

humiliation.
now fully devoted to him and who must rejoice at his former master's
he treated Balashev not as an envoy from his enemy, but as a man
hearing what was said to him. Napoleon did not notice this expression;
make his bow and leave, and only listened because he could not help
Balashev bowed his head with an air indicating that he would like to

prepare an asylum for them in Russia!"
Weimar relations out of Germany.... Yes. I'll drive them out. Let him
his cup away with his hand. "I'll drive all his Wurttemberg, Baden, and
"And let him know that I will do so!" said Napoleon, rising and pushing

in him.
him back on to the track of his morning's anger, which was still fresh
and he turned inquiringly to Balashev, and evidently this thought turned
That I do not... understand. Has he not thought that I may do the same?"
the Emperor Alexander has surrounded himself with my personal enemies.
self-confident smile. "What I can't understand," he went on, "is that
deliberating," continued Napoleon with the same derisive and
"Yes. Four days ago in this room, Wintzingerode and Stein were

Balashev made no reply and bowed his head in silence.

superiority to Alexander.
would be agreeable to his hearer since it went to prove his, Napoleon's,
isn't it, General?" he said, evidently not doubting that this remark
"They tell me this is the room the Emperor Alexander occupied? Strange,

pleasant, though slightly ironic, smile.
Balashev too was his friend and worshiper. Napoleon turned to him with a
by men who adored him: and he felt convinced that, after his dinner,
consider everyone his friend. It seemed to him that he was surrounded
any reasoned cause, makes a man contented with himself and disposed to
Napoleon was in that well-known after-dinner mood which, more than

chair beside him.
down, toying with his Sevres coffee cup, and motioned Balashev to a
days previously had been that of the Emperor Alexander. Napoleon sat
After dinner they went to drink coffee in Napoleon's study, which four

reminiscences.
badness of the road from Petersburg to Moscow and of his Petersburg
he uttered the word Poltava before Caulaincourt began speaking of the
flushed with pleasure at the aptitude of this reply, but hardly had
road through Poltava, which Charles XII chose." Balashev involuntarily
so all roads lead to Moscow: there were many roads, and "among them the
all through the dinner, replied that just as "all roads lead to Rome,"
direct road from there to Moscow passed. Balashev, who was on the alert
notice it at all and naively asked Balashev through what towns the
to say. So little was his rejoinder appreciated that Napoleon did not
we don't see it, or it is not at all witty," their expressions seemed
were puzzled as to what Balashev's tone suggested. "If there is a point
The uninterested and perplexed faces of the marshals showed that they

passed unnoticed.
court, but it was not much appreciated at Napoleon's dinner, where it
French in Spain, was much appreciated when he related it at Alexander's
This reply of Balashev's, which hinted at the recent defeats of the

is Spain, where there are also many churches and monasteries."
"I beg your Majesty's pardon," returned Balashev, "besides Russia there

"But nowhere in Europe is there anything like that," said Napoleon.

"Every country has its own character," said he.

Balashev respectfully ventured to disagree with the French Emperor.

appreciation of this remark.
backwardness of a people," said Napoleon, turning to Caulaincourt for
"But a large number of monasteries and churches is always a sign of the

"The Russians are very devout," replied Balashev.

"Why such a quantity of churches?"

he remarked:
And receiving the reply that there were more than two hundred churches,

Moscow?" he asked.
that Moscow is called 'Holy Moscow'? How many churches are there in
"How many inhabitants are there in Moscow? How many houses? Is it true

curiosity.
if convinced that Balashev, as a Russian, must be flattered by his
interested traveler asks about a new city he intends to visit, but as
questioned Balashev about the Russian capital, not merely as an
his success. In the course of conversation he mentioned Moscow and
one of those who sympathized with his plans and ought to rejoice at
him amiably but behaved as if Balashev were one of his own courtiers,
At dinner, having placed Balashev beside him, Napoleon not only treated

their handkerchiefs to him.
monogram were displayed, and the Polish ladies, welcoming him, waved
the windows of the streets through which he rode, rugs, flags, and his
crowds of people had rapturously greeted and followed him. From all
The Emperor was in very good spirits after his ride through Vilna, where

did it.
because it harmonized with any idea of right and wrong, but because he
mistake, and that in his perception whatever he did was right, not
he had long been convinced that it was impossible for him to make a
but, on the contrary, tried to reassure Balashev. It was evident that
of constraint or self-reproach on account of his outburst that morning,
Napoleon met Balashev cheerfully and amiably. He not only showed no sign

Bessieres, Caulaincourt, and Berthier were present at that dinner.

with the Emperor that day.
to his surprise, Balashev received, through Duroc, an invitation to dine
insulted envoy--especially as he had witnessed his unseemly anger. But,
not wish to see him, and would even avoid another meeting with him--an
shall receive my letter," Balashev felt convinced that Napoleon would
last dryly spoken words: "I will detain you no longer, General; you
After all that Napoleon had said to him--those bursts of anger and the


CHAPTER VII





rushed forward and descended the staircase.
And Napoleon went quickly to the door. Everyone in the reception room

shall receive my letter to the Emperor."
esteem his lofty qualities. I will detain you no longer, General; you
I am as devoted to him as before: I know him thoroughly and very highly
"Assure the Emperor Alexander from me," said he, taking his hat, "that

without giving them a glance, turned to Balashev:
his hat and gloves; another brought him a pocket handkerchief. Napoleon,
opened, a gentleman-in-waiting, bending respectfully, handed the Emperor
at it, and stamped his foot twice on the floor as a signal. The door
When Balashev had ended, Napoleon again took out his snuffbox, sniffed

convinced you."
your duty to say that, but you don't believe it yourself. I have
the war. Napoleon nodded condescendingly, as if to say, "I know it's
him. Balashev said that in Russia the best results were expected from
silent, still looking derisively at him and evidently not listening to
Russian side things did not appear in so gloomy a light. Napoleon was
Balashev, feeling it incumbent on him to reply, said that from the

"And yet what a splendid reign your master might have had!"

quiet voice:
paused, looked ironically straight into Balashev's eyes, and said in a
it several times to his nose, and stopped in front of Balashev. He
He put his snuffbox into his waistcoat pocket, took it out again, lifted

several times up and down the room, his fat shoulders twitching.
That is what you have gained by alienating me!" And he walked silently
Europe to allow to be destroyed. Yes, that is what will happen to you.
re-erect against you that barrier which it was criminal and blind of
will throw you back beyond the Dvina and beyond the Dnieper, and will
struck one of his small hands energetically with the other. "Yes, I
of Europe!" he declared, his face pale and distorted by anger, and he
"Know that if you stir up Prussia against me, I'll wipe it off the map

energetically with his white hands, almost shouted:
round, drew close to Balashev's face, and, gesticulating rapidly and
the same attitude of submission to fate, Napoleon abruptly turned
obvious falsehood, and that Balashev still stood silently before him in
And probably still more perturbed by the fact that he had uttered this

lions. And there will be two hundred thousand of them."
allies--the Poles. There are eighty thousand of them and they fight like
"But what do I care about your allies?" said Napoleon. "I have

his eyes.
at the movements of Napoleon's stout legs and trying to avoid meeting
when he came to his senses. Balashev stood with downcast eyes, looking
had any significance, and that Napoleon himself would be ashamed of them
seized Napoleon. He knew that none of the words now uttered by Napoleon
he shrank before the transport of groundless wrath that had evidently
to demean his dignity and felt the necessity of replying; but, as a man,
in the right. Balashev began to feel uncomfortable: as envoy he feared
a man has to talk, talk, and talk, merely to convince himself that he is
to drown his voice. Napoleon was in that state of irritability in which
Sweden is practically an island: but Napoleon gave an angry exclamation
of the Swedes, Balashev wished to reply that when Russia is on her side
something, but Napoleon always interrupted him. To the alleged insanity
have done so; he continually made the gesture of a man wishing to say
Balashev knew how to reply to each of Napoleon's remarks, and would

Napoleon grinned maliciously and again raised his snuffbox to his nose.

himself with Russia unless he were mad."
another--Bernadotte, who promptly went mad--for no Swede would ally
by mad kings. Their king was insane and they changed him for
peace with you. As for the Swedes--it is their fate to be governed
be of no use to you; they are worth nothing and have shown it by making
hundred and thirty thousand men this side of the Vistula. The Turks will
could carry no weight--"I give you my word of honor that I have five
you my word of honor," said Napoleon, forgetting that his word of honor
not two hundred thousand men, and I have three times that number. I give
know the number of your battalions as exactly as I know my own. You have
"I know everything!" Napoleon interrupted him. "I know everything. I

difficulty, "the troops are burning with eagerness..."
what had been said to him and following these verbal fireworks with
"On the contrary, Your Majesty," said Balashev, hardly able to remember

provinces. Your army is grumbling."
defend Vilna. You are cut in two and have been driven out of the Polish
"The campaign began only a week ago, and you haven't even been able to

desired to be a military commander.
these words as a direct challenge to the Emperor. He knew how Alexander
the army unless he is a general!" said Napoleon, evidently uttering
the responsibility for all that happens. A sovereign should not be with
playing in that monstrous crowd? They compromise him and throw on him
a quick eye, and resolution.... And what role is your young monarch
Bagration alone is a military man. He's stupid, but he has experience,
does not know what to decide on, and time passes bringing no result.
Armfeldt disputes, Bennigsen considers, and Barclay, called on to act,
movements. And what are they doing, all these courtiers? Pfuel proposes,
most capable of them all, but I cannot say so, judging by his first
They are neither fit for war nor peace! Barclay is said to be the
perception the two were one and the same)--"but they are not even that!
that incessantly sprang up, proving how right and strong he was (in his
Napoleon--hardly able to keep pace in words with the rush of thoughts
Granted that were they competent they might be made use of," continued
should awaken terrible memories in the Emperor Alexander's mind....
the same an incompetent who was unable to do anything in 1807 and who
subject; Bennigsen, rather more of a soldier than the others, but all
Armfeldt, a rake and an intriguer; Wintzingerode, a fugitive French
Wintzingerodes! Stein, a traitor expelled from his own country;
my enemies, and with whom? With Steins, Armfeldts, Bennigsens, and
in perplexity. "But no, he has preferred to surround himself with
through my friendship?" demanded Napoleon, shrugging his shoulders
"What could he wish or look for that he would not have obtained

to make some rejoinder hastily interrupted him.
He looked compassionately at Balashev, and as soon as the latter tried

"What a splendid reign the Emperor Alexander's might have been!"

his nose, and greedily sniffed at it.
times, then paused, drew from his pocket a gold snuffbox, lifted it to
owed to my friendship. Oh, what a splendid reign!" he repeated several
he had used to Alexander himself at Tilsit. "All that, he would have
paced up and down the room, repeating to Balashev almost the very words
not have done more," said Napoleon, growing more and more excited as he
Gulf of Bothnia to the mouths of the Danube. Catherine the Great could
his empire and in a single reign would have extended Russia from the
won't have those splendid provinces. Yet he might have united them to
have given the Emperor Alexander Moldavia and Wallachia, and now he
provinces as I gave him Finland. Yes," he went on, "I promised and would
Moldavia and Wallachia; I would have given your sovereign those
"Yes, I know you have made peace with the Turks without obtaining

unrestrained irritability to which spoiled people are so prone.
talking himself, and continued to talk with the sort of eloquence and
But Napoleon did not let him speak. He evidently wanted to do all the

"Peace has been concluded..." he began.

Balashev bowed his head affirmatively.

"I hear you have made peace with Turkey?"

the interview.
insult Alexander--just what he had least desired at the commencement of
The whole purport of his remarks now was evidently to exalt himself and

and the more he talked the less could he control his words.
that he was nevertheless willing to negotiate. But he had begun talking,
intention of demonstrating the advantages of his position and showing
The commencement of his speech had obviously been made with the

power and Alexander's errors and duplicity.
and discuss its possibility, but only to prove his own rectitude and
hurriedly, evidently no longer trying to show the advantages of peace
aim of your alliance with England? What has she given you?" he continued
your position is a bad one. You offer me negotiations! But what is the
have expended millions, when you are in alliance with England, and when
army? The Emperor Alexander, not I! And you offer me negotiations when I
such conditions. You say I have begun this war! But who first joined his
own surprise. "If you gave me Petersburg and Moscow I could not accept
Prince of Baden, but not to me!" Napoleon almost screamed, quite to his
"Such demands as to retreat beyond the Vistula and Oder may be made to a

he remarked at a later date.
conscious of. "The vibration of my left calf is a great sign with me,"
expression. This quivering of his left leg was a thing Napoleon was
quivering faster than before and his face seemed petrified in its stern
stopped in front of Balashev. Balashev noticed that his left leg was
He went in silence from one corner of the room to the other and again

and yet you are willing to negotiate."
the demand was that I should withdraw beyond the Vistula and the Oder,
before commencing negotiations, but in just the same way two months ago
"You say the demand now is that I am to withdraw beyond the Niemen

quickly and began to pace the room.
only a withdrawal beyond the Niemen was now demanded. Napoleon turned
Instead of the demand of four months earlier to withdraw from Pomerania,

The latter bowed his head respectfully.

Balashev.
the Niemen--only the Niemen?" repeated Napoleon, looking straight at
"The Niemen?" repeated Napoleon. "So now you want me to retire beyond

"The withdrawal of your army beyond the Niemen, sire," replied Balashev.

energetic gesture of inquiry with his small white plump hand.
negotiations, what is demanded of me?" he said, frowning and making an
have waited eighteen months for explanations. But in order to begin
I not for eighteen months been doing everything to obtain it? I
"I desire peace, no less than the Emperor Alexander," he began. "Have

Napoleon raised his voice.
noticed the quivering of Napoleon's left leg which increased the more
followed, Balashev, who more than once lowered his eyes, involuntarily
a louder tone and more hurriedly than before. During the speech that
rhythmically. Without moving from where he stood he began speaking in
words; his face twitched and the calf of his left leg began to quiver
Napoleon noticed Balashev's embarrassment when uttering these last

French army retires beyond the Niemen."
wished to do so. He grew confused and said: "On condition that the
complex feeling restrained him. He could not utter them, though he
"So long as a single armed foe remains on Russian soil," but some
told Balashev to repeat to Napoleon. Balashev remembered these words,
letter, but had specially inserted in the rescript to Saltykov and had
he remembered the words the Emperor Alexander had not written in his
negotiations except on condition that... Here Balashev hesitated:
the Emperor Alexander wished for peace, but would not enter into
After saying all he had been instructed to say, Balashev added that

proceed.
feelings, he frowned and nodded slightly as a sign that Balashev might
"Not yet!" interposed Napoleon, and, as if fearing to give vent to his

desire war, and had no relations with England.
and without his sovereign's assent, that the Emperor Alexander did not
sufficient cause for war; that Kurakin had acted on his own initiative
Emperor Alexander did not consider Kurakin's demand for his passports a
Balashev recovered himself and began to speak. He said that the

Balashev's uniform and sword.
seemed to say, as with a scarcely perceptible smile he looked at
bent on him confused him. "You are flurried--compose yourself!" Napoleon
"Sire! The Emperor, my master..." but the sight of the Emperor's eyes
Russian envoy, Balashev began a speech he had prepared long before:
When Napoleon, having finished speaking, looked inquiringly at the

negotiations.
was firmly persuaded that he wished for peace and intended to enter into
moderate and amicable tone in which the French Emperor spoke, Balashev
dissatisfaction with the Russian government. Judging by the calmly
And he began clearly and concisely to explain his reasons for

any explanations you can give me."
forced on me. Even now" (he emphasized the word) "I am ready to receive
"I do not, and did not, desire war," he continued, "but it has been

in the world, it seemed to him, depended entirely on his will.
Nothing outside himself had any significance for him, because everything
Evidently only what took place within his own mind interested him.
It was plain that Balashev's personality did not interest him at all.

his large eyes into Balashav's face and immediately looked past him.
from the Emperor Alexander and am very glad to see you." He glanced with
"Good day, General!" said he. "I have received the letter you brought

he will always say the right thing and say it well.
time and does not condescend to prepare what he has to say but is sure
to him at once began speaking like a man who values every moment of his
He nodded in answer to Balashav's low and respectful bow, and coming up

day.
comfort. It was evident, too, that he was in the best of spirits that
imposing and stately appearance one sees in men of forty who live in
shoulders, and chest and stomach involuntarily protruding, had that
thrown back. His whole short corpulent figure with broad thick
He entered briskly, with a jerk at every step and his head slightly

welcome.
prominent chin, wore a gracious and majestic expression of imperial
of Eau de Cologne. His full face, rather young-looking, with its
stood out sharply above the black collar of his uniform, and he smelled
lock hung down in the middle of his broad forehead. His plump white neck
Hessian boots. His short hair had evidently just been brushed, but one
leather breeches tightly fitting the fat thighs of his short legs, and
a white waistcoat so long that it covered his rotund stomach, white
dressing for his ride, and wore a blue uniform, opening in front over
firm and resolute--they were those of Napoleon. He had just finished
was silent and then from the study the sound was heard of other steps,
footsteps beyond the door, both halves of it were opened rapidly; all
on his mission. He stood a minute or two, waiting. He heard hurried
study, the very one from which the Russian Emperor had dispatched him
Balashev went into a small reception room, one door of which led into a

him.
the great reception room and, bowing politely, asked Balashev to follow
After some minutes, the gentleman-in-waiting who was on duty came into

for his ride.
Duroc said that Napoleon would receive the Russian general before going
Balashev had seen at the court of the Emperor of Russia--were waiting.
generals, gentlemen-in-waiting, and Polish magnates--several of whom
The Comte de Turenne showed him into a big reception room where many

and magnificence of Napoleon's court.
Though Balashev was used to imperial pomp, he was amazed at the luxury


CHAPTER VI





house in Vilna from which Alexander had dispatched him on his mission.
horse and his Mameluke, Rustan. Napoleon received Balashev in the very
for Napoleon to come out, were standing at the porch, round his saddle
brilliant suite of aides-de-camp, pages, and generals, who were waiting
shaggy caps on their heads, and an escort of hussars and Uhlans and a
grenadiers stood there in blue uniforms unfastened in front and with
front of the house to which Balashev was conducted, and now two French
Four days before, sentinels of the Preobrazhensk regiment had stood in

with an audience.
to Balashev and informed him of the Emperor Napoleon's wish to honor him
Next day the imperial gentleman-in-waiting, the Comte de Turenne, came

previously.
French--through the very gate by which he had left it four days
whole district, Balashev was brought to Vilna--now occupied by the
the marshal's baggage and the French army, which occupied the
power in which he had so lately moved--and after several marches with
and insignificance--particularly acute by contrast with the sphere of
After four days of solitude, ennui, and consciousness of his impotence

except Monsieur de Castres.
baggage train should orders come for it to move, and to talk to no one
him, peremptorily requested him to remain there, to move on with the
Next day Davout rode out early and, after asking Balashev to come to

That day he dined with the marshal, at the same board on the barrels.

Balashev to the quarters assigned him.
A minute later the marshal's adjutant, de Castres, came in and conducted

his pocket, left the shed.
"You will be treated as is fitting," said he and, putting the packet in

signs of agitation and confusion which appeared on Balashev's face.
Davout glanced at him silently and plainly derived pleasure from the

be adjutant general to His Majesty...."
protested Balashev, "but permit me to observe that I have the honor to
"You are perfectly at liberty to treat me with respect or not,"

across two barrels). Davout took the packet and read the inscription.
on the table (made of a door with its hinges still hanging on it, laid
Balashev took out the packet containing the Emperor's letter and laid it

on duty.
dependence on brute force, Davout sent an adjutant to call the officer
And, as if to make the Russian general still more conscious of his

"you must do as you're told."
"Your Emperor's orders are obeyed in your army, but here," said Davout,

Emperor.
Balashev replied that he had been ordered to hand it personally to the

the Emperor."
"Where is your dispatch?" he inquired. "Give it to me. I will send it to

hearing him, became still surlier and ruder.
him of his rank and mission. Contrary to his expectation, Davout, after
Alexander and even his envoy to Napoleon, Balashev hastened to inform
Davout did not know that he was adjutant general to the Emperor
Thinking he could have been received in such a manner only because

wanted.
reception produced, Davout raised his head and coldly asked what he
When he noticed in Balashev's face the disagreeable impression this

more and sneered malevolently.
by his talk with Murat, he did not rise or even stir, but scowled still
Balashev's face, which was animated by the beauty of the morning and
the Russian general entered, and after glancing over his spectacles at
Balashev was brought in. He became still more absorbed in his task when
dreary, persistent activity. Davout allowed himself that pleasure when
when they encounter anyone who shows animation, is to flaunt their own
his face seemed to say. The chief pleasure and necessity of such men,
am sitting on a barrel and working in a dirty shed?" the expression of
hurry. "How can I think of the bright side of life when, as you see, I
being gloomy. For the same reason they are always hard at work and in a
themselves in most depressing conditions to have a justification for
found him, but Marshal Davout was one of those men who purposely put
writing--he was auditing accounts. Better quarters could have been
Balashev found Davout seated on a barrel in the shed of a peasant's hut,

chivalrous, noble, and gentle.
maintain his powerful position with Alexander, whose own character was
danger, and who was neither an educated man nor a courtier, was able to
with his own hands, whose weak nerves rendered him unable to face
can explain how the cruel Arakcheev, who tore out a grenadier's mustache
proximity to the head of the government may be. This inevitability alone
appear and hold their own, however incongruous their presence and their
necessary in the organism of nature, and they always exist, always
In the organism of states such men are necessary, as wolves are

express his devotion to his monarch except by cruelty.
coward like Arakcheev, he was as precise, as cruel, and as unable to
Davout was to Napoleon what Arakcheev was to Alexander--though not a


CHAPTER V





Davout.
commander, who was fetched, conducted him into the village to Marshal
the pickets of the vanguard had done, and an adjutant of the corps
village the sentinels of Davout's infantry corps detained him as
be brought before Napoleon himself. But instead of that, at the next
Balashev rode on, supposing from Murat's words that he would very soon

awaiting him.
glittering ornaments, he rejoined his suite who were respectfully
and with his embroidered red mantle, his flowing feathers, and his
"I won't detain you longer, General. I wish success to your mission,"

at his coronation, and, waving his right arm, said:
Murat solemnly drew himself up, assumed the pose in which he had stood
with him in Naples. Then suddenly, as if remembering his royal dignity,
health, and to reminiscences of the gay and amusing times he had spent
And he went on to inquiries about the Grand Duke and the state of his

despite a quarrel between their masters.
in the tone of a servant who wants to remain good friends with another
begun by no wish of mine may finish as quickly as possible!" said he,
wish the Emperors may arrange the affair between them, and that the war
"Oh, my dear general!" Murat again interrupted him, "with all my heart I

war.
Balashev told him why he considered Napoleon to be the originator of the

unexpectedly, with a kindly and foolish smile.
"Then you don't consider the Emperor Alexander the aggressor?" he asked

because..." but Murat interrupted him.
Balashev replied that there was "nothing offensive in the demand,


    * "Royalty has its obligations."


and the dignity of France was thereby offended.
troops from Prussia, especially when that demand became generally known
the Emperor Napoleon had resented the demand that he should withdraw his
with him, trying to speak significantly. He referred to the fact that
from his suite, which waited respectfully, began to pace up and down
envoy. He dismounted, took Balashev's arm, and moving a few steps away
him, as a king and an ally, to confer on state affairs with Alexander's
de Bal-macheve." But royaute oblige! * and he felt it incumbent on
Murat's face beamed with stupid satisfaction as he listened to "Monsieur

frequently addressing one to whom the title was still a novelty.
Your Majesty at every opportunity, with the affectation unavoidable in
desire war and as Your Majesty sees..." said Balashev, using the words
"Your Majesty," replied Balashev, "my master, the Emperor, does not

of which he was unable to judge.
"Well, General, it all looks like war," as if regretting a circumstance

withers of Balashev's horse and said:
natural tone of good-natured familiarity. He laid his hand on the
instantly forsook him, and without noticing it he passed into his
As soon as the King began to speak loud and fast his royal dignity

condescension.
make your acquaintance, General!" he added, with a gesture of kingly
difficulty that had presented itself to the colonel). "Charmed to
"De Bal-macheve!" said the King (overcoming by his assurance the

Majesty of Balashev's mission, whose name he could not pronounce.
inquiringly at the French colonel. The colonel respectfully informed His
curling to his shoulders, in a majestically royal manner, and looked
On seeing the Russian general he threw back his head, with its long hair

roads of Poland, without himself knowing why or whither.
and expensive as possible, and gaily and contentedly galloped along the
skittish between the shafts--he dressed up in clothes as variegated
a well-fed but not overfat horse that feels himself in harness and grows
in yours!"--he had cheerfully taken up his familiar business, and--like
had told him: "I made you King that you should reign in my way, but not
last interview with Napoleon in Danzig, when his august brother-in-law
had been ordered to return to military service--and especially since his
the grief felt by the subjects he was abandoning, latterly, after he
But though he firmly believed himself to be King of Naples and pitied


    * "Long live the king."


tomorrow!"
smile and said: "Poor fellows, they don't know that I am leaving them
called out to him: "Viva il re!" * he turned to his wife with a pensive
city, while walking through the streets with his wife, some Italians
was the King of Naples that when, on the eve of his departure from that
solemn and important air than formerly. He was so sure that he really
and was himself convinced that he was so, and therefore assumed a more
incomprehensible why he should be King of Naples, he was called so,
in fact, Murat, now called "King of Naples." Though it was quite
French colonel, whispered respectfully: "The King of Naples!" It was,
toward him with a theatrically solemn countenance, when Julner, the
bracelets, plumes, necklaces, and gold embroidery, who was galloping
Balashev was only two horses' length from the equestrian with the

gold lace glittering in the bright June sunshine.
rode toward Balashev at a gallop, his plumes flowing and his gems and
mantle, and stretched his long legs forward in French fashion. This man
in his hat and black hair curling down to his shoulders. He wore a red
with trappings that glittered in the sun, rode a tall man with plumes
of horsemen coming toward them. In front of the group, on a black horse
They had hardly ridden up a hill, past a tavern, before they saw a group

The sun had by now risen and shone gaily on the bright verdure.

destination.
and a quarter away and would receive Balashev and conduct him to his
village. The colonel said that the commander of the division was a mile
curiosity at a Russian uniform, and came out at the other end of the
horses, past sentinels and men who saluted their colonel and stared with
They rode through the village of Rykonty, past tethered French hussar

quarters were, he believed, not far off.
the Emperor would most likely be satisfied immediately, as the Emperor's
and behind the outposts and told him that his wish to be presented to
evidently understood Balashev's importance. He led him past his soldiers
The French colonel with difficulty repressed a yawn, but was polite and

of enterprise which always accompany the opening of a campaign.
martial swagger in their clothes, and a touch of the gaiety and spirit
trim, almost like that of peacetime maneuvers, but with a shade of
It was that first period of a campaign when troops are still in full

smart and well kept.
by two hussars. The officer, the soldiers, and their horses all looked
riding from the village on a handsome sleek gray horse, accompanied
A French colonel of hussars, who had evidently just left his bed, came

silently at one another from time to time.
village. The Russian Cossacks and bugler and the French hussars looked
Balashev looked around him, awaiting the arrival of an officer from the

another, like bubbles rising in water.
the village, and over the fields the larks rose trilling, one after
fresh and dewy. A herd of cattle was being driven along the road from
The sun was only just appearing from behind the clouds, the air was

himself.
and still more this disrespectful, application of brute force to
found it very strange here on Russian soil to encounter this hostile,
being accustomed to the respect due to his rank in the service, Balashev
conversing with the Emperor less than three hours before, and in general
After living at the seat of the highest authority and power, after

matters without looking at the Russian general.
noncommissioned officer began talking with his comrades about regimental
he did not do as he was told? Balashev mentioned who he was. The
and shouted rudely at the Russian general, asking: was he deaf that
advanced his horse's chest against Balashev, put his hand to his saber,
The noncommissioned officer frowned and, muttering words of abuse,

pace.
not do so at once, but continued to advance along the road at a walking
shaggy cap, shouted to the approaching Balashev to halt. Balashev did
A French noncommissioned officer of hussars, in crimson uniform and a

was stopped by French cavalry sentinels.
village of Rykonty, on the Russian side of the Niemen, by dawn. There he
bugler and two Cossacks, Balashev reached the French outposts at the
Having set off in the small hours of the fourteenth, accompanied by a

repeat them personally to Napoleon.
reconciliation was being made, but he definitely instructed Balashev to
it would be injudicious to use them at a moment when a last attempt at
in his letter to Napoleon, because with his characteristic tact he felt
him to transmit those words to Napoleon. Alexander did not insert them
peace so long as a single armed enemy remained on Russian soil and told
Balashev, the Emperor repeated to him the words that he would not make
take it and hand it personally to the French Emperor. When dispatching
sent for Balashev and read him his letter to Napoleon, ordered him to
At two in the morning of the fourteenth of June, the Emperor, having


CHAPTER IV





(signed) Alexander.

etc.,
Majesty to preserve humanity from the calamity of another war. I am,
attack that nothing on my part has provoked. It still depends on Your
the contrary case, Your Majesty, I shall see myself forced to repel an
having occurred and an understanding between us will be possible. In
troops from Russian territory, I will regard what has passed as not
peoples for such a misunderstanding, and consents to withdraw your
at his post. If Your Majesty does not intend to shed the blood of our
it I let him know how much I disapproved of it and ordered him to remain
never authorized to make that demand, and as soon as I was informed of
aggression. In fact, the ambassador, as he himself has declared, was
never have led me to suppose that that could serve as a pretext for
which the Duc de Bassano based his refusal to deliver them to him would
from the time Prince Kuragin asked for his passports. The reasons on
Your Majesty has considered yourself to be in a state of war with me
which Count Lauriston informs me, as a reason for this aggression, that
frontier, and I have this moment received from Petersburg a note, in
my engagements with Your Majesty, your troops have crossed the Russian
Yesterday I learned that, despite the loyalty with which I have kept

Monsieur mon frere,


Next day the following letter was sent to Napoleon:

Russian soil.
he would not make peace so long as a single armed Frenchman remained on
Prince Saltykov, in which he insisted on the words being inserted that
him to write an order to the troops and a rescript to Field Marshal
at two o'clock that night he sent for his secretary, Shishkov, and told
expressed his feelings, and has since become famous. On returning home
and resentment the Emperor had found a phrase that pleased him, fully
a ball. On first receiving the news, under the influence of indignation
particularly startling after a month of unfulfilled expectations, and at
The unexpected news of the French having crossed the Niemen was


estimation.
usually known to him, and by this means he rose higher in their
important personages that much that was concealed from others was
crossed the Niemen and, thanks to this, was able to show certain
Boris was thus the first to learn the news that the French army had

remained there about another half-hour.
slightly bowed his head. The Emperor re-entered the ballroom and
Boris understood that this was meant for him and, closing his eyes,

"Let no one know of it!" the Emperor added with a frown.

Boris had overheard it.
the form in which he had expressed his thoughts, but displeased that
gave the Emperor pleasure to utter these words. He was satisfied with
a single armed enemy remains in my country!" It seemed to Boris that it
"To enter Russia without declaring war! I will not make peace as long as

affronted, was finishing with these words:
The Emperor, with the agitation of one who has been personally

withdraw, respectfully pressed close to the doorpost with bowed head.
moving toward the door. Boris, fluttering as if he had not had time to
and the Emperor returning to the veranda, he stood still. They were
the parquet to the door opening into the garden, where, seeing Balashev
Potocka who, he thought, had gone out onto the veranda, and glided over
two ladies, he whispered to Helene that he meant to choose Countess
could find it out before others. In the figure in which he had to choose
worried by the question of what news Balashev had brought and how he
All the time Boris was going through the figures of the mazurka, he was

wrathfully around, followed some twenty paces behind them.
without noticing Arakcheev who, holding his sword and glancing
But the Emperor and Balashev passed out into the illuminated garden

otherwise than through himself.)
was displeased that evidently important news had reached the Emperor
to address him. (Boris understood that Arakcheev envied Balashev and
his red nose, stepped forward from the crowd as if expecting the Emperor
Arakcheev looked at the Emperor from under his brow and, sniffing with
Arakcheev's excited face when the sovereign went out with Balashev.
yards wide as the people on both sides made way for him. Boris noticed
and crossed the room with him, unconsciously clearing a path seven
amazement appeared on the Emperor's face. He took Balashev by the arm
and turned to him. Hardly had Balashev begun to speak before a look of
there were important reasons for so doing, nodded slightly to the lady
at Balashev and, evidently understanding that he only acted thus because
lady. Having finished speaking to her, the Emperor looked inquiringly
to court etiquette stood near him while he was talking to a Polish
those in closest attendance on the Emperor, went up to him and contrary
As the mazurka began, Boris saw that Adjutant General Balashev, one of

he alone knew how to utter.
doorway, stopping now one pair and now another with gracious words which
who was in the same room. The Emperor was not dancing, he stood in the
unnoticed by others, never for an instant ceased to observe the Emperor
of old acquaintances and at the same time, unaware of it himself and
which emerged from a dark, gold-embroidered, gauze gown, talked to her
third couple. Boris, coolly looking at Helene's dazzling bare shoulders
partner, herself offered to dance the mazurka with Boris. They were the
At midnight dancing was still going on. Helene, not having a suitable

married, they met as good friends of long standing.
the favors of a very important personage and Boris had only recently
a long time and did not recall the past, but as Helene was enjoying
own age. He was meeting Helene in Vilna after not having seen her for
patronage but stood on an equal footing with the highest of those of his
was now a rich man who had risen to high honors and no longer sought
aide-de-camp, had subscribed a large sum toward the expenses. Boris
present en garcon (as he phrased it), was also there and, though not an
Boris Drubetskoy, having left his wife in Moscow and being for the

Emperor noticed her and honored her with a dance.
Polish ladies by her massive, so called Russian type of beauty. The
followed the sovereign from Petersburg to Vilna and eclipsed the refined
Countess Bezukhova was present among other Russian ladies who had
that rarely had so many beautiful women been assembled in one place.
It was a gay and brilliant fete. Connoisseurs of such matters declared

aides-de-camp at Bennigsen's country house.
Alexander spent the evening at the entertainment given by his
his vanguard, driving off the Cossacks, crossed the Russian frontier,
The very day that Napoleon issued the order to cross the Niemen, and

fireworks at Zakret, Count Bennigsen's country seat.
and the thirteenth of June was fixed for a ball, dinner, regatta, and
landowner in the Vilna province, offered his country house for the fete,
Emperor was invited to act as hostess. Count Bennigsen, being a
subscription. The lady who was thought to be most pleasing to the
The Emperor gave his consent. The aides-de-camp collected money by
the Emperor by his aides-de-camp. This idea was eagerly received.
aides-de-camp in attendance that a dinner and ball should be given for
courtiers, and by the Emperor himself, it occurred to one of the Polish
In June, after many balls and fetes given by the Polish magnates, by the

pleasantly and forget that war was impending.
the sovereign seemed directed merely to making him spend his time
of waiting--prepare for the war. All the efforts of those who surrounded
The longer the Emperor remained in Vilna the less did everybody--tired

responsibility himself.
commander of all the forces, and the Emperor did not assume that
armies had its own commander in chief, but there was no supreme
the Emperor had been at headquarters for a month. Each of the three
between the various plans that were proposed had even increased after
from Petersburg. There was no general plan of action. The vacillation
war that everyone expected and to prepare for which the Emperor had come
month, reviewing troops and holding maneuvers. Nothing was ready for the
The Emperor of Russia had, meanwhile, been in Vilna for more than a


CHAPTER III





    * Those whom (God) wishes to destroy he drives mad.


Quos vult perdere dementat. *

d'honneur of which Napoleon was himself the head.
had needlessly plunged into the river should be enrolled in the Legion
found, Napoleon also gave instructions that the Polish colonel who
containing information about the orders to the French army had been
possible and another that a Saxon should be shot, on whom a letter
money prepared for use in Russia should be delivered as quickly as
That evening, between issuing one order that the forged Russian paper

no longer was and at that moment considered themselves happy.
and looked ecstatically at the spot where Napoleon had been but where he
got out, in their soaked and streaming clothes, they shouted "Vivat!"
difficulty clambered out on the further bank. And as soon as they had
they had started. The colonel and some of his men got across and with
their assistance. The majority struggled back to the bank from which
Some forty Uhlans were drowned in the river, though boats were sent to

his horse and rode to his quarters.
dumfound people and impel them to insane self-oblivion. He called for
the world, from Africa to the steppes of Muscovy alike, was enough to
For him it was no new conviction that his presence in any part of

drowning Uhlans who distracted his attention.
him instructions and occasionally glancing disapprovingly at the
summoned Berthier, began pacing up and down the bank with him, giving
to his person, the little man in the gray overcoat got up and, having
ventured to draw the Emperor's attention to the devotion of the Poles
the aide-de-camp, having returned and choosing an opportune moment,
sat on the log and was not even looking at what they were doing. When
were swimming and drowning in this river under the eyes of the man who
though there was a ford one third of a mile away, were proud that they
manes. They tried to make their way forward to the opposite bank and,
tried to swim on, some in the saddle and some clinging to their horses'
horses. Some of the horses were drowned and some of the men; the others
stream, and the Uhlans caught hold of one another as they fell off their
him. It was cold and uncanny in the rapid current in the middle of the
part where the current was swift. Hundreds of Uhlans galloped in after
restive under him, and plunged into the water, heading for the deepest
into the river. He gave an angry thrust to his horse, which had grown
and, commanding the Uhlans to follow him, spurred his horse and galloped
with happy face and sparkling eyes, raised his saber, shouted "Vivat!"
As soon as the aide-de-camp had said this, the old mustached officer,

displeased at this excess of zeal.
eyes. The aide-de-camp replied that probably the Emperor would not be
begged to be allowed to swim across the river before the Emperor's
fear of refusal, like a boy asking for permission to get on a horse, he
to swim the river with his Uhlans instead of seeking a ford. In evident
from excitement, asked the aide-de-camp whether he would be permitted
Polish Uhlans, a handsome old man, flushed and, fumbling in his speech
The order was to find a ford and to cross the river. The colonel of the

when one of the aides-de-camp rode up to them.
"What? What did he say?" was heard in the ranks of the Polish Uhlans

his aides-de-camp galloped off to the Polish Uhlans.
out on the logs. Without lifting his head he said something, and two of
and he gazed at the opposite bank. Then he became absorbed in a map laid
him which he rested on the back of a happy page who had run up to him,
that lay on the bank. At a mute sign from him, a telescope was handed
Napoleon looked up and down the river, dismounted, and sat down on a log

pressing against one another to see him.
"Vivat!" shouted the Poles, ecstatically, breaking their ranks and

near a regiment of Polish Uhlans stationed by the river.
him through the troops. On reaching the broad river Viliya, he stopped
Guard who, breathless with delight, galloped ahead to clear a path for
the direction of Kovno, preceded by enraptured, mounted chasseurs of the
bridges to the farther side, turned sharply to the left, and galloped in
time he joined the army. He rode across one of the swaying pontoon
distracted him from the military cares that had occupied him from the
but the shouting which accompanied him everywhere disturbed him and
to forbid the soldiers to express their love of him by such shouting,
acclamations which he evidently endured only because it was impossible
bridges over the Niemen, deafened continually by incessant and rapturous
brought to Napoleon. He mounted it and rode at a gallop to one of the
On the thirteenth of June a rather small, thoroughbred Arab horse was

the hill.
of rapture and devotion to the man in the gray coat who was standing on
expression of joy at the commencement of the long-expected campaign and
characters and social positions. On the faces of all was one common
l'Empereur!" came the voices of men, old and young, of most diverse
corporal... I saw him give the cross to one of the veterans.... Vive
is, do you see him? I've seen him twice, as I see you now. The little
Cossacks--those rascals--see how they run! Vive l'Empereur! There he
Kashmir--that's settled. Vive l'Empereur! Hurrah! hurrah! hurrah! The
they make me Governor of India, Gerard, I'll make you Minister of
luck!... Did you see the Emperor? Vive l'Empereur!... preur!--If
Beauche; I'll keep the best palace in Moscow for you! Au revoir. Good
are the steppes of Asia! It's a nasty country all the same. Au revoir,
get hot... by heaven!... There he is!... Vive l'Empereur! So these
"Now we'll go into action. Oh, when he takes it in hand himself, things

bridges to the other side.
that had concealed them and, separating, flowed on and on by the three
one after another poured in a ceaseless stream out of the vast forest
the hill, they threw up their caps and shouted: "Vive l'Empereur!" and
and a cocked hat standing apart from his suite in front of his tent on
lookout for him, and when they caught sight of a figure in an overcoat
the river. The troops, knowing of the Emperor's presence, were on the
the Vilkavisski forest and flowing over the three bridges thrown across
looked through a spyglass at the streams of his troops pouring out of
which was pitched that day on the steep left bank of the Niemen, and
Early in the morning of the twelfth of June he came out of his tent,

advance, and the next day his army began to cross the Niemen.
contrary alike to strategic and diplomatic considerations, ordered an
into which Alexander the Great had marched--Napoleon unexpectedly, and
(Moscou, la ville sainte), the capital of a realm such as the Scythia
wide-spreading steppes in the midst of which lay the holy city of Moscow
Seeing, on the other side, some Cossacks (les Cosaques) and the

select a place for the crossing.
changing into a Polish uniform, he drove to the riverbank in order to
Next day, overtaking the army, he went in a carriage to the Niemen, and,


    * Old style.


a Polish count in the Vilkavisski forest.
army, he spent the night in apartments prepared for him on the estate of
him in the same direction. On the tenth of June, * coming up with the
The army was moving from west to east, and relays of six horses carried

towns thousands of people met him with excitement and enthusiasm.
along the road to Posen, Thorn, Danzig, and Konigsberg. At each of these
with six horses, surrounded by pages, aides-de-camp, and an escort,
movement of his troops from west to east. He went in a traveling coach
join his army, and at every station gave fresh orders to accelerate the
not want war and would always love and honor him--yet he set off to
calling him Monsieur mon frere, and sincerely assured him that he did
and though the Emperor Napoleon himself wrote a letter to Alexander,
believed in the possibility of peace and worked zealously to that end,
she seemed hardly able to bear. Though the diplomatists still firmly
left another wife in Paris--left her grieved by the parting which
the Empress Marie Louise--who regarded him as her husband, though he had
of Austria, and having, as his historian tells us, tenderly embraced
of his own--that is, which he had taken from other kings--to the Empress
and princes with whom he was dissatisfied, presented pearls and diamonds
emperor, kings, and princes who had deserved it, reprimanded the kings
and even an emperor. Before leaving, Napoleon showed favor to the
three weeks surrounded by a court that included princes, dukes, kings,
On the twenty-ninth of May Napoleon left Dresden, where he had spent


CHAPTER II





history and predestined from eternity.
in an historical sense involuntary and is related to the whole course of
Every act of theirs, which appears to them an act of their own will, is

like labels they have but the smallest connection with the event itself.
events the so-called great men are labels giving names to events, and
the last navvy struck it for the last time with his mattock. In historic
he who says that an undermined hill weighing a million tons fell because
wanted to, and perished because Alexander desired his destruction, and
right or wrong is he who says that Napoleon went to Moscow because he
the apple fell because he wanted to eat it and prayed for it. Equally
forth is equally right with the child who stands under the tree and says
who finds that the apple falls because the cellular tissue decays and so
which all vital organic and elemental events occur. And the botanist
Nothing is the cause. All this is only the coincidence of conditions in

because the boy standing below wants to eat it?
by the sun, because it grows heavier, because the wind shakes it, or
attraction to the earth, because its stalk withers, because it is dried
When an apple has ripened and falls, why does it fall? Because of its

coincided with it.
other causes that adapted themselves to the event that was happening or
but which only wounded the self-love of both sides, and millions of
contemporaries, were carried on with a sincere desire to attain peace,
in Dresden, the diplomatic negotiations which, in the opinion of
to compensate for that expenditure, the intoxicating honors he received
expenditure on those preparations and the need of obtaining advantages
inclinations, allurement by the grandeur of the preparations, and the
French Emperor's love and habit of war coinciding with his people's
to Napoleon) only for the purpose of securing an armed peace, the
wrongs, the movement of troops into Prussia--undertaken (as it seemed
nonobservance of the Continental System, the Duke of Oldenburg's
co-ordinated to produce that movement and war: reproaches for the
by the law of coincidence thousands of minute causes fitted in and
The people of the west moved eastwards to slay their fellow men, and


    * "To shed (or not to shed) the blood of his peoples."


performed.
for the hive life--that is to say, for history--whatever had to be
while thinking that he was acting on his own volition, to perform
never been so much in the grip of inevitable laws, which compelled him,
*--as Alexander expressed it in the last letter he wrote him--he had
it depended on him, verser (ou ne pas verser) le sang de ses peuples
Though Napoleon at that time, in 1812, was more convinced than ever that

every moment of the life of kings as a tool for its own purposes.
History, that is, the unconscious, general, hive life of mankind, uses

A king is history's slave.

"The king's heart is in the hands of the Lord."

predestination and inevitability of his every action.
and the more power he has over others, the more evident is the
stands on the social ladder, the more people he is connected with
millions of other men assumes an historic significance. The higher a man
is irrevocable, and its result coinciding in time with the actions of
the attainment of the historic, universal, aims of humanity. A deed done
Man lives consciously for himself, but is an unconscious instrument in

life in which he inevitably obeys laws laid down for him.
is the more free the more abstract its interests, and his elemental hive
There are two sides to the life of every man, his individual life, which

history, in which it has not a free but a predestined significance.
performed at a certain moment in time becomes irrevocable and belongs to
doing this or that action; but as soon as he has done it, that action
aims, and feels with his whole being that he can now do or abstain from
Each man lives for himself, using his freedom to attain his personal

us.
reasonably, the more unreasonable and incomprehensible do they become to
not understand). The more we try to explain such events in history
events (that is to say, events the reasonableness of which we do
We are forced to fall back on fatalism as an explanation of irrational

of diverse and complex causes.
individuals, and should have been induced to do so by an infinite number
provisions and guns--should consent to carry out the will of these weak
whose hands lay the real power--the soldiers who fired, or transported
could not have taken place. It was necessary that millions of men in
innumerable circumstances was needed without any one of which the event
the event seemed to depend) should be carried out, the concurrence of
otherwise, for in order that the will of Napoleon and Alexander (on whom
drawn into the campaign by lot or by conscription. This could not be
to hang, were as little voluntary as the actions of any soldier who was
The actions of Napoleon and Alexander, on whose words the event seemed

to the west, slaying their fellows.
just as some centuries previously hordes of men had come from the east
feelings and reason, had to go from west to east to slay their fellows,
to occur because it had to. Millions of men, renouncing their human
about. And so there was no one cause for that occurrence, but it had
happened. So all these causes--myriads of causes--coincided to bring it
Revolution, and so on. Without each of these causes nothing could have
dictatorship and Empire, or all the things that produced the French
government in Russia, or a Revolution in France and a subsequent
had Alexander not felt insulted, and had there not been an autocratic
a war had there been no English intrigues and no Duke of Oldenburg, and
term then also there could have been no war. Nor could there have been
have been no war; but had all his sergeants objected to serving a second
beyond the Vistula, and not ordered his troops to advance, there would
Had Napoleon not taken offense at the demand that he should withdraw

occurred.
been so many less men in Napoleon's army and the war could not have
and a thousandth corporal and private also refused, there would have
Oldenburg; for had he not wished to serve, and had a second, a third,
withdraw his troops beyond the Vistula and to restore the duchy of
serve a second term appears as much a cause as Napoleon's refusal to
event. To us, the wish or objection of this or that French corporal to
from the cooperation of all the other coincident causes--to occasion the
compared to the magnitude of the events, and by its impotence--apart
to us equally valid in itself and equally false by its insignificance
them we find; and each separate cause or whole series of causes appears
themselves. The deeper we delve in search of these causes the more of
with unclouded common sense, an incalculable number of causes present
away by the process of research and can therefore regard the event
To us, their descendants, who are not historians and are not carried

and ruined the people of Smolensk and Moscow and were killed by them.
Duke was wronged, thousands of men from the other side of Europe killed
have with the actual fact of slaughter and violence: why because the
Oldenburg wronged. We cannot grasp what connection such circumstances
was firm, or because England's policy was astute or the Duke of
tortured each other either because Napoleon was ambitious or Alexander
To us it is incomprehensible that millions of Christian men killed and
perceive its plain and terrible meaning, these causes seem insufficient.
posterity who view the thing that happened in all its magnitude and
of view, presented themselves to the men of that day; but to us, to
reasons, the number depending on the endless diversity of points
is natural that these and a countless and infinite quantity of other
from Napoleon, and from the awkward wording of Memorandum No. 178. It
Russia and Austria in 1809 had not been sufficiently well concealed
that time that it all resulted from the fact that the alliance between
need of re-establishing les bons principes, and to the diplomatists of
giving them employment; to the legitimists of that day that it was the
and old soldiers that the chief reason for the war was the necessity of
war was the Continental System which was ruining Europe; to the generals
war was the violence done to him; to businessmen that the cause of the
was Napoleon's ambition; to the Duke of Oldenburg, that the cause of the
seemed to members of the English Parliament that the cause of the war
intrigues (as in fact he said on the island of St. Helena). It naturally
It naturally seemed to Napoleon that the war was caused by England's
We can understand that the matter seemed like that to contemporaries.

the duchy to the Duke of Oldenburg"--and there would have been no war.
have written to Alexander: "My respected Brother, I consent to restore
taken proper pains and written a more adroit note, or for Napoleon to
Rumyantsev, or Talleyrand, between a levee and an evening party, to have
Consequently, it would only have been necessary for Metternich,

mistakes of the diplomatists, and so on.
System, the ambition of Napoleon, the firmness of Alexander, the
inflicted on the Duke of Oldenburg, the nonobservance of the Continental
historians tell us with naive assurance that its causes were the wrongs
What produced this extraordinary occurrence? What were its causes? The

those who committed them did not at the time regard as being crimes.
recorded in the annals of all the law courts of the world, but which
burglaries, incendiarisms, and murders as in whole centuries are not
crimes, frauds, treacheries, thefts, forgeries, issues of false money,
nature. Millions of men perpetrated against one another such innumerable
began, that is, an event took place opposed to human reason and to human
the forces of Western Europe crossed the Russian frontier and war
Russian forces had been similarly drawn. On the twelfth of June, 1812,
the west eastwards to the Russian frontier, toward which since 1811
of men, reckoning those transporting and feeding the army--moved from
the forces of Western Europe began, and in 1812 these forces--millions
From the close of the year 1811 intensified arming and concentrating of


CHAPTER I





BOOK NINE: 1812





his own softened and uplifted soul, now blossoming into a new life.
seemed to Pierre that this comet fully responded to what was passing in
displaying its white light amid countless other scintillating stars. It
fixed in a chosen spot, vigorously holding its tail erect, shining and
space, seemed suddenly--like an arrow piercing the earth--to remain
traveled in its orbit with inconceivable velocity through immeasurable
joyfully, his eyes moist with tears, at this bright comet which, having
luminous tail aroused no feeling of fear. On the contrary he gazed
and the end of the world. In Pierre, however, that comet with its long
comet of 1812--the comet which was said to portend all kinds of woes
light, and its long uplifted tail, shone the enormous and brilliant
but distinguished from them all by its nearness to the earth, its white
Prechistenka Boulevard, surrounded and sprinkled on all sides by stars
sky presented itself to his eyes. Almost in the center of it, above the
At the entrance to the Arbat Square an immense expanse of dark starry
things compared with the heights to which his soul had just been raised.
did Pierre cease to feel how sordid and humiliating were all mundane
black roofs, stretched the dark starry sky. Only looking up at the sky
It was clear and frosty. Above the dirty, ill-lit streets, above the

air with joy.
he threw open the bearskin cloak from his broad chest and inhaled the
"Home!" said Pierre, and despite twenty-two degrees of frost Fahrenheit

tears.
with that softened, grateful, last look she had given him through her
with this feeling of tenderness and love he experienced: in comparison
Club or to pay calls?" All men seemed so pitiful, so poor, in comparison
"Where to?" Pierre asked himself. "Where can I go now? Surely not to the

"Where to now, your excellency?" asked the coachman.

sleeves of his fur cloak threw it on and got into his sleigh.
tears of tenderness and joy that choked him, and without finding the
Pierre too when she had gone almost ran into the anteroom, restraining

tenderness, and glancing at Pierre she went out of the room.
For the first time for many days Natasha wept tears of gratitude and

ask on my knees for your hand and your love!"
cleverest, and best man in the world, and were free, I would this moment
 "All over?" he repeated. "If I were not myself, but the handsomest,

self-abasement.
"Before me? No! All is over for me," she replied with shame and

"Stop, stop! You have your whole life before you," said he to her.

amazed at his own words.
He knew he had something more to say to her. But when he said it he was

turned to leave the room, but Pierre held her hand.
"Don't speak to me like that. I am not worth it!" exclaimed Natasha and

Pierre grew confused.

if it's in my power..."
clearer think of me!" He took her hand and kissed it. "I shall be happy
simply to open your heart to someone--not now, but when your mind is
I beg of you, consider me your friend and if you want help, advice, or
"We won't speak of it, my dear--I'll tell him everything; but one thing

cordial tone suddenly seemed very strange to Natasha.
"We won't speak of it any more, my dear," said Pierre, and his gentle,

hoped they would not be noticed.
welled up in Pierre. He felt the tears trickle under his spectacles and
She began to cry and a still greater sense of pity, tenderness, and love

all...."
"Don't call him bad!" said Natasha. "But I don't know, don't know at

bad man?"
refer to Anatole and flushed at the thought of him--"did you love that
"I should like to know, did you love..." Pierre did not know how to

"Know what?" Natasha's eyes asked.

"But... I should like to know one thing...."
"I will tell him, I will tell him everything once more," said Pierre.

A sense of pity he had never before known overflowed Pierre's heart.

She trembled all over and sat down on a chair.

beg him to forgive, forgive, forgive me for everything...."
I'm only tormented by the wrong I have done him. Tell him only that I
"No, I know all is over," she said hurriedly. "No, that can never be.

had meant.
Natasha was evidently dismayed at the thought of what he might think she

He did not know what to say.

"Yes... I will tell him," answered Pierre; "but..."

breathed still more quickly, but did not shed tears.
"He is here now: tell him... to for... forgive me!" She stopped and

sorry for her that there was no room in his soul for reproach.
reproached her in his heart and tried to despise her, but he now felt so
Pierre sniffed as he looked at her, but did not speak. Till then he had

to apply to you..."
everything that had once been must now be different.) "He told me once
friend--is your friend," she corrected herself. (It seemed to her that
"Peter Kirilovich," she began rapidly, "Prince Bolkonski was your

expression of face.
went to the middle of the ballroom to sing, but with quite a different
hanging lifelessly just in the pose she used to stand in when she
usual; but she, stepping up to him, stopped, breathing heavily, her arms
Pierre hastened to her. He thought she would give him her hand as

whether to go to meet him or to wait till he came up.
her. When he appeared at the door she grew flurried, evidently undecided
a pale set face, but not at all shamefaced as Pierre expected to find
Natasha was standing in the middle of the drawing room, emaciated, with

her, she is so much to be pitied, so much to be pitied."
tell her everything!" said she to Pierre. "One hasn't the heart to scold
"When will her mother come? She has worried me to death! Now mind, don't

Marya Dmitrievna only shrugged her shoulders.

"No, she has dressed and gone into the drawing room," said Sonya.

tidied up."
"But how? Are we to take him up to her? The room there has not been

"Natasha insists on seeing Count Peter Kirilovich," said she.

later Sonya came to Marya Dmitrievna.
interested to know how Prince Andrew had taken the news. Ten minutes
after giving the letters to Sonya, went to Marya Dmitrievna who was
entrusted to him. Natasha was in bed, the count at the Club, and Pierre,
That same evening Pierre went to the Rostovs' to fulfill the commission


CHAPTER XXII





the cause of which Pierre so well understood.
now with the Swiss tutor Dessalles, and showing an unnatural animation,
evident. Prince Andrew talked incessantly, arguing now with his father,
At dinner the talk turned on the war, the approach of which was becoming

the name of her who could give up Prince Andrew for anyone else.
Rostovs, and that it was impossible in their presence even to mention
Pierre realized what contempt and animosity they all felt for the
satisfaction that the engagement had been broken off. Looking at them
always, but beneath her sympathy for her brother, Pierre noticed her
The old man seemed livelier than usual. Princess Mary was the same as

Pierre left the room and went to the old prince and Princess Mary.

you'll give her the packet?"
my friend never speak to me of that... of all that! Well, good-by. So
I am unable to follow in that gentleman's footsteps. If you wish to be
again, be magnanimous, and so on?... Yes, that would be very noble, but
Prince Andrew interrupted him and cried sharply: "Yes, ask her hand

"But can this be compared...?" said Pierre.

should be forgiven, but I didn't say I could forgive her. I can't."
"Yes," returned Prince Andrew hastily. "I said that a fallen woman

"about..."
"I say, do you remember our discussion in Petersburg?" asked Pierre,

anything, looked fixedly at him.
he had something more to say, or waiting to see if Pierre would say
Pierre took the packet. Prince Andrew, as if trying to remember whether

good."
that she was and is perfectly free and that I wish her all that is
"Well, it doesn't matter," said Prince Andrew. "Tell Countess Rostova

"He has gone to Peters... But I don't know," said Pierre.

"And where is your brother-in-law now, if I may ask?" he said.

Prince Andrew laughed disagreeably, again reminding one of his father.

"He could not marry, for he was married already," said Pierre.

said Prince Andrew, and he snorted several times.
"So Monsieur Kuragin has not honored Countess Rostova with his hand?"

father, coldly, maliciously, and unpleasantly.
"I much regret her illness," said Prince Andrew; and he smiled like his

"He left long ago. She has been at death's door."

added quickly.
"Then she is here still?" said Prince Andrew. "And Prince Kuragin?" he

"She is very ill," said Pierre.

"Give this to the countess... if you see her."

He took the packet from the table and handed it to Pierre.

"Here are her letters and her portrait," said he.

"Both true and untrue," Pierre began; but Prince Andrew interrupted him.

kind. Is that true?"
of your brother-in-law having sought her hand, or something of that
"I have received a refusal from Countess Rostova and have heard reports

Andrew, and in a determined, ringing, and unpleasant tone he continued:
broad face expressed pity and sympathy. This expression irritated Prince
Pierre saw that Prince Andrew was going to speak of Natasha, and his

"Forgive me for troubling you..."

stood up and coughed. His face was gloomy and his lips compressed.
packet wrapped in paper. He did it all silently and very quickly. He
Andrew went to one and took out a small casket, from which he drew a
up there, and some open portmanteaus and trunks stood about. Prince
asked him into the room that had been assigned him. A bed had been made
When Prince Meshcherski had left, Prince Andrew took Pierre's arm and
in order to stifle thoughts that were too oppressive and too intimate.
familiar, to get excited and to have arguments about extraneous matters
Pierre now recognized in his friend a need with which he was only too

not, and never did, like Speranski personally, but I like justice!"
they would have been made public," he said with warmth and haste. "I do
"If there were treason, or proofs of secret relations with Napoleon,

Speranski which was still going on between the two old men.
tutor, Prince Andrew again joined warmly in the conversation about
about M. Dessalles, whom he had brought from abroad to be his son's
frontier, about people he had met in Switzerland who knew Pierre, and
After a few words to Pierre about the awful roads from the Polish

no use to anyone."
To Pierre that smile said plainly: "I am well, but my health is now of

answer to Pierre's question, and smiled.
the new wrinkle on his forehead deepened. "Yes, I am well," he said in
"Well, how are you? Still getting stouter?" he said with animation, but

Pierre.
"Posterity will do him justice," he concluded, and at once turned to

assumed a vindictive expression.
He paused at the sight of Pierre. His face quivered and immediately

him, by him alone."
that if anything good has been accomplished in this reign it was done by
him all the blame of other men's mistakes is very easy, but I maintain
understand his aims. To judge a man who is in disfavor and to throw on
a month ago," Prince Andrew was saying, "and by those who were unable to
"Now he is censured and accused by all who were enthusiastic about him

sudden exile and alleged treachery had just reached Moscow.
gesticulating. The conversation was about Speranski--the news of whose
his father and Prince Meshcherski, warmly disputing and vigorously
horizontal wrinkle between his brows, stood in civilian dress facing
Andrew, greatly changed and plainly in better health, but with a fresh
how he could ask such a question. Pierre went into the study. Prince
Princess Mary looked at him with astonishment. She did not understand

"But is it possible that all is really ended?" asked Pierre.

than I expected. Evidently it had to be...."
him express his feelings, but still he has taken it better, far better,
"He says he expected it," she remarked. "I know his pride will not let

way her brother had taken the news of Natasha's faithlessness.
saw by her face that she was glad both at what had happened and at the
evidently intending to express her sympathy with his sorrow, but Pierre
sighed, looking toward the door of the room where Prince Andrew was,
and then interrupted him. Princess Mary came out to meet Pierre. She
intrigue going on in Petersburg. The old prince's voice and another now
to hear him in the study talking in a loud animated voice about some
as Natasha and was therefore surprised on entering the drawing room
morning. Pierre expected to find Prince Andrew in almost the same state
Prince Andrew had arrived in the evening and Pierre came to see him next

elopement, with additions.
it to the old prince), and he heard from him the story of Natasha's
(Mademoiselle Bourienne had purloined it from Princess Mary and given
father Natasha's note to Princess Mary breaking off her engagement
As soon as he reached Moscow, Prince Andrew had received from his

Andrew, informing him of his arrival and asking him to come to see him.
Some days after Anatole's departure Pierre received a note from Prince

usual and awaited his son with great impatience.
Natasha had broken off her engagement. He seemed in better spirits than
Mademoiselle Bourienne and had read the note to Princess Mary in which
Old Prince Bolkonski heard all the rumors current in the town from

the old prince's for news of him.
He was awaiting Prince Andrew's return with dread and went every day to

Natasha's reputation.
Pierre that it was his duty to conceal the whole affair and re-establish
brother-in-law had proposed to her and been refused. It seemed to
rumors, assuring everyone that nothing had happened except that his
the attempted abduction of Rostova. He resolutely denied these
Pierre dined at the club that day and heard on all sides gossip about

Sonya, who had a tear-stained face, but he could not see Natasha.
so the countess had been sent for. Pierre saw the distracted count, and
weak that it was out of the question to move her to the country, and
been administered in time and she was now out of danger, though still so
woke Sonya and told her what she had done. The necessary antidotes had
procured. After swallowing a little she had been so frightened that she
been told that Anatole was married, with some arsenic she had stealthily
Dmitrievna told him in secret, poisoned herself the night after she had
a state of alarm and commotion. Natasha was very ill, having, as Marya
wish that Kuragin should be banished from Moscow. The whole house was in
Pierre drove to Marya Dmitrievna's to tell her of the fulfillment of her


CHAPTER XXI





Next day Anatole left for Petersburg.

"Oh, vile and heartless brood!" he exclaimed, and left the room.

Pierre knew so well in his wife, revolted him.
Anatole smiled. The expression of that base and cringing smile, which

you require money for your journey..."
forgive me." Pierre involuntarily glanced at the loose button. "And if
"I take them back, I take them back!" said Pierre, "and I ask you to

you wish, eh?"
"You could at least take back your words. What? If you want me to do as

"Is it satisfaction you want?" said Pierre ironically.

"Though it was tete-a-tete," Anatole continued, "still I can't..."

wanted.
Pierre glanced at him with amazement, unable to understand what he

honor I can't allow anyone to use."
"but you have used such words to me--'mean' and so on--which as a man of
said, not looking at Pierre and with a slight tremor of his lower jaw,
Pierre mastered his wrath. "I don't know that and don't want to," he
"I don't know about that, eh?" said Anatole, growing more confident as

questioning look.
Pierre paused and looked at Anatole no longer with an angry but with a

or a child?..."
kidnap.... Don't you understand that it is as mean as beating an old man
of debauchery; but to promise a maid to marry her... to deceive, to
you want of them. They are armed against you by the same experience
like my wife--with them you are within your rights, for they know what
a whole life for the sake of amusing yourself! Amuse yourself with women
a thing as other people's happiness and peace, and that you are ruining
"After all, you must understand that besides your pleasure there is such

Anatole sat at a table frowning and biting his lips.

conscience..." Pierre paced the room several times in silence.
I know I can't prevent your doing so, but if you have a spark of
breathe a word of what has passed between you and Countess Rostova.
"Thirdly," Pierre continued without listening to him, "you must never

"But how can I?..."

out of Moscow."
pause, again rising and again pacing the room, "tomorrow you must get
repeating a lesson to himself. "Secondly," he continued after a short
frightened gesture of Anatole's. "First, the letters," said he, as if
"I shan't be violent, don't be afraid!" said Pierre in answer to a

that stood in his way, threw himself on the sofa.
Pierre took the letter Anatole handed him and, pushing aside a table

and drew out his pocketbook.
Anatole glanced at him and immediately thrust his hand into his pocket

Anatole.
"Have you any letters of hers? Any letters?" he said, moving toward

Pierre interrupted him.

"I... I didn't think of it. I never promised, because..."

"Did you promise to marry her?"

it back in its place.
He took a heavy paperweight and lifted it threateningly, but at once put

expressing himself so artificially because he was talking French.
me from the pleasure of smashing your head with this!" said Pierre,
"You're a scoundrel and a blackguard, and I don't know what deprives

his collar that had been wrenched loose with a bit of the cloth.
"Come now, this is stupid. What?" said Anatole, fingering a button of

"When I tell you that I must talk to you!..." repeated Pierre.

to side till Anatole's face showed a sufficient degree of terror.
by the collar of his uniform with his big hand and shook him from side
Pierre's face, already pale, became distorted by fury. He seized Anatole

tone."
"I don't consider myself bound to answer questions put to me in that
"Mon cher," answered Anatole (their whole conversation was in French),

her, is that so?"
"You promised Countess Rostova to marry her and were about to elope with

without looking at him.
Having entered his study Pierre closed the door and addressed Anatole

anxiety.
Anatole followed him with his usual jaunty step but his face betrayed

Pierre did not reply and went out of the room.
"If you allow yourself in my drawing room..." whispered Helene, but

and was leading him from the room.
follow Pierre. Pierre, taking him by the arm, pulled him toward himself
Anatole glanced round at his sister and rose submissively, ready to

"Anatole, come with me! I must speak to you," he added in French.
"Where you are, there is vice and evil!" said Pierre to his wife.

duel with Dolokhov.
rage and strength which she knew and had herself experienced after his
glowing eyes and his resolute gait, the terrible indications of that
She stopped, seeing in the forward thrust of her husband's head, in his

what a plight our Anatole..."
"Ah, Pierre," said the countess going up to her husband. "You don't know

the drawing room and seeing Anatole went up to him.
return--at that moment she was more repulsive to him than ever--entered
Pierre without greeting his wife whom he had not seen since his

guests.
Anatole was with the countess. The countess' drawing room was full of
after vainly hunting all over Moscow, his valet informed him that Prince
to discuss with her how to arrange a meeting. When Pierre returned home
him essential to see Natasha. In the evening he drove to his sister's
consulting him as to how to remedy this unfortunate affair. It seemed to
Anatole, for whom Pierre was looking, dined that day with Dolokhov,

as Anatole had not turned up did not stay for dinner but drove home.
soul. He paced through the ballroom, waited till everyone had come, and
calm, indifferent crowd of people unaware of what was going on in his
another that he was coming to dinner. Pierre felt it strange to see this
everyone about Anatole. One man told him he had not come yet, and
said it was nonsense for he had just come from the Rostovs'. He asked
which was talked of in the town, and was it true? Pierre laughed and
the weather, asked if he had heard of Kuragin's abduction of Rostova
arrived. One of Pierre's acquaintances, while they were talking about
Michael Zakharych was in the library, but Paul Timofeevich had not yet
there was a place left for him in the small dining room and that Prince
having greeted him, knowing his habits and his acquaintances, told him
in groups; they greeted Pierre and spoke of the town news. The footman
usual. The members who were assembling for dinner were sitting about
Komoneno's. Pierre drove to the Club. In the Club all was going on as
breathing. He was not at the ice hills, nor at the gypsies', nor at
whom now the blood rushed to his heart and he felt a difficulty in
He drove through the town seeking Anatole Kuragin, at the thought of
Pierre did not stay for dinner, but left the room and went away at once.


CHAPTER XX





they should leave her alone.
She was evidently unable to speak and made a sign with her hands that

"Yes, I have just seen him."

"Is he still here?" she asked, quickly.

Pierre gave his word of honor.

"Has he been married long?" she asked. "On your honor?..."

"Yes, it is true."

"Then it is not true that he's married!"

true or not should make no difference to you, because..."
pity for her and loathing for the thing he had to do, "whether it is
"Natalya Ilynichna," Pierre began, dropping his eyes with a feeling of

looks at the approaching dogs and sportsmen.
Natasha looked from one to the other as a hunted and wounded animal

addressing Natasha. "Let him tell you whether I have told the truth."
"He knows all about it," said Marya Dmitrievna pointing to Pierre and

not exist for her.
others an enemy in regard to Anatole? As for Pierre, he evidently did
him, and her look asked only one thing: was he a friend, or like the
moment he entered. She did not smile or nod, but only gazed fixedly at
eyes, glittering feverishly, met Pierre with a questioning look the
Natasha, pale and stern, was sitting beside Marya Dmitrievna, and her

Natasha's room.
himself. Sonya told Pierre this as she led him along the corridor to
did not wish to believe it and insisted on having it confirmed by Pierre
When Marya Dmitrievna told Natasha that Anatole was married, Natasha

room.
And clutching the spare gray locks on his temples the count left the

was!"
him a message," said the count. "Oh dear! Oh dear! How happy it all
"Yes, you are a great friend of Bolkonski's, no doubt she wants to send

Marya Dmitrievna is with her and she too asks you to come."
"Natasha is not quite well; she's in her room and would like to see you.

Sonya entered the room with an agitated face.

subject, but the count returned to his troubles.
Pierre saw that the count was much upset and tried to change the

their mother's absence...."
ill, and God knows what! It's hard, Count, hard to manage daughters in
to take such a step without father's or mother's consent! And now she's
Natasha won't lack suitors. Still, it has been going on so long, and
still, with his father's disapproval they wouldn't have been happy, and
never was much to my liking. Of course he is an excellent man, but
off her engagement without consulting anybody? It's true this engagement
come here.... I will be frank with you. Have you heard she has broken
one has with these girls without their mother! I do so regret having
"Troubles, troubles, my dear fellow!" he said to Pierre. "What troubles

Natasha had told him that she had rejected Bolkonski.
Pierre met the old count, who seemed nervous and upset. That morning

stay to dinner if you care to!" she called after Pierre.
she said. "And I will go and tell her it is no use expecting him! And
"Mind, the count knows nothing. Behave as if you know nothing either,"

explained her wishes to him, she let him go to the drawing room.
Andrew--promised to do as she wished. Having briefly and exactly
now realizing the danger to the old count, Nicholas, and Prince
leave Moscow and not dare to let her set eyes on him again. Pierre--only
and she therefore asked Pierre to tell his brother-in-law in her name to
(which she hoped to hide from them) might challenge Anatole to a duel,
Bolkonski, who might arrive at any moment, if they knew of this affair
told Pierre why she had sent for him. She was afraid that the count or
vent to her anger against Anatole in words of abuse, Marya Dmitrievna
After hearing the details of Anatole's marriage from Pierre, and giving

expecting him."
him since yesterday. She must be told! Then at least she won't go on
nice youth! What a scoundrel! And she's expecting him--expecting
"Things get worse from hour to hour!" ejaculated Marya Dmitrievna. "A

could not marry--he is married!"
"But how get married?" said Pierre, in answer to Marya Dmitrievna. "He

and severity.
her fault that her face happened to assume an expression of calm dignity
overflowing with despair, shame, and humiliation, and that it was not
such a look of cold dignity. He did not know that Natasha's soul was
disgust of that Natasha who had just passed him in the ballroom with
he pitied his friend the more did he think with contempt and even with
the point of tears and sympathized with his wounded pride, and the more
enough to be tied to a bad woman. But still he pitied Prince Andrew to
said to himself, reflecting that he was not the only man unfortunate
folly, and cruelty. He thought of his wife. "They are all alike!" he
he had known from a child, with this new conception of her baseness,
He could not reconcile the charming impression he had of Natasha, whom

and could not imagine.
to agree to run away with him, was something Pierre could not conceive
secretly married (as Pierre knew), and should be so in love with him as
charming--should give up Bolkonski for that fool Anatole who was already
deeply loved affianced wife--the same Natasha Rostova who used to be so
him, scarcely able to believe his own ears. That Prince Andrew's
Pierre raised his shoulders and listened open-mouthed to what was told

married secretly.
Natasha had tried to elope during her father's absence, in order to be
Kuragin into whose society Pierre's wife had thrown her and with whom
without her parents' knowledge and that the cause of this was Anatole
Marya Dmitrievna informed him that Natasha had refused Prince Andrew
And having put him on his honor not to repeat anything she told him,

in this world and never known anything so disgraceful!"
"Fine doings!" answered Dmitrievna. "For fifty-eight years have I lived

"What has happened?" asked Pierre, entering Marya Dmitrievna's room.

frowned, and left the room with an expression of cold dignity.
window, with a thin, pale, and spiteful face. She glanced round at him,
When he opened the ballroom door Pierre saw Natasha sitting at the

fur coat said that the mistress asked him to come to her bedroom.
In Marya Dmitrievna's anteroom the footman who helped him off with his

him!" he thought enviously.
always cheerful, satisfied, and serene. What wouldn't I give to be like
beyond the pleasure of the moment, nothing troubles him and so he is
"Yes, indeed, that's a true sage," thought Pierre. "He sees nothing

with powdery snow.
tilted to one side, disclosed his curled and pomaded hair besprinkled
head slightly bent. His face was fresh and rosy, his white-plumed hat,
dandies, the lower part of his face hidden by his beaver collar and his
past. Anatole was sitting upright in the classic pose of military
dashboard with snow, Anatole and his constant companion Makarin dashed
a sleigh drawn by two gray trotting-horses that were bespattering the
"Pierre! Been back long?" someone shouted. Pierre raised his head. In

On the Tverskoy Boulevard a familiar voice called to him.

hurry up and come and marry her!" thought he on his way to the house.
as he dressed to go to Marya Dmitrievna's. "If only Prince Andrew would
"What can have happened? And what can they want with me?" thought he

Yet some fate constantly threw them together.
was stronger than a married man's should be for his friend's fiancee.
been avoiding Natasha because it seemed to him that his feeling for her
importance relating to Andrew Bolkonski and his betrothed. Pierre had
Dmitrievna asking him to come and see her on a matter of great
When he returned to Moscow Pierre was handed a letter from Marya

husband's.
had long since promised to hand over to him some papers of her deceased
his intention. He went to Tver to see Joseph Alexeevich's widow, who
to Moscow the effect Natasha had on him made him hasten to carry out
away somewhere, so as not to be near her. Soon after the Rostovs came
From the day his wife arrived in Moscow Pierre had been intending to go


CHAPTER XIX





delayed their return to the country.
had happened; and he was only dissatisfied that her indisposition
avoided inquiries and tried to assure himself that nothing particularly
daughter, and he so prized his own cheerful tranquillity, that he
for him to think that anything disgraceful had happened to his beloved
that something had gone wrong during his absence, but it was so terrible
embarrassed faces of Sonya and Marya Dmitrievna, the count saw clearly
the pretense of illness, from his daughter's distress, and by the
confirmed Natasha's assurances that nothing had happened. From
that nothing had happened and asked him not to worry. Marya Dmitrievna
and whether anything had happened to her betrothed, she assured him
In reply to the count's anxious inquiries as to why she was so dejected

After a moment's silence Natasha answered: "Yes, ill."

with you, my angel? Are you ill?" asked the count.
expression. She did not even get up to greet him. "What is the matter
of a man's footstep, and then her face resumed its cold and malevolent
When the count came to see her she turned anxiously round at the sound

that he would come or would write to her.
anyone who entered the room. She was evidently expecting news of him and
watching the people who drove past and hurriedly glancing round at
and parched lips and dry fixed eyes, she sat at the window, uneasily
better now. Natasha had not left her room that morning. With compressed
day before and that they had sent for the doctor, but that she was
Dmitrievna met him and told him that Natasha had been very unwell the
him any longer in Moscow, away from the countess whom he missed. Marya
the purchaser was going on satisfactorily, and there was nothing to keep
lunch as he had promised. He was in very good spirits; the affair with
Next day Count Rostov returned from his estate near Moscow in time for

did not speak to Sonya who got up and went to her several times.
looked straight before her. All that night she did not sleep or weep and
But Natasha was not asleep; with pale face and fixed wide-open eyes she

supposing Natasha to be asleep.
"Well, let her sleep," said Marya Dmitrievna as she went out of the room

water, but Natasha did not respond to her.
covered her with two quilts, and herself brought her some lime-flower
and had a shivering fit. Marya Dmitrievna put a pillow under her head,
Natasha did not reply, nor did she sob any longer, but she grew cold
to forget it all and not let anyone see that something had happened.
would know anything about it if only Natasha herself would undertake
that it must all be kept from her father and assuring her that nobody
Marya Dmitrievna went on admonishing her for some time, enjoining on her

back on the sofa.
"Go away! Go away! You all hate and despise me!" and she threw herself

Dmitrievna was to speak again but Natasha cried out:
bewail disasters they feel they have themselves occasioned. Marya
And she burst into sobs with the despairing vehemence with which people

why?... Go away!"
hadn't interfered... Oh, my God! What is it all? What is it? Sonya,
"He is better than any of you!" exclaimed Natasha getting up. "If you

wretch--that's a fact!"
Your father, or brother, or your betrothed? And he's a scoundrel, a
had carried you off... do you think they wouldn't have found him?
Why carry you off as if you were some gypsy singing girl?... Well, if he
"Were you kept under lock and key? Who hindered his coming to the house?
"But what did you want?" cried Marya Dmitrievna, growing angry again.

malignantly at Marya Dmitrievna.
you to?" shouted Natasha, raising herself on the sofa and looking
"Oh, let me be! Why have you interfered at all? Why? Why? Who asked

challenges him to a duel will that be all right? Eh?"
this, will they let it pass? He, your father, I know him... if he
"That's all the same," continued Marya Dmitrievna. "If they hear of

"I have no betrothed: I have refused him!" cried Natasha.

"Suppose he finds out, and your brother, and your betrothed?"

Again Natasha's body shook with sobs.

tomorrow what am I to tell him? Eh?"
guilty you are. You know that yourself. But when your father comes back
stay like that then, I won't touch you. But listen. I won't tell you how
"Natalie!" said Marya Dmitrievna. "I wish for your good. Lie still,

and sinking down again into her former position.
wrenching herself from Marya Dmitrievna's hands with a vicious effort
"Let me be!... What is it to me?... I shall die!" she muttered,

cheeks sunken.
looked. Her eyes were dry and glistening, her lips compressed, her
Both Marya Dmitrievna and Sonya were amazed when they saw how Natasha
She put her large hand under Natasha's face and turned it toward her.

her rough voice. "Do you hear what I am saying or not?" she added.
"It's lucky for him that he escaped me; but I'll find him!" she said in

round at Sonya and seated herself on the sofa beside Natasha.
noiseless, convulsive sobs which choked her. Marya Dmitrievna glanced
Natasha did not change her position, but her whole body heaved with

differently, but I'm sorry for your father, so I will conceal it."
You've disgraced yourself like the lowest of hussies. I'd treat you
to you!" And Marya Dmitrievna touched her arm. "Listen when I speak!
with lovers in my house! It's no use pretending: you listen when I speak
"A nice girl! Very nice!" said Marya Dmitrievna. "Arranging meetings

just the same position in which Marya Dmitrievna had left her.
sofa, her head hidden in her hands, and she did not stir. She was in
count." She entered the room with resolute steps. Natasha lying on the
be, I'll tell them all to hold their tongues and will hide it from the
father!" thought she, trying to restrain her wrath. "Hard as it may
abominable... In my house... horrid girl, hussy! I'm only sorry for her
the door and went in without giving her an answer.... "Disgusting,
sake let me in to her!" she pleaded, but Marya Dmitrievna unlocked
Sonya was sitting sobbing in the corridor. "Marya Dmitrievna, for God's
midnight she went to Natasha's room fingering the key in her pocket.
through the rooms a long time considering what she should do. Toward
away again, she rose frowning, and clasping her hands behind her paced
When Gabriel came to inform her that the men who had come had run

seated herself in the drawing room to await the abductors.
out again, and having told the footman to bring them up to her, she
admit the persons who would be coming that evening, but not to let them
eyes, she locked her in; and having given orders to the yard porter to
Pushing back Natasha who looked at her with astonished but tearless

"You shameless good-for-nothing!" said she. "I won't hear a word."

went into Natasha's room with it in her hand.
confess everything, and intercepting the note to Natasha she read it and
Marya Dmitrievna, having found Sonya weeping in the corridor, made her


CHAPTER XVIII





with him to the troyka.
back seized him by the arm, pulled him through the wicket, and ran back
desperate effort Dolokhov pushed the porter aside, and when Anatole ran
struggling with the yard porter who was trying to lock it. With a last
Dolokhov, after Anatole entered, had remained at the wicket gate and was

"Kuragin! Come back!" shouted Dolokhov. "Betrayed! Back!"

"Kindly step in, my orders are to bring you in."

"To what Mistress? Who are you?" asked Anatole in a breathless whisper.

intercepting any retreat.
"Come to the mistress, please," said the footman in his deep bass,

He was met by Gabriel, Marya Dmitrievna's gigantic footman.

courtyard, turned the corner, and ran up into the porch.
Dolokhov stayed by the gate. Anatole followed the maid into the

said she.
"Come into the courtyard or you'll be seen; she'll come out directly,"

Dolokhov whistled. The whistle was answered, and a maidservant ran out.
and Dolokhov went along the pavement. When they reached the gate
The young fellow on the box jumped down to hold the horses and Anatole

Street.
rein in, and turning back drew up at the crossing of the old Konyusheny
After taking a turn along the Podnovinski Boulevard, Balaga began to

Arbat Street.
something cracked, shouts were heard, and the troyka flew along the
be heard. On the Arbat Square the troyka caught against a carriage;
and of the sturdy young fellow seated on the box was all that could
"Tproo! Get out of the way! Hi!... Tproo!..." The shouting of Balaga

down the Nikitski Boulevard.
"Go!" he cried, twisting the reins round his hands, and the troyka tore

"Well, are you ready?" asked Balaga.

the other sleigh.
got in with him. Makarin, Khvostikov, and a valet seated themselves in
his elbows high arranged the reins deliberately. Anatole and Dolokhov
holding the horses. Balaga took his seat in the front one and holding
Two troykas were standing before the porch and two young drivers were

accent.
"Well, Prince, may God give you great luck!" said Matrena in her gypsy

me luck!"
are over. Remember me to Steshka. There, good-by! Good-by, Matrena, wish
"Well, good-by, Matrena," said Anatole, kissing her. "Ah, my revels here

seen.
gap left by the collar, through which Matrena's brilliant smile was
then so, do you see?" and he pushed Anatole's head forward to meet the
up round her head, leaving only a little of the face uncovered. "And
"That's the way," said Dolokhov, "and then so!" and he turned the collar

wrapped her up in it.
Dolokhov, without answering, took the cloak, threw it over Matrena, and

master and yet regretful of her cloak.
"Here, I don't grudge it--take it!" she said, evidently afraid of her

mantle on her arm.
and curly blue-black hair, wearing a red shawl, ran out with a sable
A handsome, slim, and pale-faced gypsy girl with glittering black eyes

that his voice rang far through the rooms.
"Fool, I told you the sable one! Hey, Matrena, the sable!" he shouted so

The valet brought a woman's fox-lined cloak.

thing and carry her to the sleigh."
a minute and must go back--but you wrap the fur cloak round her first
at all there'll be tears and 'Papa' and 'Mamma,' and she's frozen in
out more dead than alive just in the things she is wearing; if you delay
elopements are like," continued Dolokhov with a wink. "Why, she'll rush
Matrena Matrevna and ask her for the sable cloak. I have heard what
"And where's the fur cloak?" asked Dolokhov. "Hey, Ignatka! Go to

went out into the vestibule.
Joseph, his valet, handed him his sabretache and saber, and they all

"Now, quick march, lads!" said Anatole, rising.

They shut the door and all sat down.

That's the way."
"No, stop!" said Anatole. "Shut the door; we have first to sit down.

Balaga was about to leave the room.

"Let's go. Let's go!" cried Anatole.

"Ah, Prince, how sorry I am to part from you!

Makarin embraced Anatole with tears in his eyes.

mouth with his handkerchief.
"To your health!" said Balaga who also emptied his glass, and wiped his

glass flung it on the floor.
farewell, lads! To our health! Hurrah!..." he cried, and emptying his
shall we meet again? I am going abroad. We have had a good time--now
youth, we've had our fling and lived and reveled. Eh? And now, when
"All take glasses; you too, Balaga. Well, comrades and friends of my

one leg.
spoke slowly in a loud voice and throwing out his chest slightly swayed
something touching and solemn out of this address to his comrades. He
Though they were all going with him, Anatole evidently wished to make

"...of my youth, farewell!" he said, turning to Makarin and the others.
Anatole. "Well, comrades and friends..." he considered for a moment
"Well, good-by, Theodore. Thank you for everything and farewell!" said

he lifted a glass of wine.
and standing before Dolokhov in the same pose he had assumed before it,
side and very becoming to his handsome face. Having looked in a mirror,
a fur coat girt with a silver belt, and a sable cap jauntily set on one
Anatole went out of the room and returned a few minutes later wearing


CHAPTER XVII





hours! Only the near one died of it."
them in till we reached the place. The devils took us there in three
sprawled there. It wasn't a case of urging them on, there was no holding
excellency!' says I, and I just tumbled on the bottom of the sleigh and
frost so that I threw down the reins--'Catch hold yourself, your
forty miles? I couldn't hold them in, my hands grew numb in the sharp
to Dolokhov. "Will you believe it, Theodore Ivanych, those animals flew
two young side horses with the bay in the shafts," he went on, turning
"Those were horses!" Balaga continued the tale. "That time I'd harnessed

drove right over two of them. Eh?"
away, the rate we flew. We came across a train of loaded sleighs and
with wide-open eyes. "Will you believe it, Makarka, it took one's breath
at the recollection and turning to Makarin who gazed rapturously at him
"Do you know, one Christmas I drove from Tver," said Anatole, smilingly

think you remember that, your excellency?"
in time?" replied Balaga. "Didn't we get you to Tver in seven hours? I
"That depends on our luck in starting, else why shouldn't we be there

Balaga! You'll get there in time? Eh?"
"Well..." Anatole looked at his watch. "We'll start at once. Mind,

"And when are we to start, your excellency?"

handkerchief he took out of his cap.
it for manners' sake, he drank it and wiped his mouth with a red silk
The driver's eyes sparkled at the sight of the wine. After refusing

glass of Madeira for him.
"Sit down; nonsense! Have a drink!" said Anatole, and filled a large

"I'll stand, Theodore Ivanych."

"Yes, sit down!" said Dolokhov.

"Ah!" said Anatole. "Well, sit down."

anything! As fast as ever the horses can gallop, so fast we'll go!"
"Why joke?" said the driver, laughing. "As if I'd grudge my gentlemen

suddenly rolling his eyes.
"Mind, I'll smash your face in! Don't make jokes!" cried Anatole,

"When they are dead, what shall I drive?" said Balaga with a wink.

three hours. Eh?"
"Well, listen, Balaga! Drive all three to death but get me there in

"As your messenger ordered, your special beasts," replied Balaga.

have you come with? Eh?"
"do you care for me or not? Eh? Now, do me a service.... What horses
"I say, Balaga," said Anatole, putting his hands on the man's shoulders,

Anatole who had just come in.
"Good day, your excellency!" he said, again holding out his hand to

"How d'you do, friend? Well, here he is!"

"Theodore Ivanych!" he said, bowing.

hand.
corner of the room, and went up to Dolokhov, holding out a small, black
On entering the room now he crossed himself, turning toward the front

cloth coat over a sheepskin.
little eyes, and a small beard. He wore a fine, dark-blue, silk-lined
twenty-seven; red-faced, with a particularly red thick neck, glittering
Balaga was a fair-haired, short, and snub-nosed peasant of about

or a couple of thousand rubles.
And Anatole and Dolokhov, when they had money, would give him a thousand

fair."
say. "I am quite out of horses. Let me have what you can to go to the
"Do help me out, Theodore Ivanych, sir," or "your excellency," he would

bow would ask them to help him. The gentlemen always made him sit down.
money in hand--he would turn up of a morning quite sober and with a deep
a couple of times a year--when he knew from their valets that they had
he always drove himself and never demanded anything for his work. Only
himself, generally letting his young men do so. But with "his gentlemen"
charging twenty-five rubles for a two hours' drive, and rarely drove
because he liked the things they liked. With others Balaga bargained,
Anatole and Dolokhov liked Balaga too for his masterly driving and

gentlemen!" he considered them.
who, more dead than alive, was already hurrying out of his way. "Real
faster. He liked giving a painful lash on the neck to some peasant
shouts behind him: "Get on! Get on!" when it was impossible to go any
gallop through the Moscow streets. He liked to hear those wild, tipsy
upsetting a driver or running down a pedestrian, and flying at full
he liked them; liked that mad driving at twelve miles an hour, liked
had lost more horses than the money he had from them would buy. But
risked his skin and his life twenty times a year, and in their service
rubles of their money had passed through his hands. In their service he
made him drink and dance at the gypsies', and more than one thousand
ordinary man to Siberia. They often called Balaga into their orgies and
more than one thing about each of them which would long ago have sent an
had made him drunk on champagne and Madeira, which he loved; and he knew
service. More than once they had beaten him, and more than once they
gentlemen" as he called them. He had ruined more than one horse in their
of Moscow and had always been protected from the consequences by "my
service he had run over pedestrians and upset vehicles in the streets
and "ladykins" as he called the cocottes. More than once in their
pursued. More than once he had driven them through the town with gypsies
the next night. More than once he had enabled Dolokhov to escape when
evening, brought him to Moscow by daybreak, and driven him back again
regiment was stationed at Tver he had taken him from Tver in the
them good service with his troykas. More than once when Anatole's
driver who had known Dolokhov and Anatole some six years and had given
Anatole rose and went into the dining room. Balaga was a famous troyka

"Come! Balaga is here."

"I don't want to," answered Anatole continuing to smile.

other room.
"Come and eat something. Have a drink!" Dolokhov shouted to him from the

pensively, while his handsome lips muttered tenderly to himself.
Anatole lay on the sofa in the study leaning on his elbow and smiling

the room where Khvostikov and Makarin were sitting.
something for them to eat and drink before the journey, and went into
Dolokhov put away the money, called a footman whom he ordered to bring

"Now then! Nearly ready? You're dawdling!" he shouted to the servants.

Anatole went into the back room.

nonsense!" He glanced at his watch. "It's time!"
of the future. "What then?... Then, I don't know.... But why talk
"What then? Eh?" repeated Anatole, sincerely perplexed by a thought

"Well and when the money's gone, what then?"

looked at him--evidently wishing to get some more amusement out of him.
Dolokhov with a cold smile and a gleam in his handsome insolent eyes

my dear fellow! What a glance! A goddess!" he added in French. "What?"
beats!" He took Dolokhov's hand and put it on his heart. "What a foot,
with his feet turned under him. "It's the very devil! What? Feel how it
but returned at once and dropped into an armchair in front of Dolokhov
"Go to the devil!" cried Anatole and, clutching his hair, left the room,

"Seriously, you'd better drop it! You'll only get yourself into a mess!"

don't talk to me, don't, don't."
matter! Abroad no one will know anything about it. Isn't that so? And
finger, "then I have nothing to answer for; but if it is valid, no
conclusion: if this marriage is invalid," he went on, crooking one
a hundred times. "Didn't I explain to you that I have come to this
own reasoning, repeated the argument he had already put to Dolokhov
dull-witted people have for any conclusion they have reached by their
"Didn't I explain to you? What?" And Anatole, with the partiality
"Oh, nonsense, nonsense!" Anatole ejaculated and again made a grimace.

criminal court...."
will come out that you're already married. Why, they'll have you in the
you'll carry her off--all right! Will they let it stop at that? It
dangerous business, and if you think about it--a stupid business. Well,
"I helped you, but all the same I must tell you the truth; it is a

sighed and embraced Dolokhov.
"Well, thank you for it. Do you think I am not grateful?" And Anatole

all."
found the priest and got the passport? Who raised the money? I did it
I joke about it? Did I hinder you? Who arranged everything for you? Who
"Now listen to me. I'm telling you this for the last time. Why should

attention and evidently submitting to him involuntarily.
Anatole returned and looked at Dolokhov, trying to give him his

sense. Come here, come here!"
"You wait a bit," he called after him. "I'm not joking, I'm talking

out.
Dolokhov smiled contemptuously and condescendingly when Anatole had gone

room.
grimace. "Really it's no time for your stupid jokes," and he left the
"What, teasing again? Go to the devil! Eh?" said Anatole, making a

no joke, this plot you've hatched."
"No, really, give it up!" said Dolokhov. "I am speaking seriously. It's

the devil knows what!"
"Fool," retorted Anatole. "Don't talk nonsense! If you only knew... it's

"Do you know? You'd really better drop it all. There's still time!"

ironic smile:
Dolokhov banged down the lid of his desk and turned to Anatole with an

face.
and looking straight before him with a smile that did not leave his
"Yes, of course," returned Anatole, evidently not listening to Dolokhov

showing him the memorandum. "Is that right?"
you for nothing. So here are our accounts all settled," said Dolokhov,
"Makarka" (their name for Makarin) "will go through fire and water for

"Give it to him, then," said Anatole.

"Well," he said, "Khvostikov must have two thousand."

things. Dolokhov was counting the money and noting something down.
behind, where his French valet and others were packing the last of his
the room where the witnesses were sitting, through the study to the room
paper money. Anatole, with uniform unbuttoned, walked to and fro from
and high boots, at an open desk on which lay abacus and some bundles of
Persian rugs, bearskins, and weapons, sat Dolokhov in a traveling cloak
In his large study, the walls of which were hung to the ceiling with

affection for Kuragin--were sitting at tea in Dolokhov's front room.
Makarin, a retired hussar, a kindly, weak fellow who had an unbounded
official whom Dolokhov made use of in his gambling transactions, and
Two witnesses for the mock marriage--Khvostikov, a retired petty

Dolokhov's help.
he had taken from his sister and another ten thousand borrowed with
Anatole had a passport, an order for post horses, ten thousand rubles

horses.
the Warsaw highroad, and from there they would hasten abroad with post
them. At Kamenka a relay of horses was to wait which would take them to
unfrocked priest was in readiness to perform a marriage ceremony over
ready and to drive her forty miles to the village of Kamenka, where an
that evening. Kuragin was to put her into a troyka he would have
Natasha had promised to come out to Kuragin at the back porch at ten
door, resolved to safeguard her, it was to have been put into execution.
days before, and on the day that Sonya, after listening at Natasha's
abduction had been arranged and the preparations made by Dolokhov a few
Anatole had lately moved to Dolokhov's. The plan for Natalie Rostova's


CHAPTER XVI





family be disgraced," thought she.
this passage and will hold her back by force and will and not let the
I love Nicholas. Yes! If I don't sleep for three nights I'll not leave
never I must prove that I remember the family's goodness to me and that
"Well, anyway," thought Sonya as she stood in the dark passage, "now or
Marya Dmitrievna who had such faith in Natasha seemed to Sonya terrible.
sent a letter to Princess Mary yesterday. And Uncle is away...." To tell
misfortune?... But perhaps she really has already refused Bolkonski--she
to reply? Write to Pierre, as Prince Andrew asked me to in case of some
to Kuragin demanding an explanation? But what is there to oblige him
had some terrible intention. "The count is away. What am I to do? Write
thought she, recalling all the signs that clearly indicated that Natasha
"Yes, that's it, she means to elope with him, but what am I to do?"
face today. She cried as she said good-by to Uncle," Sonya remembered.
anything. There was something particularly pathetic and resolute in her
"She will run away with him!" thought Sonya. "She is capable of

her in.
plan for that evening. Sonya knocked at her door. Natasha did not let
Then suddenly it became clear to Sonya that Natasha had some dreadful

learned that another letter had been delivered.
to let her pass. She let the girl go in, and then listening at the door
After tea Sonya noticed a housemaid at Natasha's door timidly waiting

finish, and laughed at everything.
state. She answered questions at random, began sentences she did not
at dinner and all that evening Natasha was in a strange and unnatural
Sonya began watching her friend still more attentively and noticed that

Anatole.
that she made a sign to an officer who drove past, whom Sonya took to be
by the drawingroom window all the morning as if expecting something and
The day before the count was to return, Sonya noticed that Natasha sat

of her sight.
Hard as it was for Sonya, she watched her friend and did not let her out

taking up now one occupation, now another, and at once abandoning them.
expression of agitated surprise and guilt she went about the house,
Natasha did not speak to Sonya again and avoided her. With the same

of the room.
"I hate you, I hate you! You're my enemy forever!" And Natasha ran out

"Natasha!" moaned Sonya, aghast.

me alone! I hate you!"
business! It won't be you, but I, who'll suffer. Leave me alone, leave
"And I'll go to my ruin, I will, as soon as possible! It's not your

Anger again showed in Natasha's face.

herself horrified at what she had said.
"I am afraid you're going to your ruin," said Sonya resolutely, and was

"Afraid of what?"

"Natasha, I am afraid for you!"

"Again, again!" interrupted Natasha.

this secrecy?"
spoken, but now you yourself have begun. I don't trust him, Natasha. Why
"Natasha," said she, "you asked me not to speak to you, and I haven't

the more serious and stern grew Sonya's.
more emotional and ingratiating the expression of Natasha's face became,
Sonya did not succumb to the tender tone Natasha used toward her. The

anyone: I love and pity everybody. But what am I to do?"
he is! Now don't think badly of me or of him. I don't think badly of
"Wait a bit, Sonya, you'll understand everything. You'll see what a man

"I don't think anything, only I don't understand this..."

you think so badly of me?"
"Perhaps I have. Perhaps all is over between me and Bolkonski. Why do

"But you haven't refused Bolkonski?" said she.

Sonya sighed sorrowfully.

promised Bolkonski. He was glad I was free to refuse him."
"Oh, Sonya, if you knew him as I do! He said... He asked me what I had

Natasha became thoughtful.

angry with me! Tell me everything--the whole truth. What did he say?"
"Well, what happened? What did he say? Natasha, how glad I am you're not

praised. "We have had an explanation today."
Natasha began in a mild voice such as children use when they wish to be
"There, Sonya, you were talking all sorts of nonsense about him,"

begin the explanation Sonya expected.
more agitated than ever. When they got home Natasha was the first to
to him, trying not to be overheard, and that all through dinner she was
that party Natasha again met Anatole, and Sonya noticed that she spoke
dinner party at the Karagins', and Marya Dmitrievna took them there. At
On the day the count left, Sonya and Natasha were invited to a big

the count went with the prospective purchaser to his estate near Moscow.
On Friday the Rostovs were to return to the country, but on Wednesday


At that moment this all seemed quite easy, simple, and clear to Natasha.
if she had been to blame toward her, but that she could not be his wife.
freedom, she begged Princess Mary to forget everything and forgive her
magnanimity of Prince Andrew who when he went abroad had given her her
misunderstandings were at an end; that availing herself of the
the morning. In this letter she said briefly that all their
answer to Princess Mary which she had been unable to write all
Natasha went to the table and without a moment's reflection wrote that

room.
despair and repressed irritation. Sonya burst into sobs and ran from the
go! You see how I am suffering!" Natasha cried angrily, in a voice of
away, Sonya! I don't want to quarrel with you, but go, for God's sake
is dishonorable? Don't you know that I love him?" screamed Natasha. "Go
"I don't want anyone, I don't love anyone but him. How dare you say he

father and of Nicholas."
"Natasha, I don't understand you. And what are you saying! Think of your

"But I can't live without him!" cried Natasha.

and I will tell Papa!" said Sonya resolutely.
cease seeing you; and if you won't do this, I will. I will write to him,
"If he is an honorable man he should either declare his intentions or

"He! dishonorable? If you only knew!" exclaimed Natasha.

"But if he is dishonorable?"

him."
lack of comprehension. "Why, you have read his letter and you have seen
"Does he love me?" Natasha repeated with a smile of pity at her friend's

"Does he love you?"

understand?" she cried.
"Sonya, one can't doubt him! One can't, one can't! Don't you

But Natasha, guessing her doubts, interrupted her in alarm.

"If there were reasons..." she began.

Sonya sighed and shook her head incredulously.

"I don't know what the reasons are. But there must be reasons!"

to answer it.
presented itself to her mind for the first time and she did not know how
Natasha looked at Sonya with astonishment. Evidently this question

Natasha, have you considered what these secret reasons can be?"
you complete freedom--if it is really so; but I don't believe it!
"Why doesn't he openly ask for your hand? You know Prince Andrew gave
"But why this secrecy? Why doesn't he come to the house?" asked Sonya.

confided in you...."
entreated. "Remember no one ought to interfere in such matters! I have
"For God's sake, Sonya, don't tell anyone, don't torture me," Natasha

Natasha did not answer her questions.

you? Why doesn't he come to the house?"
"But what has happened between you?" she asked. "What has he said to

her friend.
When she saw Natasha's fright, Sonya shed tears of shame and pity for

separated...."
declared Natasha. "You want me to be miserable, you want us to be
"What do you mean? For God's sake... If you tell, you are my enemy!"

bursting into tears.
"Then I won't let it come to that... I shall tell!" cried Sonya,

understand? I love him!"
"I told you that I have no will," Natasha replied. "Why can't you

she went on, with a horror and disgust she could hardly conceal.
this. This secret correspondence... How could you let him go so far?"
"But think what you are doing," cried Sonya. "I can't leave it like

cried Natasha with a happy yet frightened expression.
do. You don't understand that. What can I do? What can I do, Sonya?"
I could not help loving him. Yes, his slave! Whatever he orders I shall
As soon as I saw him I felt he was my master and I his slave, and that
but it's only now that I feel such love. It's not the same as before.
"I had heard that it happens like this, and you must have heard it too,

kissed her.
understand it.... Sonya, wait a bit, sit here," and Natasha embraced and
years. It seems to me that I have never loved anyone before. You can't
"Three days?" said Natasha. "It seems to me I've loved him a hundred

three days to forget everything and so..."
seen him three times! Natasha, I don't believe you, you're joking! In
you have loved a man for a whole year and suddenly... Why, you have only
"But I can't believe it," insisted Sonya. "I don't understand. How is it

said Natasha, with momentary vexation.
"Oh, you don't understand anything! Don't talk nonsense, just listen!"

"Well, then, are you refusing Prince Andrew?" said Sonya.

the question.
Natasha looked at Sonya with wide-open eyes as if she could not grasp

"But, Natasha, can that be all over?"

know what love is...."
"Ah, Sonya, if you only knew how happy I am!" cried Natasha. "You don't

"And Bolkonski?" she asked.

Sonya stared open-eyed at Natasha, unable to believe her ears.

Sonya..."
any longer. You know, we love one another! Sonya, darling, he writes...
"No, Sonya, I can't any longer!" she said. "I can't hide it from you

Natasha smiled rapturously.

"Yes," answered Sonya softly.

"Sonya, you've read that letter?" she demanded.

embarrassment, her own face expressed confusion and suspicion.
of awakening, she embraced her friend, but noticing Sonya's look of
And with the decision and tenderness that often come at the moment

"Ah, you're back?"

Natasha awoke and saw Sonya.

"Natasha!" she said, just audibly.

face.
Sonya wiped away her tears and went up to Natasha, again scanning her

from. Probably she is offended by it. She could not do such a thing!"
she loves him! She probably opened the letter without knowing who it was
yesterday, yesterday, and today," thought Sonya. "But it can't be that
the meaning of her excited, resolute, unnatural look the day before
Nicholas, dear noble Nicholas, do when he hears of it? So this is
such lengths? He is a deceiver and a villain, that's plain! What will
left off loving Prince Andrew? And how could she let Kuragin go to
"How was it I noticed nothing? How could it go so far? Can she have

down in an armchair and burst into tears.
from choking, Sonya, pale and trembling with fear and agitation, sat
face was calm, gentle, and happy. Clutching her breast to keep herself
face an explanation of what she was reading, but did not find it. Her
As she read she glanced at the sleeping Natasha, trying to find in her

table, beside her lay Anatole's letter. Sonya picked it up and read it.
her surprise found her still dressed and asleep on the sofa. Open on the
On returning late in the evening Sonya went to Natasha's room, and to


CHAPTER XV





take the girls with her. Natasha, pleading a headache, remained at home.
That evening Marya Dmitrievna was going to the Akharovs' and proposed to

it.
twentieth time and finding some peculiarly deep meaning in each word of
"Yes, yes! I love him!" thought Natasha, reading the letter for the

carry her off to the ends of the earth.
hinder their bliss. Love would conquer all. He would steal her away and
she loved him she need only say the word yes, and no human power could
there were secret reasons he could reveal only to her--but that if
on to say that he knew her parents would not give her to him--for this
to die. There is no other way for me," the letter began. Then he went
"Since yesterday evening my fate has been sealed; to be loved by you or

echo of all that she herself imagined she was feeling.
Dolokhov had composed for Anatole, and as she read it she found in it an
With trembling hands Natasha held that passionate love letter which

have a love letter from him in her hand?
else how could that have happened which had happened? And how could she
it was a letter from him--from the man she loved. Yes, she loved him, or
Anatole, of which, without taking in a word, she understood only that
thinking, mechanically broke the seal and read a love letter from
"Only, for Christ's sake..." the girl went on, as Natasha, without

air. "A man told me to give you this-" and she handed Natasha a letter.
"Please, Miss!" whispered a maid entering the room with a mysterious

have lived so long?"
I really to abandon forever the joy of Prince Andrew's love, in which I
both equally impossible. But with that one nothing is spoiled. But am
"to tell Prince Andrew what has happened or to hide it from him are
choose, and I can't be happy without either of them. Only," she thought,
bewilderment. "Only so could I be completely happy; but now I have to
"Why could that not be as well?" she sometimes asked herself in complete

interview with Anatole.
same time, aglow with excitement, recalled every detail of yesterday's
with him she had so often repeated in her imagination, and at the
pictured herself as Prince Andrew's wife, and the scenes of happiness
strength, and at the same time felt that she loved Kuragin. She vividly
before?" She recalled her love for Prince Andrew in all its former
that all this has happened so quickly and has destroyed all that went
letter. "Can it be that it is all over?" she thought. "Can it be
After dinner Natasha went to her room and again took up Princess Mary's

patterns with her.
escape from these dreadful thoughts she went to Sonya and began sorting
her. "Must I break off with him? Must I really? That's awful..." and to
changed," she thought as she sat with the letter she had begun before
the evening before? "Yes, yes! All that has happened, and now all is
then paused. What more could she write after all that had happened
it. "Dear Princess," she wrote in French quickly and mechanically, and
After reading the letter Natasha sat down at the writing table to answer

her again.
Princess Mary went on to ask Natasha to fix a time when she could see
he is good and magnanimous and will love her who makes his son happy."
toward you. He is an invalid and an old man who must be forgiven; but
"Do not think, however," she wrote, "that my father is ill-disposed

everything.
chosen by her brother, for whose happiness she was ready to sacrifice
begged Natasha to believe that she could not help loving her as the one
had occurred between them. Whatever her father's feelings might be, she
Princess Mary wrote that she was in despair at the misunderstanding that

Princess Mary's letter.
Write an answer!" Natasha did not reply and went to her own room to read
"Don't answer like that, my good girl!" she said. "What I say is true!

to frown.
resolution that caused Marya Dmitrievna to look at her more intently and
boldly as she took the letter, and her face expressed a cold and angry
"I shan't believe anyone, I know she doesn't like me," replied Natasha

"Don't talk nonsense!" cried Marya Dmitrievna.

"But she doesn't like me," said Natasha.

afraid you might think that she does not like you."
"She has written to you. How she torments herself, poor thing! She's

Natasha. It was a letter from Princess Mary.
Having found what she was looking for in the reticule she handed it to

like letting you go, it is the best way. So go, with God's blessing!"
to wait for; and what is not ready I'll send after you. Though I don't
in her reticule. "Besides, the trousseau is ready, so there is nothing
won't--that's his affair," said Marya Dmitrievna, looking for something
"No, why be sorry? Being here, you had to pay your respects. But if he

said the old count.
"That is perfectly true. And I am sorry I went to see him and took her,"

against his wishes, could only be arranged at Otradnoe.
visit him in Moscow or at Bald Hills later on; and if not, the wedding,
reasonableness. If the old man came round it would be all the better to
Count Rostov approved of this suggestion, appreciating its

with the old man he will talk things over and then come on to you."
betrothed comes here now--there will be no avoiding a quarrel; but alone
"Yes, go back," said Marya Dmitrievna, "and wait there. If your

"Oh, no!" exclaimed Natasha.

to Otradnoe... and wait there."
Dmitrievna. "My advice to you is finish your business and go back home
of talking? As it is we have worn the poor girl out," said Marya
"He? He's crazy... he did not want to listen. But what's the use

"Well, and he?" asked the count.

to say!"
begin shouting, but I am not one to be shouted down. I said what I had
Bolkonski. Well, I had a talk with him.... He took it into his head to
my advice," she began. "Yesterday, as you know, I went to see Prince
"Well, friends, I have now thought the whole matter over and this is

her armchair and called Natasha and the count to her.
After breakfast, which was her best time, Marya Dmitrievna sat down in

directed toward her, and tried to appear the same as usual.
everybody with wide-open eyes, as if wishing to intercept every glance
and they were called to breakfast. Natasha kept looking uneasily at
move about and talk, dressmakers came again. Marya Dmitrievna appeared,
Morning came with its cares and bustle. Everyone got up and began to


CHAPTER XIV





find an answer to these terrible questions.
to do if I love him and the other one too?" she asked herself, unable to
kind, noble, and splendid, and I could not help loving him. What am I
that, it means that I loved him from the first. It means that he is
return his smile when saying good-by, if I was able to let it come to
could all this have happened?" thought she. "If, after that, I could
him. But she also loved Anatole, of that there was no doubt. "Else how
She loved Prince Andrew--she remembered distinctly how deeply she loved
by the insoluble question whether she loved Anatole or Prince Andrew.
After reaching home Natasha did not sleep all night. She was tormented

without staying for supper.
Helene returned with Natasha to the drawing room. The Rostovs went away

knowing what to say and he repeated it till Helene came up to them.
"Natalie, just a word, only one!" he kept repeating, evidently not

had happened and to which she could find no answer.
She paused. She so wanted a word from him that would explain to her what

"One word, just one, for God's sake!" cried Anatole.

toward the door.
and trembling, threw a frightened look of inquiry at Anatole and moved
were heard in the room. Natasha looked round at her, and then, red
herself released, and Helene's footsteps and the rustle of her dress
Burning lips were pressed to hers, and at the same instant she felt

"I don't understand. I have nothing to say," her eyes replied.

painfully pressed. "Natalie?"
"Natalie?" he whispered inquiringly while she felt her hands being

nothing but them.
His large, glittering, masculine eyes were so close to hers that she saw

brought his face close to hers.
you? I love you madly. Can I never...?" and, blocking her path, he
"I cannot come to visit you but is it possible that I shall never see

alone, and Anatole had taken her hand and said in a tender voice:
Anatole in the little sitting room. Helene had disappeared leaving them
her and spoken laughingly of her brother's love, and that she again met
go to the dressing room to rearrange her dress, that Helene had followed
upon her. Later on she recalled how she had asked her father to let her
Wherever she went and whomever she was speaking to, she felt his eyes
Grossvater. Her father asked her to come home, but she begged to remain.
anything that went on that evening. They danced the ecossaise and the
frightened eyes and seemed merrier than usual. She understood hardly
Natasha, animated and excited, looked about her with wide-open

enchanting?... It's our turn to begin."
am madly, madly, in love with you! Is it my fault that you are
"Don't speak to me of that! What can I do?" said he. "I tell you I

Anatole was not upset or pained by what she had said.

rapidly.... She glanced at him.
"Don't say such things to me. I am betrothed and love another," she said

say. She lowered her eyes.
and smile that she could not, whilst looking at him, say what she had to
to him, but there was such confident tenderness in his affectionate look
themselves, but merely gazed at her. Natasha lifted her frightened eyes
also danced with him, Anatole said nothing when they happened to be by
was bewitching and that he loved her. During the ecossaise, which she
valse and as they danced he pressed her waist and hand and told her she
improvised ball, and the Rostovs stayed on. Anatole asked Natasha for a
The count wished to go home, but Helene entreated him not to spoil her

Bezukhova asked her visitors into the ballroom.
After giving several recitations, Mademoiselle George left, and Countess

eyes.
stepped up to her father and looked at him with surprised inquiring
daughter. "How beautiful she is!" Natasha without saying anything
"Come, come, Natasha!" said the count, as he turned back for his

enchanting... from the moment I saw you I have never ceased..."
He said this at a moment when she alone could hear him. "You are
"I don't think so when I look at you!" said Anatole, following Natasha.

risen and was moving through the crowd toward the actress.
"How beautiful she is!" Natasha remarked to her father who had also

Mademoiselle George, expressing their enthusiasm.
After the first monologue the whole company rose and surrounded

expectancy.
and conscious of his proximity she experienced a frightened sense of
was good or bad, reasonable or senseless. Behind her sat Anatole,
from her old world--a world in which it was impossible to know what
again completely borne away into this strange senseless world--so remote
understood anything of what went on before her. She only felt herself
Natasha looked at the fat actress, but neither saw nor heard nor

"Adorable! divine! delicious!" was heard from every side.

sounds, rolling her eyes.
lifting her head triumphantly; sometimes she paused and uttered hoarse
son. In some places she raised her voice, in others she whispered,
began reciting some French verses describing her guilty love for her
Mademoiselle George looked sternly and gloomily at the audience and

assumed an unnatural pose. Enthusiastic whispering was audible.
draped over one shoulder, came into the space left vacant for her, and
Mademoiselle George, with her bare, fat, dimpled arms, and a red shawl

lost sight of her, took the seat himself. Anatole sat down behind her.
Natasha and was about to sit down beside her, but the count, who never
arranging the chairs and taking their seats. Anatole moved a chair for
out of the room to change her costume. In the drawing room people began
beauty and her dress. Soon after their arrival Mademoiselle George went
Helene welcomed Natasha delightedly and was loud in admiration of her

the absence of a moral barrier between them.
had at the opera--gratified vanity at his admiration of her and fear at
her. As soon as she saw him she was seized by the same feeling she had
Immediately after greeting the count he went up to Natasha and followed
Anatole was at the door, evidently on the lookout for the Rostovs.

to get away as soon as Mademoiselle George's performance was over.
decided not to sit down to cards or let his girls out of his sight and
Helene reached Moscow had been an intimate in her house. The count
were several Frenchmen present, among them Metivier who from the time
standing in a corner of the drawing room surrounded by young men. There
women known for the freedom of their conduct. Mademoiselle George was
displeased to see that the company consisted almost entirely of men and
many people there, but nearly all strangers to Natasha. Count Rostov was
Count Rostov took the girls to Countess Bezukhova's. There were a good


CHAPTER XIII





added, addressing Natasha.
to; however, if you've promised--go. It will divert your thoughts," she
"I don't care to have anything to do with Bezukhova and don't advise you

remarked:
Bezukhova's visit and the invitation for that evening, Marya Dmitrievna
and that she would tell about it next day. On hearing of Countess
answer to the count's inquiries she replied that things were all right
agitated by the encounter to be able to talk of the affair calmly. In
evidently suffered a defeat at the old prince's. She was still too
Marya Dmitrievna came back to dinner taciturn and serious, having

gazing at Helene with wide-open, wondering eyes.
evidently likes me so much. And why not enjoy myself?" thought Natasha,
simple and natural. "And she is such a grande dame, so kind, and
again, under Helene's influence, what had seemed terrible now seemed
Pierre--have talked and laughed about this. So it's all right." And
"So she knows I am engaged, and she and her husband Pierre--that good

would wish you to go into society rather than be bored to death."
to shut yourself up. Even if you are engaged, I am sure your fiance
certainly come. If you love somebody, my charmer, that is not a reason
"How she blushes, how she blushes, my pretty!" said Helene. "You must

Natasha blushed scarlet when she heard this.

in love with you, my dear."
nothing and kept sighing for you, my charmer! He is madly, quite madly,
"My brother dined with me yesterday--we nearly died of laughter--he ate

her protegee aside.
heartily wished Natasha well. As she was leaving the Rostovs she called
drawing Boris away, she did not think of that now, and in her own way
Though at one time, in Petersburg, she had been annoyed with Natasha for

brother and Natasha together amused her.
calling on the Rostovs for that purpose. The idea of throwing her
Anatole had asked her to bring him and Natasha together, and she was
sincerely delighted with Natasha and wished to give her a good time.
this woman, who was so beautiful and so kind. Helene for her part was
so kind to her. Natasha brightened up and felt almost in love with
had formerly seemed to her so unapproachable and important and was now
she were blossoming under the praise of this dear Countess Bezukhova who
A smile of pleasure never left Natasha's face. She felt happy and as if

"But anything suits you, my charmer!" she remarked.

received from Paris, and advised Natasha to have one like it.
well as a new dress of her own made of "metallic gauze," which she had
Natasha's beauty. She looked at Natasha's dresses and praised them, as
did not cease chattering good-naturedly and gaily, continually praising
looking glass, draping the folds of her velvet dress picturesquely. She
respectfully to her, and seated herself in an armchair beside the
She nodded to the dressmaker, whom she knew and who had curtsied

You positively must! Between eight and nine."
husband is away in Tver or I would send him to fetch you. You must come.
girls--who are prettier than Mademoiselle George--I won't know you! My
tonight and there'll be some people, and if you don't bring your lovely
I won't let you off! Mademoiselle George will recite at my house
who had followed her in. "How can you live in Moscow and go nowhere? No,
this is really beyond anything, my dear count," said she to Count Rostov
"Oh, my enchantress!" she cried to the blushing Natasha. "Charming! No,

smiles.
a high collar, came into the room beaming with good-humored amiable
opened and Countess Bezukhova, dressed in a purple velvet gown with
was Helene. Natasha had not time to take off the bodice before the door
her father's voice and another's--a woman's--that made her flush. It
the back fitted, she heard in the drawing room the animated sounds of
only tacked together, and was turning her head to see in the glass how
on the new dresses. Just as she had put on a bodice without sleeves and
herself into a room adjoining the drawing room, occupied herself trying
on the Rostovs, and Natasha, very glad of this diversion, having shut
After she had gone, a dressmaker from Madame Suppert-Roguet waited

explanation with him about Natasha.
announced that she was going to see Prince Nicholas Bolkonski to have an
a stern air. She wore her holiday shawl, in which she paid calls, and
announced that the carriage was ready, and Marya Dmitrievna rose with
where the loose covers had been removed from the furniture, a servant
After Mass, when they had finished their coffee in the dining room

on that day wore an invariable look of solemn festivity.
holiday so noticeable as in Marya Dmitrievna's broad, stern face, which
and roast goose or suckling pig. But in nothing in the house was the
her table there were extra dishes at dinner, and the servants had vodka
servants worked, and they all wore holiday dress and went to church. At
house was scrubbed and cleaned on Saturdays; neither she nor the
Marya Dmitrievna liked Sundays and knew how to keep them. Her whole

concerts in the choir? I don't like it, it's just self-indulgence!"
dignity, and the deacon is the same. What holiness is there in giving
We have an excellent priest, he conducts the service decently and with
herself on her independence of thought. "God is the same every where.
"I don't like those fashionable churches," she said, evidently priding

victims of the plague.
parish church--the Church of the Assumption built over the graves of
On Sunday morning Marya Dmitrievna invited her visitors to Mass at her

far less tranquil and happy than before.
feeling. To the family Natasha seemed livelier than usual, but she was
been able to arouse in her such an incomprehensible and terrifying
every shade in the play of expression on the face of the man who had
herself recalling to the minutest detail every word, every gesture, and
had not already broken faith with Prince Andrew, and again she found
question again presented itself whether she was not guilty, whether she
Mary, of the theater, and of Kuragin mingled with her thoughts. The
began to think of him, the recollection of the old prince, of Princess
herself calmly and continuously as she had done before. As soon as she
would happen to her before he came. She could no longer think of him by
continually fancied that either he would never come or that something
and a fear and anxiety of which she did not understand the cause. She
recollection of her interview with Princess Mary and the old prince,
To her impatience and pining for him were now added the unpleasant
not arrived. She suffered more now than during her first days in Moscow.
manservant to the Vozdvizhenka to ascertain whether he had come. He had
She was expecting Prince Andrew any moment and twice that day sent a
prince and planning something, and this disquieted and offended her.
concealed from Natasha. Natasha guessed they were talking about the old
them. Marya Dmitrievna talked to the count about something which they
The day after the opera the Rostovs went nowhere and nobody came to see


CHAPTER XII





laugh.
"Well, that can't happen twice! Eh?" said Anatole, with a good-humored

who knew of Kuragin's marriage. "Take care!"
"You have been caught once already by a 'little girl,'" said Dolokhov

Anatole.
"You know, I adore little girls, they lose their heads at once," pursued

"You'd better wait till she's married...."

"I will tell my sister to ask her to dinner," said Anatole. "Eh?"

"She's first-rate, my dear fellow, but not for us," replied Dolokhov.

notion of the outcome of any of his actions.
of considering what might come of such love-making, as he never had any
intention of making love to her. Anatole had no notion and was incapable
attractions of her arms, shoulders, feet, and hair and expressed his
the opera he described to Dolokhov with the air of a connoisseur the
Natasha had made a strong impression on Kuragin. At supper after

necessity to Dolokhov.
of dominating another's will was in itself a pleasure, a habit, and a
Apart from the advantage he derived from Anatole, the very process
and amused himself at his expense without letting the other feel it.
as a bait to draw rich young men into his gambling set, made use of him
Dolokhov, who needed Anatole Kuragin's name, position, and connections
Anatole was sincerely fond of Dolokhov for his cleverness and audacity.

use of him for his own ends.
dissipation, associated with his old Petersburg comrade Kuragin and made
his Persian adventures, and was leading a life of luxury, gambling, and
Dolokhov, who had reappeared that year in Moscow after his exile and

be forgiven him, for he enjoyed much."
forgiveness. "All will be forgiven her, for she loved much; and all will
similar to that which female Magdalenes have, based on the same hope of
Rakes, those male Magdalenes, have a secret feeling of innocence

and bad people, and with a tranquil conscience carried his head high.
he honestly considered himself irreproachable, sincerely despised rogues
considering what the gratification of his tastes entailed for others,
was nothing dishonorable in these tastes, and he was incapable of
about was gaiety and women, and as according to his ideas there
was not mean, and did not refuse anyone who asked of him. All he cared
spoiling his own career, and he laughed at distinctions of all kinds. He
he be accused of ambition. More than once he had vexed his father by
not vain. He did not mind what people thought of him. Still less could
He was not a gambler, at any rate he did not care about winning. He was

evidently would not repay.
in society or money, which he borrowed from anyone and everyone and
persuaded of it too and did not refuse him either a leading place
society. He believed this so firmly that others, looking at him, were
thirty thousand rubles a year and always occupy a prominent position in
that it must live in water, so God had made him such that he must spend
that action of his might be. He was convinced that, as a duck is so made
how his actions might affect others or what the consequences of this or
never in his life done anything base. He was incapable of considering
impossible for him to live otherwise than as he did and that he had
others. He was instinctively and thoroughly convinced that it was
Anatole was always content with his position, with himself, and with

free to pass himself off as a bachelor.
payment which he agreed to send to his father-in-law, had arranged to be
marry his daughter. Anatole had very soon abandoned his wife and, for a
regiment in Poland, a Polish landowner of small means had forced him to
known only to his most intimate friends. At that time while with his
special reason for this, as he had got married two years before--a fact
especially the rich heiresses who were most of them plain. There was a
few of them at the balls. But he did not run after the unmarried girls,
was talk of his intrigues with some of the ladies, and he flirted with a
else, and was at all the balls and parties of the best society. There
or other Moscow revelers', drank whole nights through, outvying everyone
be on intimate relations. He had never missed a carousal at Danilov's
actresses--with the chief of whom, Mademoiselle George, he was said to
he slighted them and plainly preferred the gypsy girls and French
turned the heads of the Moscow ladies, especially by the fact that
As Shinshin had remarked, from the time of his arrival Anatole had

money under the guise of loans.
while, sometimes even accompanied him on his carousals, and gave him
Pierre received him unwillingly at first, but got used to him after a
Anatole consented and went to Moscow, where he put up at Pierre's house.

Princess Mary and Julie Karagina.
would at last try to make a good match there. He indicated to him
to the commander in chief--a post his father had procured for him--and
last time, but only on condition that he went to Moscow as adjutant
His father announced to him that he would now pay half his debts for the

creditors demanded from his father.
a year in cash, besides running up debts for as much more, which his
away from Petersburg, where he had been spending twenty thousand rubles
Anatole Kuragin was staying in Moscow because his father had sent him


CHAPTER XI





he pressed her arm.
saw the face, gestures, and tender smile of that bold handsome man when
imagination she went over her whole conversation with Kuragin, and again
former purity of her love for Prince Andrew had perished. And again in
that though all this was true, and though nothing had happened, yet the
Natasha quieted herself for a moment, but again some instinct told her
Andrew can love me still. But why 'still?' O God, why isn't he here?"
plain that nothing has happened and there is nothing to repent of, and
will know and I shall never see him again," she told herself. "So it is
to me? Nothing! I have done nothing, I didn't lead him on at all. Nobody
soothing irony replied: "What a fool I am to ask that! What did happen
"Am I spoiled for Andrew's love or not?" she asked herself, and with

confession. So Natasha tried to solve what was torturing her by herself.
would either not understand it at all or would be horrified at such a
was feeling. She knew that Sonya with her severe and simple views
Only to the old countess at night in bed could Natasha have told all she

now?" she thought.
terror I felt of him? What is this gnawing of conscience I am feeling
alone by herself, it was incomprehensible. "What is it? What was that
the presence of that Helene it had all seemed clear and simple; but now,
Helene with her proud, calm smile, rapturously cried "bravo!"--there in
music on wet boards, and young girls and old men, and the nearly naked
bare-legged Duport, in a tinsel-decorated jacket, jumped about to the
and terrible. There in that enormous, illuminated theater where the
had happened or what she felt. Everything seemed dark, obscure,
what had happened to her, but was unable either to understand what
for a long time hiding her flushed face in her hands trying to realize
"O God! I am lost!" she said to herself. "How could I let him?" She sat

gave a loud exclamation, flushed, and ran out of the room.
was horrified, and at tea to which all had sat down after the opera, she
what had happened to her, and suddenly remembering Prince Andrew she
Only after she had reached home was Natasha able clearly to think over


smiling tenderly.
flushed she turned round. He was looking at her with glittering eyes,
putting Natasha in he pressed her arm above the elbow. Agitated and
came up to them, called their carriage, and helped them in. As he was
she could not help watching. As they were leaving the theater Anatole
She felt agitated and tormented, and the cause of this was Kuragin whom
down below. That was the only part of the fourth act that Natasha saw.
about, till the boards were withdrawn from under him and he disappeared
In the fourth act there was some sort of devil who sang waving his arm

recur to her mind and were as if belonging to a remote past.
betrothed, of Princess Mary, or of life in the country did not once
quite natural, but on the other hand all her previous thoughts of her
world she found herself in. All that was going on before her now seemed
went back to her father in the other box, now quite submissive to the
The curtain rose again. Anatole left the box, serene and gay. Natasha

horror that no barrier lay between him and her.
as he was doing, gazing straight into his eyes. And again she felt with
good-natured tenderness of his smile vanquished her. She smiled just
straight into his eyes, and his nearness, self-assurance, and the
herself, and she could not refrain from turning round. She looked
"How is he now? Confused? Angry? Ought I to put it right?" she asked

he was there, behind, so close behind her.
not heard his remark. But as soon as she had turned away she felt that
intention. She did not know what to say and turned away as if she had
himself, but she felt that his incomprehensible words had an improper
Natasha did not understand what he was saying any more than he did


    * Are the pretty women.


there. Do come, dear countess, and give me this flower as a pledge!"
bouquet and dropping his voice, he added, "You will be the prettiest
costume tournament, Countess? Do come!" and putting out his hand to her
indeed," he said, looking at her significantly. "You'll come to the
ce sont les jolies femmes, * isn't that so? But now I like it very much
"At first I did not like it much, because what makes a town pleasant

something improper. Anatole smiled as though to encourage her.
blushed. She felt all the time that by talking to him she was doing
silence, asked him how he liked Moscow. She asked the question and
eyes were gazing calmly and fixedly at her, Natasha, to break the
During one of these moments of awkward silence when Anatole's prominent

of it!"
nothing but what they always said: "Having a good time? Well, I'm glad
with a general and did not answer her look, and her father's eyes said
as if asking what it all meant, but Helene was engaged in conversation
ever been to any man. Natasha kept turning to Helene and to her father,
things, yet she felt that they were closer to one another than she had
by her bare arm and kiss her on the neck. They spoke of most ordinary
this man. When she turned away she feared he might seize her from behind
that within five minutes she had come to feel herself terribly near to
always felt between herself and other men. She did not know how it was
frightened, realizing that there was not that barrier of modesty she had
look into hers rather than this. But looking into his eyes she was
at her shoulders, and she involuntarily caught his eye so that he should
oppressed. When she was not looking at him she felt that he was looking
by her. This pleased her, yet his presence made her feel constrained and
neck, and her bare arms. Natasha knew for certain that he was enraptured
While saying this he never removed his smiling eyes from her face, her

Karagins'! Please come! No! Really, eh?" said he.
ought to take part in it! It will be great fun. We shall all meet at the
old, familiar acquaintance, "we are getting up a costume tournament; you
"And do you know, Countess," he said, suddenly addressing her as an

previous performance Semenova had fallen down on the stage.
Kuragin asked her opinion of the performance and told her how at a

naive, cheerful, and good-natured.
whom there was so much talk, but that on the contrary his smile was most
struck by the fact that there was nothing formidable in this man about
He talked boldly and naturally, and Natasha was strangely and agreeably
Kuragin was much more sensible and simple with women than among men.
in fact, at which he had had the well-remembered pleasure of seeing her.
had long wished to have this happiness--ever since the Naryshkins' ball
at close quarters as at a distance, sat down beside her and told her he
and smiled at him over her bare shoulder. Anatole, who was as handsome
Natasha turned her pretty little head toward the elegant young officer

uneasily from Natasha to Anatole.
"Let me introduce my brother to you," said Helene, her eyes shifting

against anyone.
door opened, and Anatole entered, stooping and trying not to brush
During the entr'acte a whiff of cold air came into Helene's box, the


CHAPTER X





"Oh, yes," replied Natasha.

"Isn't Duport delightful?" Helene asked her.

strange. She looked about with pleasure, smiling joyfully.
shouting: "Duport! Duport! Duport!" Natasha no longer thought this
clatter among the audience, and with rapturous faces everyone began
and the curtain dropped. Once more there was a terrible noise and
orchestra, everyone ran off, again dragging one of their number away,
came on, chromatic scales and diminished sevenths were heard in the
sound of music, and they all began singing. But suddenly a storm
and women danced with bare legs. Then the king again shouted to the
man stopped and began smiling and bowing to all sides. Then other men
and galleries began clapping and shouting with all their might, and the
thousand rubles a year for this art.) Everybody in the stalls, boxes,
waved his feet about very rapidly. (He was Duport, who received sixty
struck up more loudly, and this man with bare legs jumped very high and
into a corner of the stage. The cymbals and horns in the orchestra
stalls everyone clapped and shouted "bravo!" Then one of the men went
began jumping and striking one foot rapidly against the other. In the
wings, adjusted her bodice, returned to the middle of the stage, and
bare legs and thin arms, separating from the others, went behind the
violins played very shrilly and merrily and one of the women with thick
legs came in from both sides and began dancing all together. Then the
queen, but the king waved his arm severely, and men and women with bare
throne with her hair down. She sang something mournfully, addressing the
and then in light blue, now wore only a smock, and stood beside the
and sat down on a crimson throne. The maiden who had been first in white
king waved his right arm and, evidently nervous, sang something badly
walls. In the middle stood what were probably a king and a queen. The
were burning and pictures of knights with short beards hung on the
The scene of the third act represented a palace in which many candles

performance, and Natasha moved over to it.
of the young ladies should come into her box for the rest of the
his relation to Natasha. To get better acquainted she asked that one
Bolkonski," she went on with special emphasis, implying that she knew of
married? And also from my husband's friend Bolkonski, Prince Andrew
heard about you from my page, Drubetskoy. Have you heard he is getting
you," said she to Natasha with her stereotyped and lovely smile. "I had
have already heard much of you in Petersburg and wanted to get to know
staying here long this time--nor are you--I will try to amuse them. I
"Dear count, you must let me look after your daughters! Though I am not

flattering--quite simply and naturally.
woman. She could say what she did not think--especially what was
Countess Bezukhova quite deserved her reputation of being a fascinating

not ashamed to bury such pearls in the country?"
"I want to become a Moscovite too, now," said Helene. "How is it you're

by praise from this brilliant beauty that she blushed with pleasure.
Natasha rose and curtsied to the splendid countess. She was so pleased

whole town is singing their praises and I don't even know then!"
"Do make me acquainted with your charming daughters," said she. "The

her box began talking to him with an amiable smile.
with a gloved finger, and paying no attention to those who had entered
Rostovs' box--her whole bosom completely exposed--beckoned the old count
When the second act was over Countess Bezukhova rose, turned to the

not occur to her that there was anything wrong in it.
at her. She was pleased to see that he was captivated by her and it did
Anatole Kuragin with an arm thrown across the back of his chair, staring
During this act every time Natasha looked toward the stalls she saw

interrupted by the enthusiastic shouts of the audience.
everyone knelt down and sang a prayer. All these things were repeatedly
behind the scenes something metallic was struck three times and
but sang with her for a long time and then at last dragged her off, and
in white and was now in light blue. They did not drag her away at once,
some other people ran in and began dragging away the maiden who had been
things like daggers in their hands. They began waving their arms. Then
people appeared from right and left wearing black cloaks and holding
the footlights, and from horns and contrabass came deep notes while many
round hole in the canvas to represent the moon, shades were raised over
In the second act there was scenery representing tombstones, there was a

him.
like that, to be so sure he admired her, and not to be acquainted with
caressing look that it seemed strange to be so near him, to look at him
Almost smiling, he gazed straight into her eyes with such an enraptured
something told her it was Kuragin. She turned and their eyes met.
with Pierre, Natasha heard a man's voice in Countess Bezukhova's box and
elbows and, smiling, talked to her for a long time. While conversing
the rows, came toward their box. When he got there he leaned on his
box. On seeing Natasha Pierre grew animated and, hastily passing between
him and began speaking to him, looking at and indicating the Rostovs'
He passed up to the front rows, not noticing anyone. Anatole went up to
looked sad, and he had grown still stouter since Natasha last saw him.
stalls. The Rostovs had not seen him since their arrival. His face
aspect. Before the beginning of the second act Pierre appeared in the
that he should see her profile in what she thought was its most becoming
was talking about her and this afforded her pleasure. She even turned so
of the orchestra partition, looking at the Rostovs' box. Natasha knew he
During the whole of that entr'acte Kuragin stood with Dolokhov in front

in their wish to let everyone see that they knew her.
distinguished and intellectual men, who seemed to vie with one another
Helene's box was filled and surrounded from the stalls by the most

gave Boris a similar smile.
The scantily clad Helene smiled at everyone in the same way, and Natasha

everything seemed simple and natural.
had formerly been in love. In the state of intoxication she was in,
congratulated on his approaching wedding that same Boris with whom she
went away. Natasha with a gay, coquettish smile talked to him, and
to Natasha and Sonya his fiancee's invitation to her wedding, and
simply, and raising his eyebrows with an absent-minded smile conveyed
Boris came to the Rostovs' box, received their congratulations very

out and coming in.
The first act was over. In the stalls everyone began moving about, going

had said she was "charmante."
of Kuragin's in Moscow, and Natasha tried to overhear it just because he
Shinshin, lowering his voice, began to tell the count of some intrigue

handsome they both are!"
"How like the brother is to the sister," remarked the count. "And how

smiled, and rested his foot against the orchestra screen.
that Dolokhov whom others treated so fawningly. He winked at him gaily,
beside Dolokhov, nudging with his elbow in a friendly and offhand way
lips. Then he took his place in the first row of the stalls and sat down
exactly hear his words but understood them from the movement of his
"Mais charmante!" said he, evidently referring to Natasha, who did not

motion toward Natasha.
of her box, nodded to her, and leaning forward asked a question, with a
Natasha he approached his sister, laid his well gloved hand on the edge
jingling and his handsome perfumed head held high. Having looked at
deliberately down the carpeted gangway, his sword and spurs slightly
complacency and gaiety. Though the performance was proceeding, he walked
and had his handsome face not worn such an expression of good-humored
swagger which would have been ridiculous had he not been so good-looking
uniform with one epaulet and a shoulder knot. He moved with a restrained
noticed long ago at the ball in Petersburg. He was now in an adjutant's
courteous bearing. This was Anatole Kuragin whom she had seen and
handsome adjutant approaching their box with a self-assured yet
Natasha, following the direction of that look, saw an exceptionally
Shinshin. Countess Bezukhova turned smiling to the newcomer, and
the steps of a belated arrival were heard. "There's Kuragin!" whispered
leading to the stalls on the side nearest the Rostovs' box creaked, and
At a moment when all was quiet before the commencement of a song, a door

Helene and tickle her.
her fan an old gentleman sitting not far from her, then to lean over to
singing the air the actress was singing, then she wished to touch with
mind: the idea occurred to her of jumping onto the edge of the box and
strangest fancies unexpectedly and disconnectedly passed through her
was, nor what was going on before her. As she looked and thought, the
experienced for a long while. She did not realize who and where she
by little began to pass into a state of intoxication she had not
the whole place and the warm air heated by the crowd, Natasha little
taking her eyes off the stage. And feeling the bright light that flooded
who--apparently quite unclothed--sat with a quiet tranquil smile, not
seminude women in the boxes, especially at Helene in the next box,
turn at the rows of pomaded heads in the stalls and then at the
suppose it has to be like this!" she thought. She kept looking round in
on the stage, and expressed delight which to Natasha seemed feigned. "I
herself experienced, but they all seemed attentive to what was happening
audience, seeking in them the same sense of ridicule and perplexity she
for the actors and then amused at them. She looked at the faces of the
it was so pretentiously false and unnatural that she first felt ashamed
that brilliant light. She knew what it was all meant to represent, but
queerly dressed men and women who moved, spoke, and sang so strangely in
nor even listen to the music; she saw only the painted cardboard and the
seemed grotesque and amazing to Natasha. She could not follow the opera
After her life in the country, and in her present serious mood, all this

lovers--began smiling, spreading out their arms, and bowing.
and shouting, while the man and woman on the stage--who represented
her. They sang together and everyone in the theater began clapping
of the girl in white, obviously awaiting the beat to start singing with
both paused while the orchestra played and the man fingered the hand
First the man in the tight trousers sang alone, then she sang, then they

went up to her and began singing, waving his arms about.
silk trousers over his stout legs, and holding a plume and a dagger,
the girl in white went up to the prompter's box and a man with tight
was glued. They all sang something. When they had finished their song
apart on a low bench, to the back of which a piece of green cardboard
bodices and white skirts. One very fat girl in a white silk dress sat
stretched over boards. In the center of the stage sat some girls in red
some painted cardboard representing trees, and at the back was a cloth
The floor of the stage consisted of smooth boards, at the sides was


CHAPTER IX





eager curiosity to the stage. Natasha too began to look at it.
women with gems on their bare flesh, turned their whole attention with
all the men, old and young, in uniform and evening dress, and all the
As soon as it rose everyone in the boxes and stalls became silent, and

and the curtain rose.
tapped with his stick. Some latecomers took their seats in the stalls,
Just then the last chords of the overture were heard and the conductor

love with."
"Wonderful!" answered Natasha. "She's a woman one could easily fall in

"Handsome, isn't she?" he whispered to Natasha.

Count Rostov resumed his seat.

Natasha.
"Yes, he meant to look in," answered Helene, and glanced attentively at

forget us. Is he here?"
me. They say Semenova acts marvelously. Count Pierre never used to
to kiss your hand. I'm here on business and have brought my girls with
"Have you been here long, Countess?" he inquired. "I'll call, I'll call

everyone in society, leaned over and spoke to her.
She was the Countess Bezukhova, Pierre's wife, and the count, who knew
looked round and, meeting the count's eyes, nodded to him and smiled.
While Natasha was fixing her gaze on her for the second time the lady
and coiffure, and admired the beauty of the shoulders and the pearls.
Natasha involuntarily gazed at that neck, those shoulders, and pearls

and took a long time settling into her place.
large pearls, entered the adjoining box rustling her heavy silk dress
plump white shoulders and neck, round which she wore a double string of
A tall, beautiful woman with a mass of plaited hair and much exposed

Kuragin have turned all our ladies' heads."
him to you as they would a dish of choice sterlet. Dolokhov and Anatole
hear a word but Dolokhov is mentioned. They swear by him, they offer
are mad about him! It's 'Dolokhov the Persian' that does it! We never
Persia, where he killed the Shah's brother. Now all the Moscow ladies
there. They say he has been acting as minister to some ruling prince in
"He did," replied Shinshin. "He was in the Caucasus and ran away from

asked, turning to Shinshin. "Didn't he vanish somewhere?"
"Do you recognize him?" said he. "And where has he sprung from?" he

adorer.
The count, laughing, nudged the blushing Sonya and pointed to her former

whom he evidently dominated.
in his own room. Around him thronged Moscow's most brilliant young men,
attracting everyone's attention, yet as much at ease as though he were
shock. He stood in full view of the audience, well aware that he was
stood Dolokhov in a Persian dress, his curly hair brushed up into a huge
the front, in the very center, leaning back against the orchestra rail,
looking at the faces, some strange and some familiar, in the stalls. In
not think of it--not till he comes back!" she told herself, and began
"What right has he not to wish to receive me into his family? Oh, better

had been so humiliating in her morning's visit.
well and liked so much. She turned away and suddenly remembered all that
pervaded by that atmosphere of an affianced couple which Natasha knew so
happy look of resignation to the will of God on her face. Their box was
Behind them sat Anna Mikhaylovna wearing a green headdress and with a

If only they knew how little I am concerned about any of them."
no doubt is calming her jealousy of me. They needn't trouble themselves!
"They are talking about us, about me and him!" thought Natasha. "And he

to his betrothed.
looked at the Rostovs from under his brows and said something, smiling,
an ear to Julie's mouth, was Boris' handsome smoothly brushed head. He
covered with powder. Behind them, wearing a smile and leaning over with
and a string of pearls round her thick red neck--which Natasha knew was
and saw Julie sitting beside her mother with a happy look on her face
Natasha looked in the direction in which her father's eyes were turned

"Oh yes, I heard it today," said Shinshin, coming into the Rostovs' box.

"Drubetskoy has proposed?"

they're engaged...."
"The Karagins, Julie--and Boris with them. One can see at once that

"Look at our Anna Mikhaylovna--what a headdress she has on!"

count.
"Dear me, Michael Kirilovich has grown still stouter!" remarked the

mother, isn't it?"
crumpling her program. "Look, there's Alenina," said Sonya, "with her
unconsciously, she opened and closed her hand in time to the music,
above the elbow, lay on the velvet edge of the box, while, evidently
the crowd without seeking anyone, and her delicate arm, bare to
with her indifference to everything about her. Her black eyes looked at
struck those who saw her by her fullness of life and beauty, combined
that evening thanks to her agitation she was particularly pretty. She
Natasha's looks, as everyone told her, had improved in the country, and

the best matches in Russia.
since, and all looked with curiosity at a fiancee who was making one of
Prince Andrew, and knew that the Rostovs had lived in the country ever
attention. Moreover, everybody knew vaguely of Natasha's engagement to
who had not been seen in Moscow for a long time, attracted general
The two remarkably pretty girls, Natasha and Sonya, with Count Rostov

emotions associated with that feeling.
disagreeably and called up a whole crowd of memories, desires and
her bare arms and neck--suddenly affected her both agreeably and
experienced for a long time--that of hundreds of eyes looking at
scanning the brilliant tiers of boxes opposite. A sensation she had not
played. Natasha, smoothing her gown, went in with Sonya and sat down,
at Natasha. The curtain had not yet risen and the overture was being
their eyes. A lady entering the next box shot a glance of feminine envy
shoulders, and noisy stalls brilliant with uniforms, glittered before
door rows of brightly lit boxes in which ladies sat with bare arms and
opened the door of their box. The music sounded louder and through the
An attendant deferentially and quickly slipped before the ladies and

"Natasha, your hair!..." whispered Sonya.

Through the closed doors the music was already audible.
they all three went along the corridor to the first row of boxes.
passing among men and women who were entering and the program sellers,
jumped out quickly. The count got out helped by the footmen, and,
squeaking over the snow. Natasha and Sonya, holding up their dresses,
carriages, the Rostovs' carriage drove up to the theater, its wheels
where she was going and with whom. Having fallen into the line of
the frozen window, she felt still sadder and more in love, and forgot
father, pensively watching the lights of the street lamps flickering on
love such as filled her heart. While she sat in the carriage beside her
once, to embrace the man she loved, to speak and hear from him words of
enough for her to love and know she was beloved, she wanted now, at
Natasha at that moment felt so softened and tender that it was not

"No, she's altogether different. I can't!"
looking at Sonya, who also came in quite ready, with a fan in her hand.
so calmly and quietly and wait so long and so patiently?" thought she,
glass, making an effort not to cry. "And how can Sonya love Nicholas
this waiting and I shall cry in a minute!" and she turned away from the
of him but forget him, quite forget him for the present. I can't bear
manly and yet childlike.... No, I had better not think of him; not think
love him alone, him, him, with that face and those eyes, with his smile,
thought Natasha. "And what do his father and sister matter to me? I
make him laugh as he used to laugh. And his eyes--how I see those eyes!"
inquiring eyes with which he has so often looked at me, and then I would
embrace him, cling to him, and make him look at me with those searching
differently. I would not be silly and afraid of things, I would simply
"O God, if he were here now I would not behave as I did then, but

it was a sweet, tender sadness.
there saw that she was pretty, very pretty, she felt even more sad, but
into the ballroom to await her father, and looking in the large mirror
offer which was intended expressly for her. When she came ready dressed
Natasha did not want to go, but could not refuse Marya Dmitrievna's kind

had taken a box.
That evening the Rostovs went to the Opera, for which Marya Dmitrievna


CHAPTER VIII





the other guests.
Natasha was and jested resolutely and loudly at table with the count and
the prince had received the Rostovs, pretended not to notice how upset
She came in to dinner with red eyes. Marya Dmitrievna, who knew how

my fault. But it all hurts terribly. Oh, why doesn't he come?..."
"I can't tell you, I don't know. No one's to blame," said Natasha--"It's

wet face against her.
Natasha raised her head and, kissing her friend on the lips, pressed her

mind? Kiss me," said Sonya.
"Don't talk about it, Natasha. It wasn't your fault so why should you

"But if you only knew how offensive it was... as if I..."

will all pass, Natasha."
"Natasha, what is it about?" she asked. "What do they matter to you? It

stood beside her, kissing her hair.
in her room crying like a child, blowing her nose and sobbing. Sonya
They waited a long time for Natasha to come to dinner that day. She sat

out of the room.
"What have I said and what have I done?" thought she, as soon as she was

her.
with external dignity and coldness, though she felt the tears choking
"I think, Princess, it is not convenient to speak of that now," she said

this and guessed its reason.
She paused, feeling that she was not telling the truth. Natasha noticed

my brother has found happiness...."
"Dear Natalie," said Princess Mary, "I want you to know that I am glad

Natasha glanced at her ironically without knowing why.

"Wait, I must..."

to Natasha, took her by the hand, and said with a deep sigh:
the count was already leaving the room, Princess Mary went up hurriedly
knowing why, she felt it very difficult to speak of the marriage. When
because Mademoiselle Bourienne was in the way, and because, without
she ought to have said to Natasha, but she had been unable to say it
The same thought was meanwhile tormenting Princess Mary. She knew what
talking about him in the presence of that Frenchwoman," thought Natasha.
hour with her without once mentioning Prince Andrew. "I couldn't begin
could place her in such an embarrassing position and had spent half an
to get away: at that moment she hated the stiff, elderly princess, who
When the count returned, Natasha was impolitely pleased and hastened

antipathy to one another.
did so without saying what they wanted to say, the greater grew their
and Princess Mary looked at one another in silence, and the longer they
apparition and began speaking about the prince's indisposition. Natasha
Mademoiselle Bourienne was the first to recover herself after this

he went out.
muttered the old man, and after looking Natasha over from head to foot
"I beg you to excuse me, excuse me! God is my witness, I did not know,"

Mademoiselle Bourienne alone smiled agreeably.
Nor did the latter, having risen and curtsied, know what to do.

father or at Natasha.
Princess Mary stood with downcast eyes not daring to look either at her
stressing the word "God" so unnaturally and so unpleasantly that
you to excuse me... God is my witness, I didn't know-" he repeated,
visit, and I came in such a costume only to see my daughter. I beg
madam. God is my witness, I did not know you had honored us with a
not mistaken... I beg you to excuse me, to excuse me... I did not know,
"Ah, madam!" he began. "Madam, Countess... Countess Rostova, if I am

nightcap, came in.
The door opened and the old prince, in a dressing gown and a white

looked frightened.
heard the sound of slippered feet rapidly approaching. Princess Mary
more. After five minutes of irksome, constrained conversation, they
involuntarily assumed an offhand air which alienated Princess Mary still
plain, affected, and dry. Natasha suddenly shrank into herself and
displeased her. She did not like Princess Mary, whom she thought very
who--she thought--was making a favor of receiving her, and so everything
by her father's nervousness, and by the unnatural manner of the princess
Natasha felt offended by the hesitation she had noticed in the anteroom,
the room and persistently talked about Moscow amusements and theaters.
have a tete-a-tete with Natasha--Mademoiselle Bourienne remained in
Despite the uneasy glances thrown at her by Princess Mary--who wished to

to stay longer at Anna Semenovna's, and he departed.
princess told the count that she would be delighted, and only begged him
defiant expression which said that she was not afraid of anybody. The
angrier at having blushed, and looked at the princess with a bold and
and anxiety and felt mortified by it. She blushed for him, grew still
this to his daughter, but Natasha noticed her father's nervousness
encountering the old prince, of whom he was afraid. He did not mention
to one another freely, but another motive was to avoid the danger of
daughter) to give the future sisters-in-law an opportunity to talk
The count had devised this diplomatic ruse (as he afterwards told his

for her."
Semenovna, it's quite near in the Dogs' Square, and then I'll come back
hands for a quarter of an hour, Princess, I'll drive round to see Anna
remarks he rose. "If you'll allow me to leave my Natasha in your
sorry the prince is still ailing," and after a few more commonplace
might appear. "I am so glad you should get to know one another... very
count, bowing and looking round uneasily as if afraid the old prince
"There, my dear princess, I've brought you my songstress," said the

some freak, as he seemed much upset by the Rostovs' visit.
receive them, but feared lest the prince might at any moment indulge in
she chose, but they were not to be admitted to him. She had decided to
that he did not wish to see them, that Princess Mary might do so if
then because on the Rostovs' being announced, the old prince had shouted
from this insuperable antipathy to her, Princess Mary was agitated just
happiness, as well as by jealousy of her brother's love for her. Apart
was prejudiced against her by involuntary envy of her beauty, youth, and
not at all realize that before having seen her future sister-in-law she
thought her too fashionably dressed, frivolously gay and vain. She did
at ease. From the first glance Princess Mary did not like Natasha. She
the visitors, treading heavily, and vainly trying to appear cordial and
looking excited and nervous, her face flushed in patches, ran in to meet
special politeness and showed them to the princess' room. The princess,
was Mademoiselle Bourienne. She greeted the father and daughter with
begged them to walk up. The first person who came to meet the visitors
to the Rostovs that the prince was not receiving, but that the princess
the princess. At last an old, cross looking footman came and announced
maidservant ran into the hall and hurriedly said something, mentioning
another in the large hall and they whispered to one another. Then a
servants. The footman who had gone to announce them was stopped by
When they had been announced a perturbation was noticeable among the

princess were at home.
the anteroom and inquired timidly and softly whether the prince and
in earnest; but Natasha noticed that her father was flurried on entering
"Well, the Lord have mercy on us!" said the count, half in jest, half

the vestibule.
They drove up to the gloomy old house on the Vozdvizhenka and entered

sister--that there is no reason for them not to like me..."
be fond of him--for being his father--and of her--for being his
liked me, and I am so willing to do anything they wish, so ready to
spirits. "They can't help liking me," she thought. "Everybody always has
on the other hand, having put on her best gown, was in the highest
angry reprimand for not having provided his full quota of men. Natasha,
when in reply to an invitation to dinner he had had to listen to an
interview he had had with the old prince at the time of the enrollment,
on this visit, at heart he felt afraid. He well remembered the last
call on Prince Nicholas Bolkonski. The count did not set out cheerfully
Next day, by Marya Dmitrievna's advice, Count Rostov took Natasha to


CHAPTER VII





"Yes, it will," Natasha answered reluctantly.

or not? Won't that be best?"
you already know his sister and father and are liked by them. Am I right
affectionate to her: you're younger than she. When he comes, he'll find
Tomorrow you'll go with your father to see her. Be very nice and
one wouldn't hurt a fly. She has asked me to bring you two together.
future sister-in-law. 'Husbands' sisters bring up blisters,' but this
"You see I have known him a long time and am also fond of Mary, your

wanted nothing more.
loved her only, and was to come one of these days and take her. She
that no one could understand it. She loved and knew Prince Andrew, he
of Prince Andrew, which seemed to her so apart from all human affairs
really because she disliked anyone interfering in what touched her love
Natasha remained silent, from shyness Marya Dmitrievna supposed, but

be well."
and you'll know how to manage. Be kind, and use your wits. Then all will
will. One wants to do it peacefully and lovingly. You're a clever girl
without him, but it's not nice to enter a family against a father's
fellow's crotchety! Of course Prince Andrew is not a child and can shift
know that old Prince Nicholas much dislikes his son's marrying. The old
Natasha blushed happily. "I like him and all his family. Now listen! You
he was so high." She held her hand a couple of feet from the ground.
hooked a fine fellow! I am glad for your sake and I've known him since
"Well, now we'll talk. I congratulate you on your betrothed. You've

except Natasha, and then called her pet to her armchair.
whole trousseau. When they got home she turned everybody out of the room
loss merely to get rid of her. Marya Dmitrievna ordered almost the
afraid of Marya Dmitrievna that she always let her have costumes at a
shrine of the Mother of God and to Madame Suppert-Roguet, who was so
Next morning Marya Dmitrievna took the young ladies to the Iberian

Natasha, on the cheek with her large hand.
bit," said Marya Dmitrievna, touching her goddaughter and favorite,
I'll take them where they must go, scold them a bit, and pet them a
"All right. All right. They'll be safe with me, as safe as in Chancery!

day, and leave my lassies with you."
will be so kind, I'll fix a time and go down to the estate just for a
purchaser has turned up for the Moscow estate and for the house. If you
"One thing has come on top of another: her rags to buy, and now a

asked the count sternly.
now without some new fashion.... And what have you to do yourself?" she
as if she had put two barrels on her arms. You know not a day passes
Princess Irina Vasilevna came to see me; she was an awful sight--looked
Don't judge by me: sleeves nowadays are this size! The other day young
we'll drive to the Super-Rogue's. I suppose you'll have everything new.
take them first to the Iberian shrine of the Mother of God, and then
Wednesday. As for them"--and she pointed to the girls--"tomorrow I'll
ran away from her and she came galloping after him. He dined with me on
getting married! Then Bezukhov, eh? He is here too, with his wife. He
Anna Mikhaylovna? That's two. She's here with her son. The son is
you send for? Shinshin?" she crooked one of her fingers. "The sniveling
listen," she said to the count. "What do you want tomorrow? Whom will
look that showed she did not want to speak of it in her presence. "Now
But we'll speak of that later on," she added, glancing at Sonya with a
and his son's expected any day. You'll have to make his acquaintance.
time," she said, giving Natasha a significant look. "The old man is here
"I'm heartily glad you have come and are staying with me. It was high

all in due order.
tidied themselves up after their journey, Marya Dmitrievna kissed them
When they came in to tea, having taken off their outdoor things and

contemptuous though affectionate attitude toward her.
turning to Sonya and indicating by this French greeting her slightly
I'm sure! Bring some rum for tea!... Bonjour, Sonya dear!" she added,
to the count who was going to kiss her hand. "You're half frozen,
hood. "Foo! You are cold! Now take off your things, quick!" she shouted
drawing Natasha (whose cheeks were glowing from the cold) to her by the
samovar ready!... You've grown plumper and prettier," she remarked,
left. Now what are you dawdling for?" she cried to the maids. "Get the
portmanteaus and not greeting anyone. "The young ladies'? There to the
"The count's things? Bring them here," she said, pointing to the

accommodation of the visitors and their belongings.
same time been giving careful instructions to the servants for the
the travelers and would immediately turn them out, had she not at the
grim face at the new arrivals. One might have thought she was angry with
and her head flung back, stood in the hall doorway looking with a stern,
servants. Marya Dmitrievna, with her spectacles hanging down on her nose
the hall door squeaked from the cold as it let in the Rostovs and their
She had not yet gone to bed when the Rostovs arrived and the pulley of

pay visits, and then only to the most important persons in the town.
to her while she knitted. She rarely made an exception and went out to
a game of boston, and at night she had the newspapers or a new book read
at which there were always three or four guests; after dinner she played
were always some. Then she had dinner, a substantial and appetizing meal
dressing, she received petitioners of various classes, of whom there
affairs of which she never spoke to anyone. On ordinary days, after
on holy days to church and after the service to jails and prisons on
jacket, she attended to her household affairs, and then she drove out:
which she did not admit. From early in the morning, wearing a dressing
to others for any weakness, passion, or temptation--the possibility of
loudly, and bluntly as ever, and her whole bearing seemed a reproach
She held herself as erect, told everyone her opinion as candidly,

service.
She had already married off her daughter, and her sons were all in the
courtyard in the old Konyusheny street. Marya Dmitrievna lived alone.
Late one evening the Rostovs' four sleighs drove into Marya Dmitrievna's

Akhrosimova, who had long been pressing her hospitality on them.
was not with them, the count decided to stay with Marya Dmitrievna
winter and, as they had come only for a short time and the countess
could not be missed. The Rostovs' Moscow house had not been heated that
future daughter-in-law to old Prince Bolkonski while he was in Moscow
Moscow had to be sold, besides which the opportunity of presenting his
Moscow any day, the trousseau had to be ordered and the estate near
impossible to wait for her recovery. Prince Andrew was expected in
Sonya. The countess was still unwell and unable to travel but it was
At the end of January old Count Rostov went to Moscow with Natasha and


CHAPTER VI





Petersburg, paid calls, and prepared everything for a brilliant wedding.
melancholy upon them, planned the arrangements of a splendid house in
The affianced couple, no longer alluding to trees that shed gloom and

could demand this, and she received what she demanded.
than her. She knew that for the Penza estates and Nizhegorod forests she
occasions--that he loved her and had never loved any other woman more
self-satisfaction; but she forced Boris to say all that is said on such
There was no need to say more: Julie's face shone with triumph and

"You know my feelings for you!"

He blushed hotly, raised his eyes to hers, and said:
often," thought Boris. "The affair has been begun and must be finished!"
him with greedy expectation. "I can always arrange so as not to see her
suddenly quite vanished, and her anxious, imploring eyes were fixed on
He glanced at her to make sure that he might go on. Her irritability had

"I did not come here at all to quarrel with you. On the contrary..."

avoid seeing her unpleasantly irritated and irresolute face, and said:
He checked himself in the middle of the sentence, lowered his eyes to

his efforts--which was a thing he never allowed to happen.
leave Moscow without having accomplished his aim, and have vainly wasted
that instant the galling thought occurred to him that he might have to
"Then I should advise you..." Boris began, wishing to sting her; but at

weary anyone.
that a woman needs variety, and the same thing over and over again would
paying court to them. Julie was offended and replied that it was true
sadness to joy, and how their moods depend solely on who happens to be
irritably of feminine inconstancy, of how easily women can turn from
speak of his love and therefore meant to be tender, he began speaking
and asked when he was leaving. Though Boris had come intentionally to
careless manner, spoke casually of how she had enjoyed yesterday's ball,
Karagins' with the firm intention of proposing. Julie met him in a gay,
into the hands of that idiot Anatole, pained Boris. He drove to the
and put to proper use fall into the hands of another, and especially
revenue from the Penza estates which he had already mentally apportioned
month of arduous melancholy service to Julie, and of seeing all the
The idea of being made a fool of and of having thrown away that whole

you think of it, my dear?"
to Julie. I am so fond of Julie that I should be sorry for her. What do
source that Prince Vasili has sent his son to Moscow to get him married
"My dear," said Anna Mikhaylovna to her son, "I know from a reliable

her melancholy, became cheerful and very attentive to Kuragin.
of course in the Karagins' drawing room, and Julie, suddenly abandoning
absence was expiring, Anatole Kuragin made his appearance in Moscow, and
departure she formed a definite plan of action. Just as Boris' leave of
however, began to turn to irritability, and not long before Boris'
and she told herself that he was only shy from love. Her melancholy,
her feminine self-deception immediately supplied her with consolation,
sometimes the thought occurred to her that she was repulsive to him, but
the use of the income from them. Julie saw Boris' indecision, and
the possessor of those Penza and Nizhegorod estates and had apportioned
decisive words, though in imagination he had long regarded himself as
to an unnatural rapture of married bliss, Boris could not utter the
her expression of continual readiness to pass at once from melancholy
at her red face and chin (nearly always powdered), her moist eyes, and
himself that he would propose tomorrow. But in Julie's presence, looking
days at the Karagins', and every day on thinking the matter over told
restrained Boris. His leave was expiring. He spent every day and whole
a feeling of horror at renouncing the possibility of real love still
for her passionate desire to get married, for her artificiality, and
was ready to accept it; but some secret feeling of repulsion for her,
Julie had long been expecting a proposal from her melancholy adorer and

Nizhegorod estates.
to say, and sometimes questioned her carefully about the Penza and
laughed blandly at her naive diplomacy but listened to what she had
Boris smiled almost imperceptibly while listening to his mother. He

one to help her, and they do cheat her so!"
Penza (they have enormous estates there), and she, poor thing, has no
mother," she went on; "today she showed me her accounts and letters from
an angelic being! Ah, Boris, Boris!"--she paused. "And how I pity her
latterly," she said to her son. "But who could help loving her? She is
mother. "Ah, my dear, I can't tell you how fond I have grown of Julie
suffered so many disappointments and is so sensitive," said she to the
the daughter. "Boris says his soul finds repose at your house. He has
"You are always charming and melancholy, my dear Julie," she said to

with emotion, and resignation to the Divine will.
regarded the refined sadness that united her son to the wealthy Julie
have two estates in Penza and the Nizhegorod forests). Anna Mikhaylovna
with the mother made careful inquiries as to Julie's dowry (she was to
Anna Mikhaylovna, who often visited the Karagins, while playing cards

one another in a world of indifferent people.
Julie and Boris looked on one another as the only souls who understood
because of the emotions that choked him. Meeting at large gatherings
Poor Liza aloud to her, and more than once interrupted the reading
For Boris, Julie played most doleful nocturnes on her harp. Boris read


     With these tears that I feel to be flowing.
     And mingle a secret sweetness
     Come to calm the torments of my gloomy retreat,
     Tender melancholy, ah, come to console me,
     Thou, without whom happiness would for me be impossible,
      *Poisonous nourishment of a too sensitive soul,


    A ces pleurs que je sens couler. *
    Et mele une douceur secrete
    Viens calmer les tourments de ma sombre retraite,
    Tendre melancholie, ah, viens me consoler,
    Toi, sans qui le bonheur me serait impossible,
    Aliment de poison d'une ame trop sensible,

In reply Boris wrote these lines:

despair, showing the possibility of consolation."
"It is a ray of light in the darkness, a shade between sadness and
to Boris, repeating word for word a passage she had copied from a book.
"There is something so enchanting in the smile of melancholy," she said

Julie said this was charming

Ah! from suffering there is no other refuge.


    * Death gives relief and death is peaceful.


    Ah! contre les douleurs il n'y a pas d'autre asile. *
    La mort est secourable et la mort est tranquille.

On another page he drew a tomb, and wrote:

your dark branches shed gloom and melancholy upon me."
album. Boris sketched two trees in the album and wrote: "Rustic trees,
as she who had herself suffered so much could render, and showed him her
disillusionment with life, offered him such consolation of friendship
To Boris, Julie was particularly gracious: she regretted his early

mournful sketches, maxims, and verses.
of all worldly things, and to them she showed her albums filled with
with these she had prolonged conversations in private on the vanity
men, among them Boris, entered more deeply into Julie's melancholy, and
rimes, which were in vogue at the Karagins'. Only a few of these young
himself with society gossip, dancing, intellectual games, and bouts
his tribute to the melancholy mood of the hostess, and then amused
passing the time pleasantly. Every visitor who came to the house paid
herself, did not hinder the young people who came to her house from
much in life. This melancholy, which did not prevent her amusing
that light, and had even herself come to believe that she had suffered
him. Though nothing of the kind had happened to her she was regarded in
girl who has either lost the man she loved or been cruelly deceived by
adopted the tone of one who has suffered a great disappointment, like a
love, or any of the joys of life, and expected peace only "yonder." She
told everyone that she did not believe either in friendship or in
But in spite of that she seemed to be disillusioned about everything and
promenade, or a play. Her dresses were always of the latest fashion.
and staying till three in the morning. Julie never missed a ball, a
company, chiefly of men, gathered there every day, supping at midnight
in Moscow. In addition to the formal evening and dinner parties, a large
That winter the Karagins' house was the most agreeable and hospitable

and treat her not as a marriageable girl but as a sexless acquaintance.
compromising her and committing himself, would now go boldly every day
to the house when there was a girl of seventeen there, for fear of
A man who would have been afraid ten years before of going every day
company that assembled at her house, without incurring any obligation.
with her and avail themselves of her suppers, soirees, and the animated
dangerous she became to men, and the more freely they could associate
wealthy heiress and also by the fact that the older she grew the less
was confirmed in this delusion by the fact that she had become a very
merely as good-looking as before but even far more attractive. She
very wealthy. She was by now decidedly plain, but thought herself not
She was twenty-seven. After the death of her brothers she had become

manner peculiar to herself.
Julie on the contrary accepted his attentions readily, though in a

he was saying.
all his attempts to talk sentimentally, evidently not listening to what
had last met on the old prince's name day, she had answered at random
without knowing why, felt awkward about paying court to her. When they
despite her plainness seemed to him more attractive than Julie, he,
two richest heiresses, Julie and Princess Mary. Though Princess Mary
the same object in view he came to Moscow. There he wavered between the
Boris had not succeeded in making a wealthy match in Petersburg, so with


CHAPTER V





old prince to her.
sister-in-law as soon as the Rostovs arrived and to try to accustom the
Princess Mary told Pierre of her plan to become intimate with her future

"I hear they are expected very soon," said Pierre.

"Ah, I so long to like her! Tell her so if you see her before I do."

Princess Mary again shook her head disapprovingly.

clever.... Oh no, she is simply enchanting, and that is all."
"I think not," he said, "and yet--yes. She does not deign to be

Pierre considered.

"Is she clever?" she asked.

what I expected and feared."
Princess Mary sighed, and the expression on her face said: "Yes, that's

know. That is all one can say about her."
analyze her at all. She is enchanting, but what makes her so I don't
knowing why. "I really don't know what sort of girl she is; I can't
"I don't know how to answer your question," he said, blushing without

than what he thought.
disapprove of Andrew's choice; but in reply he said what he felt rather
princess' part toward her future sister-in-law and a wish that he should
requests to be told the whole truth, expressed ill-will on the
An undefined instinct told Pierre that these explanations, and repeated

father's will that I should like to know..."
truth, because you know Andrew is risking so much doing this against his
truth: what sort of girl is she, and what do you think of her?--The real
known them a long time," said Princess Mary. "Tell me honestly the whole
wish they would come sooner. I hope to be friends with her. You have
impossible. I only wish I could spare my brother the first moments. I
"What is to be done? In a few months the year will be up. The thing is

Princess Mary shook her head.

old prince.
"And how does he now regard the matter?" asked Pierre, referring to the

should like them to meet here."
"I was told they are coming soon. I am also expecting Andrew any day. I
"Have you any news of the Rostovs?" she asked, to change the subject.

cause a rupture between father and son.
except the one he knew of--that Prince Andrew's marriage threatened to
she did not remember what she had said, and that she had no trouble
she only repeated that she begged him to forget what she had said, that
princess, asked her to speak out fully and confide her grief to him; but
Pierre's gaiety vanished completely. He anxiously questioned the

notice--forget what I have said!"
"I don't know what is the matter with me today. Don't take any

tears.
But without finishing what she was saying, Princess Mary burst into

"What is wrong? What is it, Princess?"

thing left--to go away, but where could I go?"
him, and to know that you cannot alter this. Then there is only one
on in a trembling voice, "that you can do nothing for him but grieve
bitter it is to love someone near to you and to feel that..." she went
cried suddenly to her own surprise and with tears in her voice. "Ah, how
"Oh, my God, Count, there are moments when I would marry anybody!" she

"Would you marry him?"

relief. He would give me advice."
to tell everything to Pierre. He is kind and generous. It would be a
"if I ventured to confide what I am feeling to someone. I should like
still thinking of her own sorrow. "It would be a relief," thought she,
"Really?" asked Princess Mary, looking into Pierre's kindly face and

melancholy with Mademoiselle Karagina," said Pierre.
"To please Moscow girls nowadays one has to be melancholy. He is very

"No," replied Princess Mary.

raillery for which he so often reproached himself in his diary.
with an amused smile, evidently in that cheerful mood of good humored
"Yes, very often. And do you know the new way of courting?" said Pierre

"He visits them?"

to--you or Mademoiselle Julie Karagina. He is very attentive to her."
can read him like a book. At present he is hesitating whom to lay siege
matters so that where there is a wealthy heiress there he is too. I
"Yes," returned Pierre with a smile, "and this young man now manages

"You have observed that?" said Princess Mary.

heiress."
Petersburg to Moscow it is usually with the object of marrying an
"Because I have noticed that when a young man comes on leave from

father.
Princess Mary, still thinking of that morning's conversation with her
"Yes, he is an agreeable young man.... Why do you ask me that?" said

"Do you like him?"

"No, not long..."

"Drubetskoy."

"Who?"

"Have you known that young man long, Princess?" he asked.

him and smiled quietly.
Pierre was in an agreeable after-dinner mood. He looked straight before

"Oh yes," she answered. "You noticed nothing?" her look asked.

an armchair beside her.
"May I stay a little longer?" he said, letting his stout body sink into

in the drawing room.
approach her after the old prince had gone out and they were left alone
hat in hand and with a smile on his face was the last of the guests to
Princess Mary turned with absent-minded questioning look to Pierre, who

the third time already.
shown her during dinner by Boris Drubetskoy, who was visiting them for
her. She did not even notice the special attentions and amiabilities
whether the guests had all observed her father's hostile attitude toward
faultfinding, understood nothing of what she heard; she only wondered
Princess Mary as she sat listening to the old men's talk and


CHAPTER IV





Following Rostopchin's example the others also rose.

his cheek to be kissed.
hearing him!" said the old prince, keeping hold of the hand and offering
"Good-by, my dear fellow.... His words are music, I never tire of

with characteristic briskness and holding out his hand to the prince.
"Well, good-by, your excellency, keep well!" said Rostopchin, getting up

wagged his head approvingly.
All were silent. The old prince looked at Rostopchin with a smile and

out of them."
museum and belabor them in the Russian way till all the nonsense jumps
Prince, one would like to take Peter the Great's old cudgel out of the
Public Baths if I may say so. Ah, when one looks at our young people,
And they themselves sit there nearly naked, like the signboards at our
Catholics and had the Pope's indulgence for doing woolwork on Sundays.
a party last night, and there out of five ladies three were Roman
scoundrel, but our ladies crawl after him on their knees. I went to
Metivier out by the scruff of his neck because he is a Frenchman and a
"French dresses, French ideas, French feelings! There now, you turned

He began speaking louder, evidently to be heard by everyone.

Heaven."
look at our ladies! The French are our Gods: Paris is our Kingdom of
arm ourselves against our teachers and divinities? Look at our youths,
"How can we fight the French, Prince?" said Count Rostopchin. "Can we

Russian frontier, as was the case in 1807!"
an armed frontier and a firm policy, and he will never dare to cross the
all in the East, and in regard to Bonaparte the only thing is to have
not to fight either for or against Austria. Our political interests are
affairs, into which we had been drawn by the Peace of Tilsit. "We ought
sought alliances with the Germans and thrust ourselves into European
He said that our wars with Bonaparte would be disastrous so long as we

impending war.
Prince Nicholas grew more animated and expressed his views on the

men sat together.
When they went into the drawing room where coffee was served, the old

to her now.
in force, and only the presence of visitors hindered his speaking of it
that he had not forgotten the morning's talk, that his decision remained
clean-shaven cheek to kiss. The whole expression of his face told her
He gave her a cold, angry look and offered her his wrinkled,

the old prince. Princess Mary, too, went round to him.
After the roast, champagne was served. The guests rose to congratulate

were very insufficient and obscure, no one made any rejoinder.
reasons that convinced him that Metivier was a spy. Though these reasons
And he narrated his whole conversation with the French doctor and the

at his daughter.
my request that they should let no one in," he went on, glancing angrily
out of my house this morning. He was here; they admitted him in spite of
"Impudent fellows!" said the prince. "You know Metivier? I turned him

impossible to pass any judgment.
All were silent. On this fact relating to the Emperor personally, it was

review, they say, the Emperor did not once deign to address him."
to such trifles!' The Emperor did not condescend to reply. At the next
notice and allowed himself to reply that: 'We in France pay no attention
past," continued the general, "and it seems the ambassador took no
"His Majesty drew attention to the Grenadier division and to the march

presence."
"Eh? Yes, I heard something: he said something awkward in His Majesty's

cut by the new French ambassador."
"Did you hear of the last event at the review in Petersburg? The figure

his throat to draw attention.
There was a momentary pause in the conversation; the old general cleared

unnaturally.
of laws for Russia. Nowadays they are always writing!" and he laughed
only but even new laws. My Andrew there has written a whole volume
the old prince. "There in Petersburg they are always writing--not notes
"One would have thought quill drivers enough had sprung up," remarked

the Note.
Pierre now understood the count's dissatisfaction with the wording of

to have a good style," returned Count Rostopchin.
"My dear fellow, with our five hundred thousand troops it should be easy

its substance is forcible?"
"Does it matter, Count, how the Note is worded," he asked, "so long as

why he should be disturbed by the bad composition of the Note.
Pierre looked at Rostopchin with naive astonishment, not understanding

tone of a man dealing with a subject quite familiar to him.
how badly the Note was worded," remarked Count Rostopchin in the casual
"I have read our protests about the Oldenburg affair and was surprised

evidently considering him too young.
man as if about to say something in reply, but changed his mind,
of being presented to the Duke. Prince Bolkonski glanced at the young
He said this because on his journey from Petersburg he had had the honor

character and resignation," remarked Boris, joining in respectfully.
"The Duke of Oldenburg bears his misfortunes with admirable strength of

move my serfs from Bald Hills to Bogucharovo or my Ryazan estates."
Oldenburg," said Prince Bolkonski. "He shifts the Dukes about as I might
"Other territories have been offered in exchange for the Duchy of

limit beyond which censure was impossible.
and even..." Count Rostopchin paused, feeling that he had reached the
has protested against the seizure of the Duke of Oldenburg's territory,
head of the Catholic Church--yet all keep silent! Our sovereign alone
Now the Pope's turn has come and Bonaparte doesn't scruple to depose the
only wonders at the long-suffering or blindness of the crowned heads.
Rostopchin, repeating a phrase he had uttered several times before. "One
"Bonaparte treats Europe as a pirate does a captured vessel," said Count

hostile to Napoleon, which had been sent to all the European courts.
seizure of the Duke of Oldenburg's territory, and the Russian Note,
At dinner the talk turned on the latest political news: Napoleon's

point beyond which his criticism might touch the sovereign himself.
giving an opinion the speaker always stopped, or was stopped, at the
everything was going from bad to worse, but whether telling a story or
world. Incidents were related evidently confirming the opinion that
indicated that no one approved of what was being done in the political
what was being reported to him. The tone of the conversation was such as
now and then, silently or by a brief word, showing that he took heed of
Prince Bolkonski listened as a presiding judge receives a report, only
Lopukhin and the old general occasionally took part in the conversation.

and now the latest political gossip.
alone kept the conversation going, now relating the latest town news,
feeling that she was in no mood for their conversation. Count Rostopchin
and more diffident than usual. The guests were reluctant to address her,
Nicholas came in serious and taciturn. Princess Mary seemed even quieter
a court of justice. All were silent or talked in low tones. Prince
drawing room with its old furniture resembled the solemn gathering of
The small group that assembled before dinner in the lofty old-fashioned

"Oh, yes, yes!" replied the commander in chief. "How is he?..."

Nicholas Bolkonski."
"On that day I always go to pay my devotions to the relics of Prince

Rostopchin had replied that he could not come:
in his presence invited Rostopchin to dinner on St. Nicholas' Day, and
Boris had realized this the week before when the commander in chief
town--was one it was more flattering to be received in than any other.
society, but his little circle--though not much talked about in
The prince's house did not belong to what is known as fashionable

exception to the rule of not receiving bachelors in his house.
to ingratiate himself so well that the old prince in his case made an
anxious to be presented to Prince Nicholas Bolkonski, and had contrived
Boris, who had come to Moscow on leave a few days before, had been

the drawing room.
younger generation Pierre and Boris Drubetskoy--awaited the prince in
nephew, General Chatrov an old war comrade of the prince's, and of the
These guests--the famous Count Rostopchin, Prince Lopukhin with his

At two o'clock the six chosen guests assembled for dinner.

Mademoiselle Bourienne, and subsided into his study.
"If only some fool would marry her!" Then he slammed the door, sent for

screamed:
is capable, evidently suffering himself, he shook his fists at her and
restrain himself and with the virulence of which only one who loves
out--we must part; so find some place for yourself...." But he could not
anger. I am calm. I have thought it over, and it will be carried
to appear calm added: "And don't imagine I have said this in a moment of
afraid she might find some means of consolation, he returned and trying
it! I cannot endure any more," he said, and left the room. Then, as if
"No, ma'am! We must part, we must part! Understand that, understand

could not have a moment's peace and could not die quietly.
scoundrel admitted? She was the cause of it all. With her, he said, he
and not to admit anyone who was not on that list? Then why was that
had been admitted. Had he not told her, yes, told her to make a list,
the whole weight of his wrath fell on her. She was to blame that a spy
After Metivier's departure the old prince called his daughter in, and

house!"
"Spies, traitors, traitors everywhere! Not a moment's peace in my own
Through the study door came the sound of slippered feet and the cry:

fingers to his lips he hastened away.
Keep calm, I will call again tomorrow," said Metivier; and putting his
"The prince is not very well: bile and rush of blood to the head.

at the sound of shouting had run in from an adjoining room.
Metivier, shrugging his shoulders, went up to Mademoiselle Bourienne who

of Buonaparte, spy, get out of my house! Be off, I tell you..."
"You don't understand?" shouted the prince, "but I do! French spy, slave

downwards.
fez, his face distorted with fury and the pupils of his eyes rolled
with his shock of black hair, and the prince in his dressing gown and
on the threshold appeared the handsome figure of the terrified Metivier
voices began speaking at the same time, the door was flung open, and
At first she heard only Metivier's voice, then her father's, then both


    * To force the guard.


could hear all that passed in the study.
down with a book in the drawing room near the door through which she
had passed off safely. After admitting the doctor, Princess Mary sat
awaited the inevitable explosion. Until the doctor's arrival the morning
went about all that morning as though facing a cocked and loaded gun and
querulousness, which generally culminated in a burst of rage, and she
understood himself. Princess Mary well knew this mood of quiet absorbed
and pretending not to understand what was said to him and not to be
been going about the house all the morning finding fault with everyone
morning of his name day the prince was in one of his worst moods. He had
Princess Mary, and went in to see the prince. It happened that on that
it proper in his quality of doctor de forcer la consigne, * as he told
Metivier, who came in the morning with his felicitations, considered

Princess Mary.
and to invite to dinner only a small number, a list of whom he gave to
came to the prince's front door but he gave orders to admit no one
On December 6--St. Nicholas' Day and the prince's name day--all Moscow

a week.
had grown accustomed to him. Metivier came to see the prince about twice
Mademoiselle Bourienne's advice had allowed this doctor to visit him and
Prince Nicholas had always ridiculed medicine, but latterly on

as an equal.
doctor. He was received in the best houses not merely as a doctor, but
as Frenchmen are, and was, as all Moscow said, an extraordinarily clever
rapidly become the fashion. He was enormously tall, handsome, amiable
In 1811 there was living in Moscow a French doctor--Metivier--who had


CHAPTER III





herself.
him!" she thought at such moments, with a feeling of revulsion against
sink over his plate. "He is old and feeble, and I dare to condemn
would suddenly fall asleep, letting his napkin drop and his shaking head
or, worst of all, at dinner when there were no visitors to excite him
his failing legs and turn to see if anyone had noticed his feebleness,
would forget something that had just occurred, or take a false step with
spectacles in her presence, fumbling near them and not seeing them, or
soul. And suddenly that father whom she had judged would look for his
At such moments something like a pride of sacrifice gathered in her

for her intervention.
father's pardon for herself and for Philip the footman, who had begged
Princess Mary asked Mademoiselle Bourienne's pardon, and also her

Don't let me set eyes on you; beg her pardon!"
dared to do yesterday, I will show you who is master in this house. Go!
Mary for the first time, "to forget yourself again before her as you
"And if you allow yourself," he screamed in a fury, addressing Princess
first person in this house; she's my best friend," cried the prince.
"He doesn't obey... I said it twice... and he doesn't obey! She is the

conscripted for the army.
threw his stick at Philip, and instantly gave instructions to have him
habit began with the princess, the prince suddenly grew furious,
served first. After dinner, when the footman handed coffee and from
that at dinner he gave orders that Mademoiselle Bourienne should be
Next day the prince did not say a word to his daughter, but she noticed

"Leave my room," she exclaimed, and burst into sobs.
inhuman, to take advantage of the weakness..." She did not finish.
haste at the Frenchwoman, her voice breaking: "It's horrible, vile,
evidently unconscious of what she was doing began shouting in angry
away her tears, went resolutely up to Mademoiselle Bourienne, and
cheerful remarks in her agreeable voice. Princess Mary hastily wiped
Mademoiselle Bourienne came into Princess Mary's room smiling and making
Princess Mary flushed and ran out of the room. A few minutes later
Bourienne's hand and, drawing her to him, embraced her affectionately.
did it purposely when she was there) the old prince kissed Mademoiselle
One day in Moscow in Princess Mary's presence (she thought her father

demonstrations of love of Bourienne.
the companion and expressed his dissatisfaction with his daughter by
Princess Mary merely to offend her, shown special endearments to
pleased him, and latterly he had persistently, and as it seemed to
if Andrew got married he himself would marry Bourienne--had evidently
the news of his son's intentions had occurred to him in jest--that
Mademoiselle Bourienne. The idea that at the first moment of receiving
Mary more than anything else; this was his ever-increasing intimacy with
everything. Of late he had exhibited a new trait that tormented Princess
her deliberately, but to show her that she was always to blame for
tormented himself and her--knew how not merely to hurt and humiliate
loving despot--the more cruel because he loved her and for that reason
would never have entered her mind to think her position hard; but this
ground all night, had he beaten her or made her fetch wood or water, it
amounted to cruelty. Had he forced her to prostrate herself to the
irritability, which was always directed against her and had of late
her. But what distressed the princess most of all was her father's
corner, come to her, pull her wet hands from her face, and comfort
following her example, would sob, and without permission would leave his
herself begin to cry over her cruel, evil nature, and little Nicholas,
arm and put him in the corner. Having put him in the corner she would
flustered and heated, raised her voice, and sometimes pulled him by the
get angry--that at his slightest inattention she trembled, became
into the child--who was already afraid that Auntie might at any moment
alphabet, she so longed to pour her own knowledge quickly and easily
every time that, pointer in hand, she sat down to show him the French
herself that she must not get irritable when teaching her nephew, almost
some symptoms of her father's irritability. However often she told
consternation she detected in herself in relation to little Nicholas
sorrow arose from the lessons she gave her six year-old nephew. To her
usually in a bad temper) lost control of himself. Another lately added
of the young Countess Rostova the old prince (who apart from that was
fact, it seemed as if matters were quite hopeless, for at every mention
request to her to prepare his father for it had not been carried out; in
time for Prince Andrew's return and marriage was approaching, but his
to confide her sorrow, and much sorrow fell to her lot just then. The
write to. In Moscow Princess Mary had no one to talk to, no one to whom
evenings for years, she regretted Julie's presence and having no one to
the old emigre who declined to marry the lady with whom he had spent his
presence gave her no pleasure was here and they met every week. Like
mournful smile that she now had no one to write to, since Julie--whose
decided now or never. On Thursdays Princess Mary remembered with a
that her last chance of marrying has come and that her fate must be
Julie was at that stage in the life of a society woman when she feels
men who, she fancied, had suddenly learned to appreciate her worth.
was in the full whirl of society pleasures. She was surrounded by young
death of her brothers had become one of the richest heiresses in Moscow,
to be quite alien to her when they met. Just then Julie, who by the
she had corresponded for the last five years, was in Moscow, but proved
her, and for various reasons Princess Mary avoided her. Julie, with whom
she had never been able to be quite frank, had now become unpleasant to
the two who had been nearest to her. Mademoiselle Bourienne, with whom
had no friends: during this visit to Moscow she had been disappointed in
young men, possible suitors, who sometimes appeared at their house. She
and malevolence with which the old prince received and dismissed the
had quite abandoned the hope of getting married. She saw the coldness
himself, so that she was not invited to dinners and evening parties. She
anywhere without him, and his failing health prevented his going out
out into society; everyone knew that her father would not let her go
had none of the advantages and pleasures of city life. She did not go
the pilgrims and the solitude which refreshed her at Bald Hills--and she
There in Moscow she was deprived of her greatest pleasures--talks with
Latterly that private life had become very trying for Princess Mary.

private and intimate life of the house continued.
their host, there were also twenty-two hours in the day during which the
did not reflect that besides the couple of hours during which they saw
to him presented a majestic and agreeable spectacle. But the visitors
gentle daughter and the pretty Frenchwoman who were reverently devoted
the stern shrewd old man (himself a relic of the past century) with his
its gigantic mirrors, pre-Revolution furniture, powdered footmen, and
criticisms of the present. For them all, that old-fashioned house with
abrupt stories of the past, or uttered yet more abrupt and scathing
old-fashioned coat and powdered wig and, aroused by anyone, told his
veneration--especially of an evening when he came in to tea in his
the old man inspired in all his visitors alike a feeling of respectful
he accepted the role of head of the Moscow opposition. In spite of this
events, remembrance of remote ones, and the childish vanity with which
senility by a tendency to fall asleep, forgetfulness of quite recent
The prince had aged very much that year. He showed marked signs of

opposition to the government.
particular respect to the Moscovites and the center of the Moscow
originality, at once made Prince Nicholas Bolkonski an object of
there, and this, together with his past and his intellect and his
regime had weakened and a patriotic and anti-French tendency prevailed
moved to Moscow. At that time enthusiasm for the Emperor Alexander's
At the beginning of winter Prince Nicholas Bolkonski and his daughter


CHAPTER II





can," thought Pierre. "Only not to see it, that dreadful it!"
important, it's all the same--only to save oneself from it as best one
and some in governmental affairs. "Nothing is trivial, and nothing is
toys, some in horses, some in politics, some in sport, some in wine,
ambition, some in cards, some in framing laws, some in women, some in
all men seemed like those soldiers, seeking refuge from life: some in
to find some occupation the more easily to bear the danger. To Pierre
entrenched under the enemy's fire, if they have nothing to do, try hard
Sometimes he remembered how he had heard that soldiers in war when

if anyone came to see him he was glad.
insoluble and terrible as ever, and Pierre hastily picked up a book, and
In the morning, on an empty stomach, all the old questions appeared as

all out later on!" But the later on never came.
unraveled. I have a solution ready, but have no time now--I'll think it
influence of wine he said to himself: "It doesn't matter. I'll get it
supper he chatted or listened to conversation or read. But under the
aspect of that skein, as with a buzzing in his head after dinner or
not as dreadful as he had thought. He was always conscious of some
terribly tangled skein of life which previously had terrified him was
deeply. Only after emptying a bottle or two did he feel dimly that the
readiness to respond superficially to every idea without probing it
warmth in his body, an amiability toward all his fellows, and a
glasses of wine mechanically into his large mouth he felt a pleasant
drank a great deal. He was only quite at ease when having poured several
warned him that with his corpulence wine was dangerous for him, he
and more a physical and also a moral necessity. Though the doctors
from carousals back to gossip, reading, and wine. Drinking became more
gossip in drawing rooms of the Club, from gossip to carousals and women;
began to read. From reading he passed to sleeping, from sleeping to
his valets were still taking off his things, he picked up a book and
He read, and read everything that came to hand. On coming home, while

pictures, engaged in building, and above all--read.
to forget them. He frequented every kind of society, drank much, bought
insoluble problems, so he abandoned himself to any distraction in order
occupation. It was too dreadful to be under the burden of these
and blocked every path of activity. Yet he had to live and to find
be, whatever he engaged in, the evil and falsehood of it repulsed him
connected, in his eyes, with evil and deception. Whatever he tried to
to be able to take a serious part in it. Every sphere of work was
and truth, but of seeing the evil and falsehood of life too clearly
Russians, have of seeing and believing in the possibility of goodness
me?" thought he. He had the unfortunate capacity many men, especially
it. So it appears that it must be so! But I--what is to become of
depths of their souls understand it as I do, and only try not to see
all that I see? I have tried, and have always found that they too in the
the deception and confusion," he thought, "but how am I to tell them
it, astonished him each time as if it were something new. "I understand
this general deception which everyone accepts, accustomed as he was to
cross to kiss before his execution." So thought Pierre, and the whole of
of that same law of love and forgiveness, a priest, gave the soldier a
churches--but yesterday a deserter was knouted to death and a minister
the law in honor of which we have built in Moscow forty times forty
the Christian law of forgiveness of injuries and love of our neighbors,
of which the very man who wrote it does not understand. We all profess
authentic Scotch carpet and a charter that nobody needs, and the meaning
intrigue, the Astraea Lodge against the Manna Seekers, and fuss about an
do not give a ruble each to the collections for the poor, and they
they are ready to sacrifice everything for their neighbor, but they
they defeated the Spaniards. My brother Masons swear by the blood that
Catholic clergy, offer praise because on that same fourteenth of June
French on the fourteenth of June, and the French, also through the
the Catholic clergy, offer praise to God for their victory over the
to offer him his daughter in an illegal marriage. The Spaniards, through
but now that he has become a wretched comedian the Emperor Francis wants
to her. Napoleon Bonaparte was despised by all as long as he was great,
people as the acme of intelligence and refinement, and they pay homage
of the stupidest women in the world," thought Pierre, "is regarded by
"Helene, who has never cared for anything but her own body and is one

Nikolaevich's, to exchange the gossip of the town.
from them, and took up a book, or hurried of to the Club or to Apollon
there were no answers to these questions he made haste to turn away
on the meaning of the phenomena of life; but knowing by experience that
perplexity several times a day, involuntarily beginning to reflect anew
"What for? Why? What is going on in the world?" he would ask himself in
acute attacks was driven inwards and never left him for a moment.
with life, but the malady that had formerly found expression in such
Pierre no longer suffered moments of despair, hypochondria, and disgust

comrades in destiny, as he pitied himself.
despised, but began to grow fond of, to respect, and to pity his
moments of humility; and after living some time in Moscow he no longer
man is powerless--to the condition I am in," said he to himself in
circumstances, society, and race--by that elemental force against which
path in life of their own, and like me were brought by force of
comrades of mine struggled just like me and sought something new, a
discontented and want to do something for mankind. But perhaps all these
contented fellows, satisfied with their position, "while I am still
gentlemen-in-waiting he had formerly despised: they were empty, stupid,
him that he was quite different and distinct from those other retired
In moments of pride, when he thought of his position it seemed to

tooth or hair remained.
with all their teeth and hair, and had only left it when not a single
many, like himself, had entered that life and that Club temporarily,
this life temporarily; but then he was shocked by the thought of how
Sometimes he consoled himself with the thought that he was only living

he had so despised seven years before.
idea that he was one of those same retired Moscow gentlemen-in-waiting
Moscow society. For a long time he could not reconcile himself to the
a bit, a member of the Moscow English Club, and a universal favorite in
drinking and, as he unbuttoned his waistcoat, of abusing the government
unfaithful wife, a retired gentleman-in-waiting, fond of eating and
But instead of all that--here he was, the wealthy husband of an

Had he not established schools and hospitals and liberated his serfs?
human race, and his own progress to the highest degree of perfection?
possibility of, and passionately desired, the regeneration of the sinful
a strategist and the conqueror of Napoleon? Had he not seen the
then himself to be a Napoleon; then to be a philosopher; and then
time longed with all his heart to establish a republic in Russia;
his position were. He could not have believed it! Had he not at one
predetermined, and that wriggle as he might, he would be what all in
to seek or plan anything, that his rut had long been shaped, eternally
arrived from abroad, had he been told that there was no need for him
How horrified he would have been seven years before, when he first

hundreds good-humoredly ending their days in Moscow.
Pierre was one of those retired gentlemen-in-waiting of whom there were


    * "He is charming; he has no sex."


n'a pas de sexe," * they said of him.
equally amiable to all, especially after supper. "Il est charmant; il
unmarried, liked him because without making love to any of them, he was
At balls he danced if a partner was needed. Young ladies, married and
with them, shouts of delight and triumph arose among the young men.
yielding to the entreaties of the festive company to drive off somewhere
When after a bachelor supper he rose with his amiable and kindly smile,

there.
antagonists. The Masonic dinners were dull and dreary when he was not
were quarrels, his kindly smile and well-timed jests reconciled the
surrounded, and talking, disputing, and joking began. When there
he sank into his place on the sofa after two bottles of Margaux he was
There was never a dinner or soiree at the Club without him. As soon as
taken him under their protection, he would have given everything away.
had it not been for two friends who had borrowed large sums from him and
churches, and books--no one and nothing met with a refusal from him, and
gypsy choirs, schools, subscription dinners, sprees, Freemasons,
Benefit performances, poor pictures, statues, benevolent societies,

everyone.
the old Russian type. His purse was always empty because it was open to
merriest, and most magnanimous of cranks, a heedless, genial nobleman of
For Moscow society Pierre was the nicest, kindest, most intellectual,
like a long-expected guest whose place was always ready awaiting him.
Moscow society, from the old women down to the children, received Pierre

dirty as in an old dressing gown.
at home in a quiet haven. In Moscow he felt at peace, at home, warm and
Moscow ladies, the Moscow balls, and the English Club, he felt himself
nowhere, and were ending their days leisurely; when he saw those old
the Sivtsev Vrazhok, those old Moscovites who desired nothing, hurried
with its snow undisturbed by vehicles, the sleigh drivers and hovels of
tapers burning before the golden covers of the icons, the Kremlin Square
driving through the town, he saw the Iberian shrine with innumerable
fading princesses still lived, with its enormous retinue; as soon as,
In Moscow as soon as he entered his huge house in which the faded and

to avoid compromising her went away to Moscow.
to speak severely to him about it. Pierre felt that she was right, and
sets, leading such a life that the Countess Helene thought it necessary
again, drank a great deal, and came once more in touch with the bachelor
a diary, avoided the company of the Brothers, began going to the Club
life suddenly seemed to Pierre unexpectedly loathsome. He ceased keeping
Petersburg, and his court service with its dull formalities. And this
enjoyed the favors of a very important personage, acquaintance with all
Only the skeleton of life remained: his house, a brilliant wife who now
Alexeevich, the news of which reached him almost at the same time.
after the engagement of Andrew and Natasha and the death of Joseph
devoted himself with such ardor--all the zest of such a life vanished
and happy as he had been in perfecting his inner man, to which he had
convinced as he was of the truths revealed to him by his benefactor,
cause suddenly felt it impossible to go on living as before. Firmly
After Prince Andrew's engagement to Natasha, Pierre without any apparent


CHAPTER I





BOOK EIGHT: 1811 - 12





Natasha with him, went to Moscow at the end of January.
So the countess remained in the country, and the count, taking Sonya and

winter, and Natasha felt sure he had already arrived.
was expected in Moscow, where old Prince Bolkonski was spending the
trousseau had to be ordered and the house sold. Moreover, Prince Andrew
impossible to defer the journey to Moscow any longer. Natasha's
There was still no improvement in the countess' health, but it was

countess corrected her mistakes in spelling.
she attached no importance herself, and in the rough copies of which the
glance. She wrote to him formal, monotonous, and dry letters, to which
even a thousandth part of what she expressed by voice, smile, and
could not conceive the possibility of expressing sincerely in a letter
wearisome and artificial obligation. She could not write, because she
Her letters to him, far from giving her any comfort, seemed to her a
him. The more interesting his letters were the more vexed she felt.
was living a real life, seeing new places and new people that interested
It hurt her to think that while she lived only in the thought of him, he
tormented her incessantly. His letters for the most part irritated her.
in loving him, were being vainly wasted, with no advantage to anyone,
day. The thought that her best days, which she would have employed
lightly and even cheerfully, now grew more agitated and impatient every
Natasha, who had borne the first period of separation from her betrothed

departure from day to day.
to go to Moscow. But the countess' health obliged them to delay their
estate near Moscow had inevitably to be sold, and for this they had
affairs, which called for some decisive action. Their town house and
her. The count was more perturbed than ever by the condition of his
account of the hostile tone the countess could not help adopting toward
Sonya was unhappy at the separation from Nicholas and still more so on

depressing than ever, and the countess fell ill from mental agitation.
After Nicholas had gone things in the Rostov household were more

regiment.
passionately in love, left at the beginning of January to rejoin his
sorrowful, and at variance with his parents, but, as it seemed to him,
to retire from the army and return and marry Sonya, Nicholas, serious,
Firmly resolved, after putting his affairs in order in the regiment,

without his parents' knowledge.
be troubled, while he on his side promised not to undertake anything
that Nicholas received a promise from his mother that Sonya should not
Natasha set to work to effect a reconciliation, and so far succeeded

while Nicholas rose, clutching his head, and left the room.
The countess, sobbing heavily, hid her face on her daughter's breast,

was aiming.
Her words were incoherent, but they attained the purpose at which she

Natasha.
"Nicholas, I'll explain to you. Go away! Listen, Mamma darling," said

excitement of the conflict could not and would not give way.
a rupture gazed at her son with terror, but in the obstinacy and
said to her mother, who conscious that they had been on the brink of
"Mamma darling, it's not at all so... my poor, sweet darling," she

tell you!..." she almost screamed, so as to drown his voice.
"Nicholas, you are talking nonsense! Be quiet, be quiet, be quiet, I

which she had been listening.
for Natasha, with a pale and set face, entered the room from the door at
forever remained a cruel memory to them both. He had not time to say it,
caused his mother to await with terror, and which would perhaps have
had no time to utter the decisive word which the expression of his face
feelings, but if that were so, he would say for the last time.... But he
his mother he had never expected her to try to force him to sell his
Exploding at the word intriguer, Nicholas, raising his voice, told

receive that intriguer as her daughter.
father's consent, and he could do the same, but that she would never
replied that he was of age, that Prince Andrew was marrying without his
The countess, with a coldness her son had never seen in her before,

at once marry her secretly.
their marriage, then he threatened that if she molested Sonya he would
mother. He first implored her to forgive him and Sonya and consent to
situation to be intolerable and went to have an explanation with his
love. She was silent and sad and did not reply. Nicholas felt the
help loving Nicholas and knowing that his happiness depended on that
loving the countess and the whole Rostov family, but neither could she
not see what she ought to sacrifice, or for whom. She could not help
Self-sacrifice was her most cherished idea but in this case she could
of her. She was ready to sacrifice everything for her benefactors.
to the countess' cruel words, without understanding what was required
Nicholas and for ingratitude. Sonya listened silently with downcast eyes
neither of them expected, reproached her niece for trying to catch
but a few days later the countess sent for Sonya and, with a cruelty
The father and mother did not speak of the matter to their son again,

finances.
his uncomfortable habits was to blame for the condition of the family
been wished for, and that no one but himself with his Mitenka and
been in disorder, no better wife for Nicholas than Sonya could have
was only more vividly conscious of the fact that if his affairs had not
marry an heiress and choosing the dowerless Sonya. On this occasion, he
family fortune, and so he could not be angry with him for refusing to
was always conscious of his own guilt toward him for having wasted the
went in to the countess. In all his encounters with his son, the count
father, sighing and evidently disconcerted, very soon became silent and
purpose. Nicholas replied that he could not go back on his word, and his
count began irresolutely to admonish Nicholas and beg him to abandon his
herself she burst into tears of vexation and left the room. The old
inform him of the facts, in her son's presence, but unable to restrain
she sent for her husband and, when he came, tried briefly and coldly to
for him, she would not give way. Coldly, without looking at her son,
felt that his mother was displeased with him and that, despite her love
give their blessing to such a marriage. Nicholas, for the first time,
might marry whom he pleased, but that neither she nor his father would
declaration, listened to him in silence and then told her son that he
long noticed what was going on between them and was expecting this
for Sonya and of his firm resolve to marry her. The countess, who had
Soon after the Christmas holidays Nicholas told his mother of his love


CHAPTER XIII





moonlight through the frosty windowpanes.
after her candle was out lay open-eyed and motionless, gazing at the
without replying to Sonya's words of comfort she got into bed, and long
I am for him and for myself and about everything!..." Natasha began, and
"Sonya! When will he come back? When shall I see him! O, God, how afraid

red..."
"After that, I could not make out what there was; something blue and

"Well, and then, Sonya?..."

seen what she described.
turned to me." And when saying this she herself fancied she had really
"No, on the contrary, on the contrary! His face was cheerful, and he

her friend.
"Andrew lying? Is he ill?" asked Natasha, her frightened eyes fixed on

"No, I saw... At first there was nothing, then I saw him lying down."

"How? Standing or lying?"

"Yes, I saw him," she said.

tell whether I saw anything or not?" flashed through Sonya's mind.
"But why shouldn't I say I saw something? Others do see! Besides who can

knowing whom Natasha meant by him, Nicholas or Prince Andrew.
"Yes. Wait a bit... I... saw him," Sonya could not help saying, not yet

"You saw him?" urged Natasha, seizing her hand.

covered her eyes.
She did not herself know how or why the exclamation escaped her when she
disappoint either Dunyasha or Natasha, but it was hard to sit still.
up when she heard Natasha say, "Of course she will!" She did not wish to
Sonya had not seen anything, she was just wanting to blink and to get

looking glass.
"Did you see? Did you? What was it?" exclaimed Natasha, holding up the

"Oh, Natasha!" she cried.

her hand.
Sonya pushed away the glass she was holding and covered her eyes with
"Of course she will!" whispered Natasha, but did not finish... suddenly

For about three minutes all were silent.

"I know she will. She saw something last year."

Sonya heard this and Natasha's whisper:

you do nothing but laugh."
"Now, Miss Sonya is sure to see something," whispered Dunyasha; "while

looking.
Sonya sat down before the glasses, got the right position, and began

frightened!"
Sonya. You absolutely must, tonight! Do it for me.... Today I feel so
"Why is it others see things and I don't?" she said. "You sit down now,

She began blinking rapidly and moved away from the looking glasses.
smallest speck for the image of a man or of a coffin, she saw nothing.
last dim, indistinctly outlined square. But ready as she was to take the
tales she had heard) to see a coffin, or him, Prince Andrew, in that
receding line of candles reflected in the glasses and expecting (from
expression and she sat silent. She sat a long time looking at the
the right position opposite the other; her face assumed a serious
With Sonya's help and the maid's, Natasha got the glass she held into

"You mustn't laugh, Miss," said Dunyasha.

"I see someone with a mustache," said Natasha, seeing her own face.

and sat down.
Natasha lit the candles, one on each side of one of the looking glasses,

"Sit down, Natasha; perhaps you'll see him," said Sonya.

good!" said Natasha, rising and going to the looking glasses.
"Only when will all that be? I am afraid never.... It would be too

Dunyasha had prepared beforehand.
happy they would be. On Natasha's table stood two looking glasses which
when they were married, how their husbands would be friends, and how
long time talking of their happiness. They talked of how they would live
had undressed, but without washing off the cork mustaches, they sat a
evening at the Melyukovs', the girls went to their bedroom. When they
When they reached home and had told their mother how they had spent the

wife.
was Sonya, and that Sonya was certainly his future happy and loving
from under a sable hood, was still sitting there, and that Circassian
happy, smiling Circassian, with mustache and beaming eyes looking up
and, his boots scrunching the snow, ran back to his sleigh. The same
of his sister's face to see if she was in earnest. Then he jumped down
"Then it's all right?" said Nicholas, again scrutinizing the expression

Sonya, for there is nothing but good in her."
nearly stormed at Mamma. I will never let anyone say anything bad of
Mamma said she was angling for you. How could she say such a thing! I
"Oh, quite right! I had a quarrel with Mamma some time ago about it.

"So you are glad and I have done right?"

all would have been well."
ago have asked her what to do and have done whatever she told me, and
"Had I seen her before as she is now," thought Nicholas, "I should long

"Yes," she replied. "You have done splendidly."

magical, isn't it?"
bewitchingly tender that he had not seen in her before. "Natasha, it's
into her face and finding in his sister too something new, unusual, and
"No, wait a bit.... Oh, how funny you look!" cried Nicholas, peering

her."
Sonya was not," continued Natasha. "Now I am so glad! Well, run back to
Nicholas! I am horrid sometimes, but I was ashamed to be happy while
tell you, but you have been treating her badly. What a heart she has,
"I am so glad, so glad! I was beginning to be vexed with you. I did not

Natasha--are you glad?"
"Oh, how strange you are with that mustache and those eyebrows!...

"Have you told her?" asked Natasha, suddenly beaming all over with joy.

about Sonya?"
"Natasha!" he whispered in French, "do you know I have made up my mind

a moment to Natasha's sleigh and stood on its wing.
When halfway home Nicholas handed the reins to the coachman and ran for

"Yes!" she replied. "And with thee?"

"Sonya, is it well with thee?" he asked from time to time.

fairyland.
flying beneath him and at the sparkling sky, felt himself again in
inhaled the frosty air with a full breast and, looking at the ground
being reminded by the smell of burnt cork of the sensation of her kiss,
looked and recognizing in her both the old and the new Sonya, and
present Sonya from whom he had resolved never to be parted again. He
and searching beneath the eyebrows and mustache for his former and his
kept peering by that fantastic all-transforming light into Sonya's face
On the way back Nicholas drove at a steady pace instead of racing and

maids.
go back in the sleigh with Dimmler, and Sonya with Nicholas and the
saw and noticed everything, arranged that she and Madame Schoss should
When they all drove back from Pelageya Danilovna's, Natasha, who always


CHAPTER XII





then back again, re-entering, he by the front and she by the back porch.
"Sonya!... Nicholas!"... was all they said. They ran to the barn and

them to his cheeks.
kissed him full on the lips, and disengaging her little hands pressed
on the lips that wore a mustache and had a smell of burnt cork. Sonya
that covered her head, embraced her, pressed her to him, and kissed her
face all lit up by the moonlight. He slipped his arms under the cloak
"Quite different and yet the same," thought Nicholas, looking at her

tousled hair and a happy smile new to Sonya. She ran rapidly toward him.
had known and always slightly feared. He was in a woman's dress, with
away when she saw him, and to her too he was not the Nicholas she
Sonya came along, wrapped in her cloak. She was only a couple of paces

shoes.
Nicholas came the crunching, whistling sound of Sonya's feet in her thin
"I am not afraid," answered Sonya's voice, and along the path toward

path, Miss. Only, don't look back."
the voice of an old maidservant saying, "Straight, straight, along the
bottom step upon which snow had fallen gave a ringing creak and he heard
From the back porch came the sound of feet descending the steps, the

seemed to inhale not air but the strength of eternal youth and gladness.
with the frost, and then all was again perfectly silent. His bosom
precious stone, sparkled in the moonlight. A tree in the garden snapped
barn and its snow-covered roof, that looked as if hewn out of some
snow and on the path. This path led to the barn. The log walls of the
along them a network of shadows from the bare old lime trees fell on the
that way. Halfway lay some snow-covered piles of firewood and across and
along the path that led to the back porch. He knew Sonya would pass
and running out from the porch he went round the corner of the house and
"I am a fool, a fool! what have I been waiting for?" thought Nicholas,

gay.
stars were unnoticed. The sky was black and dreary, while the earth was
so many stars that one did not wish to look up at the sky and the real
brighter than before. The light was so strong and the snow sparkled with
Outside, there was the same cold stillness and the same moon, but even

had made the house stuffy.
to the front porch, saying he felt too hot. The crowd of people really
Sonya went out into the passage to go to the barn. Nicholas went hastily

thinking of till now?"
"What a darling that girl is!" thought he. "And what have I been

shoulders and glanced at Nicholas.
and they handed her a fur cloak. She threw this over her head and
They told her where the barn was and how she should stand and listen,

up.
"I'm not afraid of anything," said Sonya. "May I go at once?" She got

dimpled her cheeks, a smile he had never seen before.
at her sparkling eyes, and under the mustache a happy rapturous smile
"So that's what she is like; what a fool I have been!" he thought gazing

than Nicholas had ever seen her before.
really, that evening, Sonya was brighter, more animated, and prettier
to that burnt-cork mustache, that he had fully learned to know her. And
with quite new eyes. It seemed to him that it was only today, thanks
talking as now, Nicholas did not leave Sonya's side, and gazed at her
Whether they were playing the ring and string game or the ruble game or

"Louisa Ivanovna, may I?" asked Sonya.

"Well, why not, if you're not afraid?"

"Yes, I will; Pelageya Danilovna, let me! I'll go," said Sonya.

"Oh, I've forgotten..." she replied. "But none of you would go?"

Pelageya Danilovna smiled.

"Mamma, tell us what happened to you in the barn."

grain is good and one sometimes hears that, too."
you hear; hammering and knocking--that's bad; but a sound of shifting
"Well, say you went to the barn now, and listened. It depends on what

"And how does one do it in a barn?" inquired Sonya.

"Mamma, you used to try your fate yourself..." said her daughter.

"Now, why frighten them?" said Pelageya Danilovna.

caught her up. It was lucky the maids ran in just then..."
frightened, just got frightened and hid her face in her hands. Then he
her; and she should have kept him talking till cockcrow, but she got
"Yes, like a man. Everything quite all right, and he began persuading

"Yes? And how... did he speak?"

"Ah! ah!" screamed Natasha, rolling her eyes with horror.

man, like an officer--comes in and sits down to table with her."
harness bells; she hears him coming! He comes in, just in the shape of a
while, she suddenly hears someone coming... a sleigh drives up with
laid the table for two, all properly, and sat down. After sitting a
"Well," began the old maid, "a young lady once went out, took a cock,

"Tell what happened to the young lady!" said the second Melyukov girl.

"I'll go," said Sonya.

"You wouldn't go, it takes courage..."

"Why?" said the eldest Melyukov girl.

an old maid who lived with the Melyukovs, during supper.
"Now to tell one's fortune in the empty bathhouse is frightening!" said

serfs had something served to them in the ballroom.
well. The visitors were invited to supper in the drawing room, and the
young ladies, and she thanked them all for having entertained her so
their cleverly contrived costumes, and particularly how they suited the
merry faces. Pelageya Danilovna began to recognize the mummers, admired
eyebrows and mustaches were smeared over the perspiring, flushed, and
In an hour, all the costumes were crumpled and disordered. The corked

silver ruble were fetched and they all played games together.
the serfs and gentry join in one large circle: a ring, a string, and a
After Russian country dances and chorus dances, Pelageya Danilovna made

"My little Sasha! Look at Sasha!" she said.

irrepressible, kindly, elderly laughter.
her face in her handkerchief, and her whole stout body shook with
would recognize them--were not at all shy, Pelageya Danilovna hid
dancers, who--having decided once for all that being disguised, no one
Sometimes, as she looked at the strange but amusing capers cut by the

butler who was handing things round. "That's not forbidden by his law."
Natasha. "Here, hand some fruit jelly to the Turk!" she ordered the
Rostovs! Well, Mr. Hussar, and what regiment do you serve in?" she asked
own daughter dressed up as a Kazan-Tartar. "I suppose it is one of the
"And who is this?" she asked her governess, peering into the face of her

dressing gowns and uniforms, which they had put on.
she did not even recognize her own daughters, or her late husband's,
them. It was not merely Dimmler and the Rostovs she failed to recognize,
into their faces with a suppressed smile and failing to recognize any of
went about among the mummers without removing her spectacles, peering
visitors and arranged about refreshments for the gentry and the serfs,
Pelageya Danilovna, having given orders to clear the rooms for the

mummers.
behind the door. Ten minutes later, all the young Melyukovs joined the
were called for and received from the footman by bare girlish arms from
back rooms where a cork and various dressing gowns and male garments
Natasha, the young Melyukovs' favorite, disappeared with them into the

voices were saying.
Just like a boy! And the legs!... I can't look at him..." different
And we were sitting so quietly. Ha, ha, ha!... The hussar, the hussar!
Well, you have cheered us up! Nikita and Vanya--clear away the tables!
Circassian. Really, how becoming it is to dear Sonya. And who is that?
he good! I didn't know him! And how he dances. Dear me, there's a
like! She really reminds me of somebody. But Herr Dimmler--isn't
"Dear me! there's no recognizing them! And Natasha! See whom she looks

room.
their voices, bowed to their hostess and arranged themselves about the
the screaming children the mummers, covering their faces and disguising
clown--Dimmler--and the lady--Nicholas--started a dance. Surrounded by
came into the ballroom where candles were hurriedly lighted. The
throats and wiping the hoarfrost from their faces in the vestibule,
Hussars, ladies, witches, clowns, and bears, after clearing their

new arrivals in the vestibule.
figures would throw on the wall, when they heard the steps and voices of
quietly dropping melted wax into snow and looking at the shadows the wax
her daughters whom she was trying to keep from feeling dull. They were
spectacles, sat in the drawing room in a loose dress, surrounded by
Pelageya Danilovna Melyukova, a broadly built, energetic woman wearing


CHAPTER XI





voices.
"The mummers from the count's. I know by the horses," replied some

"Who is it?" asked someone in the porch.

running, out to the porch carrying candles.
It really was Melyukovka, and maids and footmen with merry faces came

have come to Melyukovka," thought Nicholas.
Melyukovka, it is still stranger that we drove heaven knows where and
buildings and the shrill yells of some animals. And if this is really
of diamonds and a flight of marble steps and the silver roofs of fairy
"But here was a fairy forest with black moving shadows, and a glitter

"Yes, yes!" some voices answered, laughing.

what he said.
shouted something--probably something funny--but they could not make out
They did not answer but began to laugh. Dimmler from the sleigh behind

"Aren't you cold?" he asked.

mustache I don't know, but I love her."
Madame Schoss, but perhaps it's not, and this Circassian with the
"I think this used to be Natasha," thought Nicholas, "and that was

mustache.
strange, pretty, unfamiliar people--the one with fine eyebrows and
"Look, his mustache and eyelashes are all white!" said one of the

And he looked round in the sleigh.
is happening to us--but it is very strange and pleasant whatever it is."
Melyukovka? Heaven only knows where we are going, and heaven knows what
left?" thought Nicholas. "Are we getting to the Melyukovs'? Is this
"Zakhar is shouting that I should turn to the left, but why to the

stars.
surrounded by the magic plain bathed in moonlight and spangled with
Again checking his horses, Nicholas looked around him. They were still

shrieking were heard from different sides.
The whistling sound of the runners on the snow and the voices of girls
swiftly moving legs and the shadows of the troyka they were passing.
them sounded quick ringing bells and they caught confused glimpses of
showered the fine dry snow on the faces of those in the sleigh--beside
Nicholas put all his horses to a gallop and passed Zakhar. The horses

"No you won't, master!" he shouted.

while still keeping his arms extended, raised one hand with the reins.
feet of the galloping side horses. Nicholas began to draw ahead. Zakhar,
Faster still the two troykas flew side by side, and faster moved the

"Now, look out, master!" he cried.

clucked his tongue and let his horses go.
Nicholas gave the horses the rein, and Zakhar, stretching out his arms,

covered with hoarfrost to his eyebrows.
Zakhar held back his horses and turned his face, which was already

to his horses, he began to pass the first sleigh.
something new and enchanted. Well, whatever it may be..." And shouting
meadow nor the Demkin hill, and heaven only knows what it is! It is
no--this is something new I've never seen before. This isn't the Kosoy
"Where are we?" thought he. "It's the Kosoy meadow, I suppose. But

coming out upon a broad trodden track across a meadow, near a river.
Nicholas overtook the first sleigh. They were driving downhill and

ready to put on speed when required.
beneath the bow over its head, with no thought of slackening pace and
to gallop--the other sleighs followed. The shaft horse swung steadily
screams squeals, and waving of whips that caused even the shaft horses
noticed how fast the troyka was flying. Nicholas looked back. With
side horses who pulled harder--ever increasing their gallop--that one
It was only by the keener wind that met them and the jerks given by the

and flourishing the whip.
"Gee up, my darlings!" shouted Nicholas, pulling the reins to one side

shouts, laughter, and voices of the mummers.
clearly seen against the white snow. From that sleigh one could hear the
farther and farther off, the black horses driven by Zakhar could be
now?" In front, already far ahead the deep bell of the sleigh ringing
side to side, moving his ears as if asking: "Isn't it time to begin
into a short canter, tugged at his traces. The shaft horse swayed from
increased their pace. The near side horse, arching his head and breaking
moonlight--the horses began to tug at the reins of their own accord and
and cut up by rough-shod hoofs, the marks of which were visible in the
When they came out onto the beaten highroad--polished by sleigh runners

"Nothing," said he and turned again to the horses.

"What is it, Nicholas?"

smiled.
"That used to be Sonya," thought he, and looked at her closer and

him from her sable furs--so close and yet so distant--in the moonlight.
Quite a new, sweet face with black eyebrows and mustaches peeped up at
Nicholas glanced round at Sonya, and bent down to see her face closer.

"How light it is, Nicholas!" came Sonya's voice.

frost-bound air.
"A hare's track, a lot of tracks!" rang out Natasha's voice through the

after the other.
frost-bound stillness, the troykas began to speed along the road, one
the other sleighs jolted in the same way, and rudely breaking the
first sleigh over a cradle hole in the snow of the road, and each of
like diamonds and dappled with bluish shadows. Bang, bang! went the
bathed in moonlight and motionless spread out before them glittering
moonlight, but as soon as they were past the fence, the snowy plain
of the bare trees often fell across the road and hid the brilliant
trot along the narrow road. While they drove past the garden the shadows
moved noisily, their runners squeaking. At first they drove at a steady
Nicholas set off, following the first sleigh; behind him the others

and threw it up.
middle horse, sank in the snow, which was dry and glittered like sugar,
bell clanging. The side horses, pressing against the shafts of the
squeaking on its runners as though freezing to the snow, its deep-toned
The old count's troyka, with Dimmler and his party, started forward,

wishing for a chance to race past him.
"You go ahead, Zakhar!" shouted Nicholas to his father's coachman,

mummers seated themselves in the other two sleighs.
Dimmler, his wife, and Petya, into the old count's, and the rest of the
Natasha, Sonya, Madame Schoss, and two maids got into Nicholas' sleigh;

at the noisy party under the shadow of the porch roof.
harness disks and from the eyes of the horses, who looked round in alarm
It was so light that he could see the moonlight reflected from the metal

overcoat, stood in the middle of the sleigh, reins in hand.
Nicholas, in his old lady's dress over which he had belted his hussar
the fourth was Nicholas' own with a short shaggy black shaft horse.
the old count's with a trotter from the Orlov stud as shaft horse,
Two of the troykas were the usual household sleighs, the third was

one another, laughing, and shouting.
came out into the frost and got into the sleighs, talking, calling to
from one to another, grew stronger and reached its climax when they all
Natasha was foremost in setting a merry holiday tone, which, passing

drove up to the porch.
small bells, their runners squeaking and whistling over the frozen snow,
consented to go, and in half an hour four troyka sleighs with large and
in her male attire she seemed quite a different person. Louisa Ivanovna
inner voice told her that now or never her fate would be decided, and
and she was in a spirited and energetic mood unusual with her. Some
extraordinarily becoming. Everyone told her she looked very handsome,
Sonya's costume was the best of all. Her mustache and eyebrows were

urgently than anyone begging Louisa Ivanovna not to refuse.
might go to the Melyukovs', Sonya, generally so timid and shy, more
if Louisa Ivanovna (Madame Schoss) would go with them, the young ladies
these last days. It was decided that the count must not go, but that
But the countess would not agree to his going; he had had a bad leg all

eyes."
"I'll dress up at once and go with them. I'll make Pashette open her
"That's right, my dear," chimed in the old count, thoroughly aroused.

governesses, lived three miles from the Rostovs.
Melyukova was a widow, who, with her family and their tutors and

Melyukovs'."
wouldn't have room to turn round there. If you must go, go to the
"No, why disturb the old fellow?" said the countess. "Besides, you

dozen of the serf mummers and drive to "Uncle's."
them all for a drive in his troyka, proposed to take with them about a
Nicholas, who, as the roads were in splendid condition, wanted to take

costumes were so good that they ought to be shown elsewhere.
who were not themselves dressed up, the young people decided that their
After the condescending surprise, nonrecognition, and praise, from those

Circassian was Sonya with burnt-cork mustache and eyebrows.
girl was Petya. A clown was Dimmler. An hussar was Natasha, and a
ballroom an old lady in a hooped skirt--this was Nicholas. A Turkish
Half an hour later there appeared among the other mummers in the

disappeared.
smiling radiantly and applauding the players. The young people had
costumes, went into the drawing room. The count sat in the ballroom,
The countess, when she had identified them and laughed at their
heartily, they started singing, dancing, and playing Christmas games.
the ballroom where, shyly at first and then more and more merrily and
into the anteroom, then hiding behind one another they pushed into
cold from outside and a feeling of gaiety, crowded, at first timidly,
innkeepers, and ladies--frightening and funny--bringing in with them the
The mummers (some of the house serfs) dressed up as bears, Turks,

her.
said, trying to smile, but her tears still flowed and sobs still choked
"It's nothing, Mamma, really it's nothing; only Petya startled me," she

time.
herself on it, sobbing so violently that she could not stop for a long
"Idiot!" she screamed at her brother and, running to a chair, threw

Natasha stopped abruptly.

Petya rushed in delightedly, to say that some mummers had arrived.
not be happy. Before Natasha had finished singing, fourteen-year-old
Natasha had too much of something, and that because of this she would
realizing to whom she was speaking. Her maternal instinct told her that
"Ah, how afraid I am for her, how afraid I am!" said the countess, not

nothing to learn--what softness, tenderness, and strength...."
"Ah, Countess," he said at last, "that's a European talent, she has

closed eyes.
Dimmler, who had seated himself beside the countess, listened with

Andrew.
unnatural and dreadful in this impending marriage of Natasha and Prince
thought of Natasha and of her own youth, and of how there was something
smile and with tears in her eyes, occasionally shaking her head. She
bewitching as her cousin. The old countess sat with a blissful yet sad
and her friend, and how impossible it was for her to be anything like as
listened, thought of the immense difference there was between herself
his eyes off his sister and drew breath in time with her. Sonya, as she
stood in front of him also listening and smiling. Nicholas did not take
while giving orders to the steward, and at last stopped, while Mitenka
like a schoolboy in a hurry to run out to play, blundered in his talk
count, from his study where he was talking to Mitenka, heard her and,
sung, and long before she again sang, as she did that evening. The
She had said she did not want to sing, but it was long since she had

Natasha began to sing her mother's favorite song.
middle of the hall and choosing the place where the resonance was best,
got up and Nicholas sat down at the clavichord. Standing as usual in the
their conversation and quit that corner in the sitting room, but Natasha
None of them, not even the middle-aged Dimmler, wanted to break off

rose.
"Mamma, I don't at all want to," replied Natasha, but all the same she

countess say. "Why are you sitting there like conspirators?"
"Natasha! Now it's your turn. Sing me something," they heard the

day before..."
and it will be tomorrow, and always; and there was yesterday, and the
"Why is it hard to imagine eternity?" said Natasha. "It is now today,

spoke as quietly and seriously as they.
who had joined the young folk with a mildly condescending smile but now
"Yes, but it is hard for us to imagine eternity," remarked Dimmler,

shall always live I must have lived before, lived for a whole eternity."
Natasha rejoined with conviction. "The soul is immortal--well then, if I
"Not lower, who said we were lower?... How do I know what I was before?"

that can't be!"
"If we have been angels, why have we fallen lower?" said Nicholas. "No,

by them.
"May I join you?" said Dimmler who had come up quietly, and he sat down

remember...."
were angels somewhere there, and have been here, and that is why we
a whisper though the music had ceased. "But I am certain that we
"No, I don't believe we ever were in animals," said Natasha, still in

in animals, and will go back into animals again."
remembered everything. "The Egyptians believed that our souls have lived
"That is metempsychosis," said Sonya, who had always learned well, and

begins to remember what happened before one was in the world..."
Sonya, "that when one goes on and on recalling memories, one at last
"Do you know," said Natasha in a whisper, moving closer to Nicholas and

uncertain whether to stop or to play something else.
still sat softly running his fingers over the strings, evidently
the full moon fell on the floor. Dimmler had finished the piece but
sitting on the sofa, but through the big windows the silvery light of
in her former place. It was dark in the room especially where they were
took up a candle, carried it out, and returned, seating herself quietly
Dimmler began to play; Natasha went on tiptoe noiselessly to the table,

and then continuing the conversation. They were now discussing dreams.
"Yes, we're philosophizing," said Natasha, glancing round for a moment

remarked: "How quiet you young people are!"
Dimmler struck a chord and, turning to Natasha, Nicholas, and Sonya,

countess' voice from the drawing room.
"Mr. Dimmler, please play my favorite nocturne by Field," came the old

covering, and the harp gave out a jarring sound.
went up to the harp that stood there in a corner. He took off its cloth
In the middle of their talk in the sitting room, Dimmler came in and

"It isn't wanted, Petya. Tell them to take it away," replied Natasha.

"They have brought the cock, Miss," she said in a whisper.

the sitting room.
While they were talking a maid thrust her head in at the other door of

then, but knew that it was not true, and I felt so uncomfortable."
cabbage," said Natasha, "and I remember that I dared not disbelieve it
"And I remember their telling me that you had been born under a

cords.
jacket and her nurse had told her that she, too, would be sewn up with
told them how afraid she had been of Nicholas because he had on a corded
She only really took part when they recalled Sonya's first arrival. She

simply enjoyed their pleasure and tried to fit in with it.
recalled did not arouse the same poetic feeling as they experienced. She
Much that they remembered had slipped from her mind, and what she

the same reminiscences.
Sonya, as always, did not quite keep pace with them, though they shared

laughed with quiet enjoyment.
one's most distant past in which dreams and realities blend--and they
memories of old age, but poetic, youthful ones--those impressions of
So they went through their memories, smiling with pleasure: not the sad

porch?"
"Yes, and you remember how Papa in his blue overcoat fired a gun in the

or not? Do you remember what fun it was?"
suddenly two old women began spinning round on the carpet? Was that real
"And do you remember how we rolled hard-boiled eggs in the ballroom, and

"How strange it is! It's as if it were a dream! I like that."

"Of course I do, I remember his teeth as if I had just seen them."

"and they say there was no Negro at all. But you see, you remember!"
"You know I have asked Papa and Mamma about that Negro," said Natasha,

"Yes, yes, I do remember something too," Sonya answered timidly.

"Sonya, do you remember?" asked Nicholas.

us..."
"He was gray, you remember, and had white teeth, and stood and looked at

we only dreamed it or were told about him."
remember. Even now I don't know whether there really was a Negro, or if
"A Negro," chimed in Nicholas with a smile of delight. "Of course I

suddenly there stood..."
study--that was in the old house--and it was dark--we went in and
long, long ago, when we were quite little, Uncle called us into the
"And do you remember," Natasha asked with a pensive smile, "how once,

it to you. Do you remember?"
to. We were terribly absurd. I had a funny doll then and wanted to give
afterwards and wanted to comfort you, but do you know, I felt ashamed
"I remember," answered Nicholas. "I remember that I came to you

chief thing," said Natasha. "Do you remember?"
everyone, for myself, and for everyone. And I was innocent--that was the
in the schoolroom? I shall never forget it: I felt sad and sorry for
punished once about some plums? You were all dancing, and I sat sobbing
quite little that used to be so with me. Do you remember when I was
"Oh yes, I know, I know, I know!" Natasha interrupted him. "When I was

music... and suddenly I felt so depressed..."
Once in the regiment I had not gone to some merrymaking where there was
mind that I was already tired of it all, and that we must all die.
was all right and everyone was cheerful. The thought has come into my
"I should think so!" he replied. "I have felt like that when everything

past? And to feel not exactly dull, but sad?"
as if there were nothing more to come--nothing; that everything good is
settled down in the sitting room, "does it ever happen to you to feel
"Does it ever happen to you," said Natasha to her brother, when they


CHAPTER X





their favorite corner where their most intimate talks always began.
After tea, Nicholas, Sonya, and Natasha went to the sitting room, to

same.
rising up in her for the whole household, because they were always the
same way!" thought Natasha, feeling with horror a sense of repulsion
The same faces, the same talk, Papa holding his cup and blowing in the
elders and Nicholas, who had also come to the table. "My God, my God!
She sat down at the table and listened to the conversation between the

quickly!" and she again had difficulty in repressing her sobs.
"Mamma!" she muttered, "give him to me, give him, Mamma, quickly,

if looking for something.
sit down by me." But Natasha stayed by her mother and glanced round as
"Ah, here she is!" said the old count, when he saw Natasha enter. "Well,

was not there and life was going on as before.
at the tea table. The servants stood round the table--but Prince Andrew
All the domestic circle, tutors, governesses, and guests, were already

the guitar, and went to the drawing room.
Perhaps he came yesterday and I have forgotten it." She rose, put down
immediately. Perhaps he has come and is sitting in the drawing room.
be in me what there is now. But perhaps he'll come today, will come
And, worst of all, I am growing old--that's the thing! There won't then
"Oh, if only he would come quicker! I am so afraid it will never be!

with him and he was looking at her with a lover's eyes.
not having done so, she again passed in fancy to the time when she was
before could be, and without solving this problem, or at all regretting
She sat awhile, wondering what the meaning of it all having happened

sing."
"Sonya, go and wake him," said Natasha. "Tell him I want him to come and

"Asleep, I think."

where's Nicholas?"
"You always find something to do, but I can't," said Natasha. "And

"To change the water in this glass. I am just finishing the design."

going?" she asked.
the air of the chorus so that Sonya should catch it. "Where were you
"No, it's the chorus from The Water-Carrier, listen!" and Natasha sang

the same way I thought there was something lacking in her."
timidly when all this happened before," thought Natasha, "and in just
"There! That's just how she started and just how she came up smiling

wrong.
listened. "I don't know. A storm?" she ventured timidly, afraid of being
"Oh, you are there!" said Sonya with a start, and came near and

"Sonya, what is this?" she cried, twanging a thick string.

Natasha.
passing with a glass in her hand. "Yes it was exactly the same," thought
remembered the light falling through that crack once before and Sonya
her and at the crack in the pantry door, and it seemed to her that she
Sonya passed to the pantry with a glass in her hand. Natasha glanced at

brooding on the past.
pantry door and listened to herself and pondered. She was in a mood for
the bookcase with her eyes fixed on a streak of light escaping from the
a whole series of reminiscences arose from those sounds. She sat behind
would have had no meaning for other listeners, but in her imagination
heard in Petersburg with Prince Andrew. What she drew from the guitar
in the bass, picking out a passage she recalled from an opera she had
corner behind a bookcase, and began to run her fingers over the strings
betook herself to the ballroom, picked up her guitar, sat down in a dark
that everyone was submissive, but that all the same it was dull, Natasha
Having as it were reviewed her kingdom, tested her power, and made sure

back she went downstairs.
"No, don't... the island of Madagascar!" she said, and jumping off his

arms round his neck, and he pranced along with her.
Petya ran up and offered her his back. She jumped on it, putting her

"Petya! Petya!" she called to him. "Carry me downstairs."

was preparing fireworks to let off that night.
Her brother Petya was upstairs too; with the man in attendance on him he

Schoss who asked her what she was saying, she went out of the room.
articulating each syllable distinctly, and, not replying to Madame
"The island of Madagascar," she said, "Ma-da-gas-car," she repeated,

up again.
listened to their talk with a serious and thoughtful air, and then got
whether it was cheaper to live in Moscow or Odessa. Natasha sat down,
plates of raisins, walnuts, and almonds. The governesses were discussing
Two governesses were sitting with the Vogels at a table, on which were

to see Vogel and his wife who lived on the upper story.
to do with myself?" And tapping with her heels, she ran quickly upstairs
"O Lord, O Lord, it's always the same! Oh, where am I to go? What am I

"Why, fleas, crickets, grasshoppers," answered the buffoon.

buffoon, who was coming toward her in a woman's jacket.
"Nastasya Ivanovna, what sort of children shall I have?" she asked the

as she went slowly along the passage.
readily as they did hers. "What can I do, where can I go?" thought she,
get angry or sulky with her; but the serfs fulfilled no one's orders so
them on some errand. She seemed to be trying whether any of them would
Natasha did. She could not see people unconcernedly, but had to send
No one in the house sent people about or gave them as much trouble as

"Oh dear, what a young lady!" said Foka, pretending to frown at Natasha.

whether the samovar was really wanted.
liked to test her power over him. He distrusted the order and asked
Foka, the butler, was the most ill-tempered person in the house. Natasha

though it was not at all the time for tea.
On her way past the butler's pantry she told them to set a samovar,

"And you, Theodore, get me a piece of chalk."

"Go, go quickly," the old man urged him.

"Just a few oats?" said Misha, cheerfully and readily.

and fetch a fowl, please, a cock, and you, Misha, bring me some oats."
"Oh, Nikita, please go... where can I send him?... Yes, go to the yard

"What can I do with them?" thought Natasha.

cards. They broke off and rose as she entered.
to the vestibule. There an old footman and two young ones were playing
Having released Mavrushka, Natasha crossed the dancing hall and went

"Let her alone, Kondratevna," said Natasha. "Go, Mavrushka, go."

"Stop playing--there's a time for everything," said the old woman.

the serfs' quarters.
young girl who stood panting, having just run in through the cold from
went into the maids' room. There an old maidservant was grumbling at a
She passed into the sitting room, stood there thinking awhile, and then

hide them and left the room.
Her voice broke, tears gushed from her eyes, and she turned quickly to

"Mamma, I want him. Why should I be wasted like this, Mamma?"

"Sit down with me a little," said the countess.

"Don't look at me, Mamma! Don't look; I shall cry directly."

The countess lifted her head and looked attentively at her daughter.

glittering eyes and no sign of a smile.
"Him... I want him... now, this minute! I want him!" said Natasha, with

do you want?"
"Why are you wandering about like an outcast?" asked her mother. "What

speaking.
what she was doing, and then went up to her mother and stood without
ladies. Natasha came into the room, went up to Sonya, glanced at
Ivanovna the buffoon sat with a sad face at the window with two old
design for embroidery. The countess was playing patience. Nastasya
study. Sonya sat in the drawing room at the round table, copying a
was asleep on the sitting-room sofa. The old count was resting in his
of the day. Nicholas, who had been visiting some neighbors that morning,
inmates of the house dispersed to various rooms. It was the dullest time
On the third day of Christmas week, after the midday dinner, all the

celebration of the season.
and the starlight of the winter nights seemed to call for some special
the calm frost of twenty degrees Reaumur, the dazzling sunshine by day,
new dresses everyone put on, there were no special festivities, though
wearisome Christmas congratulations from neighbors and servants, and the
Christmas came and except for the ceremonial Mass, the solemn and


CHAPTER IX





Things were not cheerful in the Rostovs' home.

anyone--while she felt herself so capable of loving and being loved.
sorry that she was being wasted all this time and of no use to
of depression which she could not master. She felt sorry for herself:
the end of the fourth month of their separation she began to have fits
ready to throw herself into all the pleasures of life as before; but at
her betrothed, found the same comfort in that love, and was still as
the beginning of the new year. Natasha was still as much in love with
reopened in the warm climate, which obliged him to defer his return till
been on his way back to Russia long ago had not his wound unexpectedly
come from Prince Andrew, from Rome, in which he wrote that he would have
Nicholas was spending the last of his leave at home. A fourth letter had

her.
love with Nicholas, that there were no grounds for finding fault with
her benefactors, and so faithfully, unchangingly, and unselfishly in
dark-eyed niece of hers was so meek, so kind, so devotedly grateful to
kindhearted countess was the more vexed with Sonya because that poor,
formal "you" instead of the intimate "thou" in speaking to her. The
up without reason, addressing her stiffly as "my dear," and using the
not refrain from grumbling at and worrying Sonya, often pulling her
the portionless Sonya. Though she blamed herself for it, she could
with exasperation, symptoms of a growing attachment between her son and
conversation with him about marriage. She saw with sorrow, and sometimes
Nicholas did not go to Moscow, and the countess did not renew the

stronger and higher than all else."
"but I can't coerce my feelings. If I love Sonya, that feeling is for me
sacrifice my feelings for my family's welfare," he said to himself,
be happier with her than with some doll-like Julie. I can always
"must not respond to her faithful, devoted love? Yet I should certainly
speak so to me. Because Sonya is poor I must not love her," he thought,
sacrifice my feelings and my honor for money? I wonder how Mamma could
"Maybe I do love a poor girl," said Nicholas to himself. "Am I to

replied, wiping away her tears.
"No, you have not understood me, don't let us talk about it," she

for him.
want a sacrifice from her son, she herself wished to make a sacrifice
But the countess did not want the question put like that: she did not

sacrifice anything for you--even my feelings."
give my life, anything, to put you at ease," said Nicholas. "I would
"Mamma, don't cry! Only tell me that you wish it, and you know I will

untruth and was becoming entangled. She began to cry.
happiness I wish for," she added, feeling that she was telling an
justify herself. "You have not understood me, Nikolenka. It is your
"No, you have not understood me," said his mother, not knowing how to

wishing to show his noble-mindedness.
asked his mother, not realizing the cruelty of his question and only
me to sacrifice my feelings and my honor for the sake of money?" he
"But, Mamma, suppose I loved a girl who has no fortune, would you expect

their affairs disentangled now lay in his marrying Julie Karagina.
her to speak quite frankly. She told him that her only hope of getting
remarks were leading to and during one of these conversations induced
during the holidays to amuse himself. Nicholas guessed what his mother's
At other times she praised Julie to him and advised him to go to Moscow

and tried to discover what he thought about marriage.
were accomplished. Then she told him that she knew of a splendid girl
married. She said she could lie down in her grave peacefully if that
now both her daughters were settled, her only wish was to see him
Several times the countess, with tears in her eyes, told her son that

come to Moscow.
everything depend on her daughter's inclination. She invited Nicholas to
from her. Karagina had replied that for her part she was agreeable, and
marriage between their children and had received a favorable answer
The countess had written direct to Julie's mother in Moscow suggesting a

wealthy heiress through the death of the last of her brothers.
a girl the Rostovs had known from childhood, and who had now become a
was with Julie Karagina, the daughter of excellent and virtuous parents,
would have to abandon the hope of ever getting matters right. This match
hope and that if Nicholas refused the match she had found for him, she
for Nicholas to marry a rich heiress. She felt this to be their last
From her feminine point of view she could see only one solution, namely,
children's ruin, and she tried to find means of remedying the position.
hide it) he himself suffered from the consciousness of his own and his
for he could not help being what he was--that (though he tried to
that her children were being ruined, that it was not the count's fault
patiently to disentangle them. The countess, with her loving heart, felt
feeling too feeble to break the meshes or to set to work carefully and
that he was entangled but becoming more and more so at every step, and
The count moved in his affairs as in a huge net, trying not to believe

play a rubber with Count Rostov as a most profitable source of income.
of rubles every day by his neighbors, who looked upon an opportunity to
that everybody could see them--he let himself be plundered of hundreds
count's games of whist and boston, at which--spreading out his cards so
dinner parties to the whole district on name days; there were still the
and fifteen grooms in the stables, the same expensive presents and
establishment which Nicholas had even enlarged, the same fifty horses
conceive of existence remained unchanged. There was still the hunting
habits of life without which the count and countess could not
than at home. They had not as many visitors as before, but the old
found it preferable and more advantageous to live in the count's house
Petya's tutors, the girls' former governess, and other people who simply
an old maiden lady, an inmate of the house, and many others such as
musician and his wife, Vogel the dancing master and his family, Belova,
seemed, obliged to live in the count's house. Such were Dimmler the
in the house almost as members of the family, or persons who were, it
table every day. These were all their own people who had settled down
and its lodges were full of people and more than twenty sat down to
Otradnoe was quieter than in former years, but still the enormous house
to entertain so freely as when the count had been Marshal, and life at
fine ancestral Rostov house and estate near Moscow. It was not necessary
together anxiously and privately and heard suggestions of selling the
not improve. Natasha and Nicholas often noticed their parents conferring
because it involved him in too much expense, but still his affairs did
Count Ilya Rostov had resigned the position of Marshal of the Nobility


CHAPTER VIII





darkness of the night.
the windows of the house that gleamed invitingly in the moist velvety
"Ah, there are still lights in the drawingroom!" she said, pointing to

"What a darling this Nicholas of mine is!" thought Natasha.

together!"
never shall have. Why should she marry? We might always drive about
charming this Natasha of mine is! I have no other friend like her and
"Rubbish, nonsense, humbug!" exclaimed Nicholas, and he thought: "How

shall never again be as happy and tranquil as I am now."
ringing laughter. "And do you know," she suddenly said, "I know that I
carried herself, how well!'" And Nicholas heard her spontaneous, happy,
"Uncle." "And then I was saying to myself all the way, 'How well Anisya
Andrew at the same time as of the rest, and of how he would have liked
"No," said Natasha, though she had in reality been thinking about Prince

knew by the sound of his voice.
"I know, I expect you thought of him," said Nicholas, smiling as Natasha

nothing else."
that we are not in Otradnoe, but in Fairyland. And then I thought... No,
really going in the darkness, and that we shall arrive and suddenly find
and imagining that we are going home, but that heaven knows where we are
"I? Wait a bit, wait.... Yes, first I thought that we are driving along

you?"
manner. What a good fellow Uncle is! Don't you think so?... Well, and
would always keep Uncle near him, if not for his riding, then for his
that Rugay, the red hound, was like Uncle, and that if he were a man he
"I?" said Nicholas, trying to remember. "Well, you see, first I thought

They were fond of asking one another that question.

"What were you thinking about just now, Nicholas?" inquired Natasha.

"Got it?" said Nicholas.

of which she had all the way been trying to get and had at last caught.
suddenly struck up the air of As 'twas growing dark last night--the tune
find place in her? But she was very happy. As they were nearing home she
and assimilated all the diverse impressions of life? How did they all
What was passing in that receptive childlike soul that so eagerly caught

only heard them splashing through the unseen mud.
while. The night was dark and damp. They could not see the horses, but
Natasha, almost perplexed by her feelings. They remained silent a long
"No. I'm quite, quite all right. I feel so comfortable!" answered

"Yes," returned Nicholas. "You're not cold?"

highroad.
"What a darling Uncle is!" said Natasha, when they had come out onto the

cheerful smell of smoke.
In the village through which they passed there were red lights and a

growing dark last night.
voice Natasha had known previously, but the one that had sung As 'twas
"Good-by, dear niece," his voice called out of the darkness--not the

in front with lanterns.
so that they had to go round by the ford, and he sent huntsmen to ride
accompanied them on foot as far as the bridge that could not be crossed,
Natasha up warmly and took leave of her with quite a new tenderness. He
traps. Natasha and Nicholas got into the other. "Uncle" wrapped
Petya was carried out like a log and laid in the larger of the two

the men.
countess did not know where they were and were very anxious, said one of
to look for them, arrived to fetch Natasha and Petya. The count and
After nine o'clock two traps and three mounted men, who had been sent

at once found the chords of the song.
harp and to play only the guitar. She asked "Uncle" for his guitar and
ecstasies over "Uncle's" singing. She resolved to give up learning the
tune, like the song of a bird, was extraordinarily good. Natasha was in
only to give measure to the words. As a result of this the unconsidered
itself, and that apart from the words there is no tune, which exists
whole meaning of a song lies in the words and that the tune comes of
"Uncle" sang as peasants sing, with full and naive conviction that the


    Fell the snow so soft and light...
    As 'twas growing dark last night

his throat and sang his favorite hunting song:
"Uncle" played another song and a valse; then after a pause he cleared

beside "Uncle," begging him to play something more.
to think about it," she said to herself, and sat down again smilingly
suddenly became serious. But this lasted only a second. "Don't dare
he would understand it all. Where is he now?" she thought, and her face
thought my Bolkonski would not approve of or understand our gaiety. But
when he said 'chosen already'? Is he glad of it or not? It is as if he
of thoughts and feelings arose in her. "What did Nicholas' smile mean
"And such a one!" she said. But as soon as she had said it a new train

nodded her head with a happy smile.
"Oh?" said "Uncle" in surprise, looking inquiringly at Natasha, who

"He's chosen already," said Nicholas smiling.

young fellow must be found as husband for you. That's it--come on!"
joyous laugh, having finished the dance. "Well done, niece! Now a fine
"Well, little countess; that's it--come on!" cried "Uncle," with a

man and woman.
Anisya and in Anisya's father and mother and aunt, and in every Russian
different from herself, who yet was able to understand all that was in
watched this slim, graceful countess, reared in silks and velvets and so
needed for the dance, had tears in her eyes, though she laughed as she
that Anisya Fedorovna, who had at once handed her the handkerchief she
She did the right thing with such precision, such complete precision,


    * The French shawl dance.


end, and they were already admiring her.
Nicholas and the others that she might not do the right thing was at an
proudly, and with sly merriment, the fear that had at first seized
of her. As soon as she had struck her pose, and smiled triumphantly,
those inimitable and unteachable Russian ones that "Uncle" had expected
supposed, long ago have effaced? But the spirit and the movements were
and obtained that manner which the pas de chale * would, one would have
French governess, imbibed from the Russian air she breathed that spirit
Where, how, and when had this young countess, educated by an emigree

shoulders and struck an attitude.
"Uncle," and setting her arms akimbo also made a motion with her
Natasha threw off the shawl from her shoulders, ran forward to face

just struck a chord.
"Now then, niece!" he exclaimed, waving to Natasha the hand that had

naive and precise attitude preparatory to a folk dance.
smiled seriously at the merry fellow, while the merry fellow struck a
"Uncle" rose, and it was as if there were two men in him: one of them

depended on it.
"Go on, Uncle dear," Natasha wailed in an imploring tone as if her life

strings, and then he stopped short and jerked his shoulders.
played "Uncle" once more, running his fingers skillfully over the

    Stop, dear maiden, I entreat--
    Fetching water clear and sweet,

in the doorway and behind hers other faces...
played the piece over again. Anisya Fedorovna's smiling face reappeared
Nicholas too was greatly pleased by "Uncle's" playing, and "Uncle"

so?"
she said, turning to her brother, as if asking him: "What is it moves me
finished. She jumped up and hugged and kissed him. "Nicholas, Nicholas!"
"Lovely, lovely! Go on, Uncle, go on!" shouted Natasha as soon as he had

he ran his fingers over the strings, something seemed to snap.
the song grew brisker and the time quicker and when, here and there, as
a little on one side of his face under his gray mustaches, especially as
where Anisya Fedorovna had just stood. Something seemed to be laughing
firmness, looking with a changed and inspired expression at the spot
the room. "Uncle" continued to play correctly, carefully, with energetic
flushed, and drawing her kerchief over her face went laughing out of
mirth as radiated from Anisya Fedorovna's whole being. Anisya Fedorovna
hearts of Nicholas and Natasha, arousing in them the same kind of sober
tune, played with precision and in exact time, began to thrill in the
My Lady, but the well-known song: Came a maiden down the street. The
quietly, smoothly, and confidently began playing in very slow time, not
Anisya Fedorovna, struck a single chord, pure and sonorous, and then
his left elbow with a somewhat theatrical gesture, and, with a wink at
armchair. He took the guitar a little above the fingerboard, arching
case with his bony fingers, tuned the guitar and settled himself in his
Without looking at anyone, "Uncle" blew the dust off it and, tapping the

errand and brought back the guitar.
Anisya Fedorovna, with her light step, willingly went to fulfill her

touched it for a long time. That's it--come on! I've given it up."
"Anisya, go and see if the strings of my guitar are all right. I haven't

"Uncle" did not answer, but smiled.

"Do you play then?" asked Natasha.

on!--ought to burst out."
energetic gesture. "Here he ought to burst out--that's it, come
"He doesn't play that part right!" said "Uncle" suddenly, with an

"Uncle's." "That's a good player of ours," she added.
"You like listening?" she said to Natasha, with a smile extremely like

and leaned her portly person against the doorpost.
of it and wished to hear it again and again. Anisya Fedorovna came in
the same notes were thrummed again, but the listeners did not grow weary
repeated a hundred times. The balalayka was retuned several times and
listening, slightly smiling, with his head on one side. The air was
to the air of My Lady, with trills and variations. "Uncle" sat
ceased. Mitka tuned up afresh, and recommenced thrumming the balalayka
"More, please, more!" cried Natasha at the door as soon as the balalayka

to her the acme of musical delight.
to her the best in the world, so also that song, at that moment, seemed
Just as "Uncle's" pickled mushrooms, honey, and cherry brandy had seemed

"Not 'very good' it's simply delicious!"
"Very good?" said Natasha reproachfully, noticing her brother's tone.

very much.
superciliousness, as if ashamed to confess that the sounds pleased him
"How good! Really very good!" said Nicholas with some unintentional

when "Uncle" returned from the chase. "Uncle" was fond of such music.
It was the custom for Mitka to play the balalayka in the huntsmen's room

of it," said "Uncle."
"That's Mitka, my coachman.... I have got him a good balalayka. I'm fond

now went out into the passage to hear better.
playing. Natasha had been listening to those strains for some time and
balalayka on which someone, who was evidently a master of the art, was
door into the huntsmen's room, from which came the clear sounds of a
There was a rapid patter of bare feet, and an unseen hand opened the

called the room for the hunt servants.
The door at the end of the passage led to the huntsmen's room, as they

there!" he shouted. "Why have you shut it?"
Now, hunting is another matter--that's it, come on! Open the door,
can't make head or tail of it. That's for you--I haven't brains enough.
"I did once, but gave it up. I am not fit for it. That's it, come on! I

"Why don't you enter the service, Uncle?"

winter, and lying in his overgrown garden in summer.
autumn and spring in the fields on his bay gelding, sitting at home in
but he always persistently refused public appointments, passing the
confided secrets to him, elected him to be a justice and to other posts;
They called him in to decide family disputes, chose him as executor,
the reputation of being the most honorable and disinterested of cranks.
his father and the neighbors. Throughout the whole province "Uncle" had
Involuntarily Rostov recalled all the good he had heard about him from
"Uncle's" face was very significant and even handsome as he said this.

it, come on! Nothing will remain. Then why harm anyone?"
"This, you see, is how I am finishing my days... Death will come. That's

answering a thought that was in his visitors' mind, said:
when receiving friends for the first time in one's own house, "Uncle,"
come for her too soon. After a casual pause, such as often occurs
happy in these novel surroundings that she only feared the trap would
incoherent words without waking up. Natasha felt so lighthearted and
times to wake Petya that he might eat something, but he only muttered
upright on the sofa and listened with sparkling eyes. She tried several
past and future hunts, of Rugay and Ilagin's dogs, while Natasha sat
After supper, over their cherry brandy, Rostov and "Uncle" talked of

a chicken anywhere. Anisya Fedorovna left the room.
buttermilk cakes, such aromatic jam, such honey-and-nut sweets, or such
Natasha ate of everything and thought she had never seen or eaten such

Natasha first one thing and then another.
"Take this, little Lady-Countess!" she kept saying, as she offered

pleasant smiles.
Fedorovna herself: a savor of juiciness, cleanliness, whiteness, and
prepared by her. The smell and taste of it all had a smack of Anisya
All this was the fruit of Anisya Fedorovna's housekeeping, gathered and

made with honey, and preserves made with sugar.
sweets. Afterwards she brought a freshly roasted chicken, ham, preserves
sparkling mead, apples, nuts (raw and roasted), and nut-and-honey
rye cakes made with buttermilk, honey in the comb, still mead and
was a bottle of herb wine, different kinds of vodka, pickled mushrooms,
slightly puckered his lips when Anisya Fedorovna entered. On the tray
the meaning of his puckered brow and the happy complacent smile that
help understanding? Not only Nicholas, but even Natasha understood
do you understand 'Uncle'?" her expression said to Rostov. How could one
stopped at the door with a smile on her face. "Here I am. I am she! Now
arranged them on the table. When she had finished, she stepped aside and
took from it the bottles and various hors d'oeuvres and dishes and
to the table, set down the tray, and with her plump white hands deftly
this woman (who was "Uncle's" housekeeper) trod very lightly. She went
caused her to protrude her chest and stomach and throw back her head,
smile, bowed respectfully. In spite of her exceptional stoutness, which
and in every motion, she looked at the visitors and, with a pleasant
large loaded tray. With hospitable dignity and cordiality in her glance
of about forty, with a double chin and full red lips, entered carrying a
the sound by a barefooted girl, and a stout, rosy, good-looking woman
Soon after "Uncle's" reappearance the door was opened, evidently from

cut short. "She's ridden all day like a man, and is as fresh as ever!"
a practiced motion of three fingers, taking down another that had been
like her!" said he, offering Nicholas a pipe with a long stem and, with
"That's right, young countess, that's it, come on! I never saw anyone

laughing at his way of life) he himself joined in the merriment.
and sister's laughter (it could never enter his head that they might be
too was in high spirits and far from being offended by the brother's
thing and not at all worse than a swallow-tail or frock coat. "Uncle"
had regarded with surprise and amusement at Otradnoe, was just the right
small top boots. And Natasha felt that this costume, the very one she
After a while "Uncle" came in, in a Cossack coat, blue trousers, and

pretext ready to account for it.
from bursting into a peal of ringing laughter even before they had a
over his sister), Natasha gave him a wink, and neither refrained long
Nicholas no longer considered it necessary to show his manly superiority
at one another (now that the hunt was over and they were in the house,
Their faces glowed, they were hungry and very cheerful. They looked
on his elbow, fell asleep at once. Natasha and Nicholas were silent.
and Petya took off their wraps and sat down on the sofa. Petya, leaning
From behind this came women's laughter and whispers. Natasha, Nicholas,
was a passage in which a partition with ragged curtains could be seen.
sofa, cleaning himself with his tongue and teeth. Leading from the study
Rugay, his back still muddy, came into the room and lay down on the
to sit down and make themselves at home, and then went out of the room.
study smelt strongly of tobacco and dogs. "Uncle" asked his visitors
the host's father and mother, and of himself in military uniform. The
there was a tattered sofa, a worn carpet, and portraits of Suvorov, of
birchwood table and a sofa, and finally into his private room where
folding table and red chairs, then into the drawing room with a round
"Uncle" led the visitors through the anteroom into a small hall with a

and wolf and fox skins hung about.
it noticeably neglected. In the entry there was a smell of fresh apples,
that those living in it aimed at keeping it spotless--but neither was
with its bare, unplastered log walls, was not overclean--it did not seem
her hand led her up the rickety wooden steps of the porch. The house,
The serfs all dispersed. "Uncle" lifted Natasha off her horse and taking

receive the guests and the visitors.
themselves off and that all necessary preparations should be made to
retainers, shouted authoritatively that the superfluous ones should take
stood in the midst of an overgrown garden and, after a glance at his
"Uncle" dismounted at the porch of his little wooden house which

addressing Natasha directly.
"How is it you didn't go head over heels?" asked the boldest of all,

"Isn't she a Tartar!"

"Goodness gracious! See her knife?..."

dangles.... See, she's got a little hunting horn!"
"Arinka! Look, she sits sideways! There she sits and her skirt

about her.
on show and not a human being able to hear or understand what was said
by her presence made remarks about her as though she were some prodigy
that many of them came up to her, stared her in the face, and unabashed
and on horseback--raised the curiosity of the serfs to such a degree
the hunters who were arriving. The presence of Natasha--a woman, a lady,
well as children, popped out from the back entrance to have a look at
porch to meet their master. A score of women serfs, old and young, as
Some five male domestic serfs, big and little, rushed out to the front

trap, while Nicholas rode with Natasha and Petya to "Uncle's" house.
"Uncle's" offer was accepted. A huntsman was sent to Otradnoe for a

and the little countess could be driven home in a trap."
come on!" said "Uncle." "You see it's damp weather, and you could rest,
"And if you put up at my house that will be better still. That's it,

should spend the night in his little village of Mikhaylovna.
so far from home that he accepted "Uncle's" offer that the hunting party
Toward evening Ilagin took leave of Nicholas, who found that they were


CHAPTER VII





speak to him.
he felt flattered that, after what had happened, "Uncle" deigned to
When, much later, "Uncle" rode up to Nicholas and began talking to him,

Nicholas to be saying.
coursing. But when it is, then look out!" his appearance seemed to
"Well, I am like any other dog as long as it's not a question of

air of a conqueror.
of his leash, walked along just behind "Uncle's" horse with the serene
red Rugay who, his arched back spattered with mud and clanking the ring
affectation of indifference. For a long time they continued to look at
shamefaced, and only much later were they able to regain their former
mounted his bay and rode off. The others all followed, dispirited and
rebuke everybody, and, with an air of not wishing to speak to anyone,
and smartly across his horse's back as if by that gesture he meant to
at any other time. "Uncle" himself twisted up the hare, threw it neatly
ashamed of so wild a cry and everyone else would have been amazed at it
talking at once, and it was so strange that she must herself have been
tingling. By that shriek she expressed what the others expressed by all
joyously, ecstatically, and so piercingly that it set everyone's ear
excitement. At the same moment Natasha, without drawing breath, screamed
Ilagin was saying at the same time, breathless from his gallop and his
"Once she had missed it and turned it away, any mongrel could take it,"

"But what is there in running across it like that?" said Ilagin's groom.

were heard or not.
said Nicholas, also not listening to anyone and regardless of whether he
"She'd tired herself out, she'd run it down three times by herself,"

pad. "You've deserved it, that's it, come on!"
"Rugay, here's a pad for you!" he said, throwing down the hare's muddy

come on!..."
justifying himself. "There are your thousand-ruble ones.... That's it,
and had insulted him, and only now had he at last succeeded in
around as if he were abusing someone, as if they were all his enemies
borzois. That's it, come on!" said he, panting and looking wrathfully
it has beaten them all, the thousand-ruble as well as the one-ruble
whom to or what about. "That's it, come on! That's a dog!... There,
eyes while his arms and legs twitched. He spoke without himself knowing
for the blood to drip off, and anxiously glancing round with restless
the delighted "Uncle" dismounted, and cut off a pad, shaking the hare
him. A moment later everyone had drawn up round the crowd of dogs. Only
his back, he rolled over with the hare. A ring of borzois surrounded
his knees in the muddy field, and all one could see was how, muddying
onto the ryefield, again put on speed still more viciously, sinking to
terrible strain, put on speed close to the hare, knocked it off the balk
with the two foremost borzois, pushed ahead of them regardless of the
and "Uncle's" red borzoi, straining and curving its back, caught up
"Rugay, Rugayushka! That's it, come on!" came a third voice just then,

quickly.
for the hare to run on the balk and the borzois did not overtake him so
of carriage horses, and began to overtake the hare, but it was easier
and the stubble. Again Erza and Milka were abreast, running like a pair
prey, the hare moved and darted along the balk between the winter rye
hearken to his appeal. At the very moment when she would have seized her
"Erza, darling!" Ilagin wailed in a voice unlike his own. Erza did not

not to make a mistake this time but seize his hind leg.
when close to the hare's scut paused as if measuring the distance, so as
past. The hare had squatted. Again the beautiful Erza reached him, but
would immediately pounce on the hare, but she overtook him and flew
"Milashka, dear!" rose Nicholas' triumphant cry. It looked as if Milka

hare.
broad-haunched, black-spotted Milka and began rapidly gaining on the
back and bounded off yet more swiftly. From behind Erza rushed the
she had seized him, rolled over like a ball. The hare arched his
at the hare with terrible swiftness aiming at his scut, and, thinking
before Ilagin's red-spotted Erza passed them, got within a length, flew
nearest, were the first to see and pursue him, but they had not gone far
The two borzois of the huntsman who had sighted him, having been the
but in front of him was the autumn sowing where the ground was soft.
back his ears and rushed off headlong. He had been lying in the stubble,
and, finally having chosen his direction and realized his danger, laid
took a dozen bounds, not very quickly, letting the borzois gain on him,
the shouting and trampling that resounded from all sides at once. He
he jumped up he did not run at once, but pricked his ears listening to
of the chase. The hare they had started was a strong and swift one. When
borzois and the hare and fearing only to lose sight even for an instant
and "Uncle" flew, reckless of where and how they went, seeing only the
setting the borzois on the hare. The tranquil Ilagin, Nicholas, Natasha,
while the borzoi whips, with a cry of "A-tu!" galloped across the field
who had been moving slowly, shouted, "Stop!" calling in the hounds,
were not on leash darted after the hounds and the hare. All the hunt,
downhill in full cry after the hare, and from all sides the borzois that
next morning, was unable to rest and leaped up. The pack on leash rushed
But before the whip could reply, the hare, scenting the frost coming

whip who had sighted the hare.
"How is it pointing?" asked Nicholas, riding a hundred paces toward the

gentlefolk, also moved away. All were moving slowly and sedately.
on the horizon turned away from the hare, and the whips, but not the
gentlefolk rode up to him at a footpace; the hounds that were far off
The huntsman stood halfway up the knoll holding up his whip and the

her brother were trying to conceal, and was herself excited by it.
red borzoi. Natasha saw and felt the agitation the two elderly men and
this diminutive expressing his affection and the hopes he placed on this
"Rugay, hey, hey!" he shouted. "Rugayushka!" he added, involuntarily by

against one another, you two, and I'll look on!"
borzois! That's it, come on! Yours are worth thousands. Try yours
"How can I join in? Why, you've given a village for each of your

The latter was riding with a sullen expression on his face.

"And you, Michael Nikanorovich?" he said, addressing "Uncle."

to Erza.
sighted the hare--and not without agitation he looked round and whistled
"A full-grown one?" asked Ilagin as he approached the whip who had

once!" he thought as he rode with "Uncle" and Ilagin toward the hare.
pitting against his own borzois. "And suppose they outdo my Milka at
and "Uncle's" red Rugay two rivals he had never yet had a chance of
ride up.... Shall we both course it?" answered Nicholas, seeing in Erza
"Ah, he has found one, I think," said Ilagin carelessly. "Yes, we must

uplifted whip meant that he saw a sitting hare.)
and again repeated his long-drawn cry, "A-tu!" (This call and the
had halted. He stood on a knoll in the stubble, holding his whip aloft,
"A-tu!" came the long-drawn cry of one of the borzoi whippers-in, who

Count? For I consider that..."
something. All I care about is to enjoy seeing the chase, is it not so,
"Or being upset because someone else's borzoi and not mine catches

"Of course not!"

takes, I don't care about that."
raised his cap to Natasha) "but as for counting skins and what one
riding in company such as this... what could be better?" (he again
jealous about game and dogs. For myself, I can tell you, Count, I enjoy
"I don't understand," continued Ilagin, "how some sportsmen can be so

to anyone who found a hare.
borzoi she is," and turning to his groom, he said he would give a ruble
full-grown hare would cross the field now I'd show you what sort of
"Yes, she's fast enough," replied Nicholas, and thought: "If only a

black-spotted one of yours is fine--well shaped!" said he.
and picked out Milka who attracted his attention by her breadth. "That
to return the young count's compliment, Ilagin looked at his borzois
continuing the conversation they had begun. And considering it polite
your parts, too, the harvest is nothing to boast of, Count?" he went on,
before, he had given a neighbor three families of house serfs. "So in
Ilagin indifferently, of the red-spotted bitch Erza, for which, a year
"That one? Yes, she's a good dog, gets what she's after," answered

"A fine little bitch, that!" said he in a careless tone. "Is she swift?"

harvest, Nicholas pointed to the red-spotted bitch.
In the middle of a sober conversation begun by Ilagin about the year's

to his own Milka.
swiftness of Ilagin's borzois, and in that beautiful bitch saw a rival
steel, a delicate muzzle, and prominent black eyes. He had heard of the
red-spotted bitch on Ilagin's leash, slender but with muscles like
Rostov was particularly struck by the beauty of a small, pure-bred,

their companions and searching uneasily for rivals to their own borzois.
stealthily glancing at one another's dogs, trying not to be observed by
into line. The masters rode together. "Uncle," Rostov, and Ilagin kept
The way to Iligin's upland was across the fields. The hunt servants fell

doubled, moved on.
which, he said, swarmed with hares. Nicholas agreed, and the hunt, now
an upland of his about a mile away which he usually kept for himself and
To expiate his huntsman's offense, Ilagin pressed the Rostovs to come to

beauty, of which he had heard much.
countess resembled Diana in her passion for the chase as well as in her
higher to Natasha and said, with a pleasant smile, that the young
greetings, she rode up to them. Ilagin lifted his beaver cap still
followed him in some excitement. Seeing the enemies exchanging friendly
Natasha, afraid that her brother would do something dreadful, had

him to draw his covert.
borzois. He hoped to become better acquainted with the count and invited
punished who had allowed himself to seize a fox hunted by someone else's
cap and said he much regretted what had occurred and would have the man
acquaintance. Having ridden up to Nicholas, Ilagin raised his beaver
gentleman who was particularly anxious to make the young count's
Instead of an enemy, Nicholas found in Ilagin a stately and courteous

accompanied by two hunt servants.
a beaver cap came riding toward him on a handsome raven-black horse,
Hardly had he passed an angle of the wood before a stout gentleman in

enemy.
prepared to take the most resolute and desperate steps to punish his
rode in angry agitation toward him, firmly grasping his whip and fully
arbitrariness and violence, and regarded him as his bitterest foe. He
of moderation in judgment, hated him cordially from reports of his
Nicholas, though he had never seen Ilagin, with his usual absence

were hunting and let his man snatch a fox their dogs had chased.
had now, as if purposely, sent his men to the very woods the Rostovs
at law, hunted over places that belonged by custom to the Rostovs, and
The facts were that Ilagin, with whom the Rostovs had a quarrel and were

surrounded by inquiring sympathizers, recounted his exploits.
The victorious huntsman rode off to join the field, and there,

party was.
wait for him and rode to the spot where the enemy's, Ilagin's, hunting
Nicholas, not stopping to talk to the man, asked his sister and Petya to

imagining himself still speaking to his foe.
of this?..." said the huntsman, pointing to his dagger and probably
gave him one with the fox. Here it is on my saddle! Do you want a taste
bitch that caught it! Go to law, indeed!... He snatches at the fox! I
"A likely thing, killing a fox our dogs had hunted! And it was my gray

"What has happened?" asked Nicholas.

but he probably was not even aware of it.
pale and breathless and his face was angry. One of his eyes was black,
distance he took off his cap and tried to speak respectfully, but he was
his young master, with the fox tied to his crupper. While still at a
the bushes came the huntsman who had been fighting and rode toward
stopped near the hounds, waiting to see how the matter would end. Out of
Nicholas dismounted, and with Natasha and Petya, who had ridden up,

Several of the field galloped to the spot where the fight was going on.
footpace to the place where the whips were getting the hounds together.
Nicholas sent the man to call Natasha and Petya to him, and rode at a

groom.
"That's Ilagin's huntsman having a row with our Ivan," said Nicholas'

a horn, with the signal agreed on in case of a fight.
arms and did something to the fox. Then from that spot came the sound of
near them and there too the dogs were lying. The huntsmen waved their
it to the saddle. Their horses, bridled and with high saddles, stood
The huntsmen got the fox, but stayed there a long time without strapping

'Uncle's' man."
"What's this?" thought Nicholas. "Where's that huntsman from? He is not

to the dogs; one in a red cap, the other, a stranger, in a green coat.
tails turned away from the center of the group. Two huntsmen galloped up
formed a star-shaped figure, scarcely swaying their bodies and with
in followed by a black one, and everything was in confusion; the borzois
curves, trailing its brush, when suddenly a strange white borzoi dashed
to the fox which began to dodge between the field in sharper and sharper
across the field. The borzois bore down on it.... Now they drew close
Nicholas saw a queer, short-legged red fox with a fine brush going hard
The huntsman standing in the hollow moved and loosed his borzois, and

at any moment on the ryefield opposite.
ravine, he even saw the hounds, and was expecting a fox to show itself
He saw the whips in their red caps galloping along the edge of the

toward the ryefield and away from Nicholas.
found, and the whole pack, joining together, rushed along the ravine
moment later he heard a cry from the wooded ravine that a fox had been
other hounds joined in, now pausing and now again giving tongue. A
before Nicholas heard one he knew, Voltorn, giving tongue at intervals;
in a hollow behind a hazel bush. The hounds had scarcely been loosed
Facing him lay a field of winter rye, there his own huntsman stood alone

Nicholas standing in a fallow field could see all his whips.
they put the hounds into a ravine thickly overgrown with young trees.
soon, but as it was still early the hunt went farther. At midday
The old count went home, and Natasha and Petya promised to return very


CHAPTER VI





smile.
For sole reply Daniel gave him a shy, childlike, meek, and amiable

"Ah, but you are a crusty fellow, friend!" said the count.

Daniel.
The count remembered the wolf he had let slip and his encounter with

"Yes, your excellency," answered Daniel, quickly doffing his cap.

Daniel, who was standing near.
"Oh, what a formidable one!" said he. "A formidable one, eh?" he asked

wolf.
yet simply at everybody. Old Count Rostov also rode up and touched the
her. When she was touched, she jerked her bound legs and looked wildly
gazed with great glassy eyes at this crowd of dogs and men surrounding
broad-browed head hanging down and the bitten stick between her jaws,
and their stories, and all came to look at the wolf, which, with her
the cubs and the borzois three. The huntsmen assembled with their booty
to the place where they were all to meet. The hounds had killed two of
and snorting horse and, accompanied by the dogs yelping at her, took her
With happy, exhausted faces, they laid the old wolf, alive, on a shying

together, and Daniel rolled her over once or twice from side to side.
and she was fastened with a leash, as if bridled, her legs were bound
set his foot on the wolf's neck. A stick was thrust between her jaws
Daniel whispered, "Don't! We'll gag her!" and, changing his position,
the wolf, seizing her by the ears. Nicholas was about to stab her, but
a step, and with his whole weight, as if lying down to rest, fell on
tried to rise, but the borzois stuck to her. Daniel rose a little, took
that all was now over. The terrified wolf pressed back her ears and
ears. It was evident to the dogs, the hunters, and to the wolf herself
lying on the wolf's back among the dogs, trying to seize her by the
heavily, panted past him, and he heard the fall of a body and saw Daniel
Nicholas neither saw nor heard Daniel until the chestnut, breathing

it were a flail.
thrashing the laboring sides of his chestnut horse with his whip as if
Daniel galloped up silently, holding a naked dagger in his left hand and

stopped a second time by "Uncle's" borzois.
result of this, he galloped up to the wolf just when she had been
toward the wood, just as Karay had run to cut the animal off. As a
safety, Daniel set his chestnut galloping, not at the wolf but straight
horsemen did not dismount and that the wolf shook herself and ran for
his horse, supposing the affair to be over. But when he saw that the
had rushed out from the wood. He saw Karay seize the wolf, and checked
Already, at the beginning of this chase, Daniel, hearing the ulyulyuing,

would be safe.
again every time she shook herself and moved toward the wood where she
dismount each moment that the wolf crouched back, and starting forward
riding round the wolf, crying "ulyulyu!" shouting and preparing to
Nicholas and his attendant, with "Uncle" and his huntsman, were all

again hemmed in.
path and his borzois once more stopped the animal's advance. She was
"Uncle's" huntsman was galloping from the other side across the wolf's

"Oh my God! Why?" Nicholas cried in despair.

difficulty out of the gully.
his hair bristling, and probably bruised or wounded, climbed with
herself from the dogs, with tail tucked in again, went forward. Karay,
a movement of her hind legs out of the gully, and having disengaged
clicked her teeth (Karay no longer had her by the throat), leaped with
mass of dogs, and then her forepaws were on the edge of the gully. She
and stab the wolf, when she suddenly thrust her head up from among that
of his life. With his hand on his saddlebow, he was ready to dismount
laid back (Karay was pinning her by the throat), was the happiest moment
outstretched hind leg and her frightened choking head, with her ears
with the dogs, while from under them could be seen her gray hair and
That instant, when Nicholas saw the wolf struggling in the gully

front of them.
suddenly on the wolf, and they rolled together down into a gully just in
here Nicholas only saw that something happened to Karay--the borzoi was
her tail yet further between her legs, and increased her speed. But
it. As if aware of her danger, the wolf turned her eyes on Karay, tucked
dog with its felted hair hanging from its thigh was within five paces of
Thanks to the delay caused by this crossing of the wolf's path, the old

"Karay? Old fellow!..." wailed Nicholas.

ground, bleeding from a gash in its side.
yellowish borzoi, which, with a piercing yelp, fell with its head on the
than anyone could have expected and, gnashing her teeth, flew at the
front and almost knocked her over. But the wolf jumped up more quickly
not know, from another leash, rushed impetuously at the wolf from in
There was still hope. A long, yellowish young borzoi, one Nicholas did
him, he saw hounds and a huntsman galloping almost straight at the wolf.
wolf would certainly escape should she reach it. But, coming toward
Nicholas could already see not far in front of him the wood where the
borzoi's slower pace made it plain that Karay had miscalculated.
aside to intercept it. But the quickness of the wolf's lope and the
stretched himself to the utmost and, watching the wolf, galloped heavily
was now his only hope. Karay, with all the strength age had left him,
"Karay, ulyulyu!..." he shouted, looking round for the old borzoi who

with a hoarse voice.
"She'll get away! No, it's impossible!" thought Nicholas, still shouting

the borzois, who did not get any closer to her.
and bounded forward, followed at the distance of a couple of feet by all
aside in terror. The wolf crouched, gnashed her teeth, and again rose
at the wolf, and seized it by its hindquarters, but immediately jumped
The reddish Lyubim rushed forward from behind Milka, sprang impetuously

"Ulyulyulyulyu!" shouted Nicholas.

and stiffened her forelegs.
of putting on speed as she usually did Milka suddenly raised her tail
was ahead of it; but the wolf turned its head to face her, and instead
powerful quarters, gaining upon the wolf. Nearer and nearer... now she
The first to come into view was Milka, with her black markings and
increasing her speed, bounded on in the same direction along the hollow.
borzois, nor the ground over which he went: he saw only the wolf, who,
did not hear his own cry nor feel that he was galloping, nor see the
off the wolf, and the borzois passed it, running faster still. Nicholas
his good horse darted headlong downhill, leaping over gullies to head
"Ulyulyu!" cried Nicholas, in a voice not his own, and of its own accord

quiet, long, easy yet resolute lope.
herself, and she moved forward without again looking round and with a
"Back or forward? Eh, no matter, forward..." the wolf seemed to say to

toward Rostov, she paused.
seen before--human eyes fixed upon her--and turning her head a little
physiognomy changed: she shuddered, seeing what she had probably never
approached him coming from the copse. Suddenly the wolf's whole
"Shall I loose them or not?" Nicholas asked himself as the wolf

tail from which tufts of matted hair hung down.
scratching his hindquarters and, cocking his ears, got up with quivering
jerking the rings of the leashes and pricking their ears. Karay finished
"Ulyulyulyu!" whispered Rostov, pouting his lips. The borzois jumped up,

baring his yellow teeth and snapping at his hind legs.
Old Karay had turned his head and was angrily searching for fleas,
They stood or lay not seeing the wolf or understanding the situation.
no one saw her. Rostov, holding his breath, looked round at the borzois.
big reddish belly. She ran without hurry, evidently feeling sure that
a gully that lay in her path. She was an old animal with a gray back and
in doubt for over a second. The wolf ran forward and jumped heavily over
noise, or display, that Rostov could not believe his eyes and remained
height of happiness was reached--and so simply, without warning, or
breath, as a man does at the coming of something long hoped for. The
the deserted field. "No, it can't be!" thought Rostov, taking a deep
Again he looked to the right and saw something running toward him across

note in the cries of the dogs.
left and then to the right and listening to the slightest variation of
want only that!" thought he, straining eyes and ears and looking to the
clearly through his mind. "Only once in my life to get an old wolf, I
unlucky." Memories of Austerlitz and of Dolokhov flashed rapidly and
be worth! It is not to be! Everywhere, at cards and in war, I am always
"No, I shan't have such luck," thought Rostov, "yet what wouldn't it

just visible above the bush on his right.
undergrowth and the gully with its water-worn side and "Uncle's" cap
edge of the wood, with the two scraggy oaks rising above the aspen
during that half-hour Rostov cast eager and restless glances over the
there--and seize it by the throat in a death grip!" A thousand times
let Karay spring at it--in sight of 'Uncle' who is watching from over
this of Thee, but for God's sake do let the old wolf come my way and
me?" he said to God. "I know Thou art great, and that it is a sin to ask
arising from trivial causes. "What would it be to Thee to do this for
shamefaced feeling with which men pray at moments of great excitement
that the wolf should come his way. He prayed with that passionate and
alternated with despair. Several times he addressed a prayer to God
from what side the beast would come and how he would set upon it. Hope
moment. He made thousands of different conjectures as to where and
that something had gone wrong. He expected the wolf to come his way any
separated into two packs, that somewhere a wolf was being chased, and
copse. He knew that young and old wolves were there, that the hounds had
approached, receded, and rose, he realized what was happening at the
whose notes were familiar to him, by the way the voices of the huntsmen
the way the hunt approached and receded, by the cries of the dogs
Nicholas Rostov meanwhile remained at his post, waiting for the wolf. By


CHAPTER V





the wolf, but it vanished into the wood before they could do so.
bushes while the field was coming up on both sides, all trying to head
his plight. But Simon was no longer there. He was galloping round by the
schoolboy, looked round, trying by a smile to win Simon's sympathy for
had aroused and flew off after the hounds. The count, like a punished
flanks of his sweating chestnut gelding with all the anger the count
say more to the frightened and shamefaced count, he lashed the heaving
"You've let the wolf go!... What sportsmen!" and as if scorning to

"Blast you!" he shouted, holding up his whip threateningly at the count.

his eyes flashed lightning.
"Ulyulyulyu! ulyulyu!..." he cried. When he caught sight of the count

his disheveled gray hair hanging over his flushed, perspiring face.
dark with sweat. On its long back sat Daniel, hunched forward, capless,
bushes parted behind the hounds and Daniel's chestnut horse appeared,
the field toward the very spot where the wolf had disappeared. The hazel
helter-skelter from the wood opposite and the whole pack rushed across
like a wail, first one hound, then another, and then another, sprang
disappeared into the skirt of the wood. At the same instant, with a cry
from side to side, gave a couple of leaps and with a swish of its tail
like a man suffering from the quinsy, and, still slightly swaying
The wolf paused, turned its heavy forehead toward the dogs awkwardly,

horses' feet at the wolf.
The angry borzois whined and getting free of the leash rushed past the
lope farther to the left to the very place where they were standing.
wolf which, softly swaying from side to side, was coming at a quiet
The count and Simon galloped out of the wood and saw on their left a

toward the count.
fretted to utter that word, and letting the borzois slip he galloped
"Look out!" he shouted, in a voice plainly showing that he had long

other side.
starting out of his head, raising his cap and pointing before him to the
The count turned and saw on his right Mitka staring at him with eyes

in front of them.
approached, as if the hounds in full cry and Daniel ulyulyuing were just
Then, unexpectedly, as often happens, the sound of the hunt suddenly

Simon were looking at him.
snuffbox. Nastasya Ivanovna dismounted to pick it up. The count and
pushing forward out of the wood. The count started and dropped the
opened it and took a pinch. "Back!" cried Simon to a borzoi that was
entangled; the count too sighed and, noticing the snuffbox in his hand,
Simon sighed and stooped to straighten the leash a young borzoi had

distant.
of both packs mingled and broke apart again, but both were becoming more
was with this that Daniel's voice was heard calling ulyulyu. The sounds
the distance, the other pack rushed by the wood past the count, and it
sound of the larger pack, eagerly giving tongue, began to die away in
convinced themselves that the hounds had separated into two packs: the
After listening a few moments in silence, the count and his attendant

carried far beyond out into the open field.
bass, now piercingly shrill. His voice seemed to fill the whole wood and
cry of ulyulyu, and above the others rose Daniel's voice, now a deep
a wolf. The whippers-in no longer set on the hounds, but changed to the
with that peculiar lift in the note that indicates that they are after
pack joined the first three hounds and they could be heard in full cry,
came the deep tones of the wolf call from Daniel's hunting horn; the
the snuffbox in his hand but not taking any. After the cry of the hounds
the distance straight before him, down the narrow open space, holding
The count, forgetting to smooth out the smile on his face, looked into

whispered, "straight to the Lyadov uplands."
finger at his master. "They are on the scent of the cubs..." he
giving tongue. He bent down his head and listened, shaking a warning
distinctly caught the music of the hunt with only two or three hounds
Sidorych..." Simon did not finish, for on the still air he had
"The other day when he came out from Mass in full uniform, Michael

to get at his snuffbox.
said more. "To search far," he said, turning back the skirt of his coat
"To search far..." repeated the count, evidently sorry Simon had not

find another as smart."
and the rider beyond all price! Yes, one would have to search far to
when they rushed from the covert... the horse worth a thousand rubles
Zavarzinsk thicket the other day! Leaped a fearful place; what a sight
"A perfect picture! How he chased a fox out of the rank grass by the

"Rides well, eh? And how well he looks on his horse, eh?"

what would please his master.
that Daniel and I are often quite astounded," said Simon, well knowing
"Yes, sir. He knows where to stand. He understands the matter so well

"And Nicholas? Where is he? By the Lyadov upland, isn't he?"

"Of course! It's marvelous. So bold, so easy!"

"She's as good as many a man!"
"And you're surprised at the way she rides, Simon, eh?" said the count.

smiling. "Though she's a lady, she's very fond of hunting."
"With young Count Peter, by the Zharov rank grass," answered Simon,

young countess?" he asked. "Where is she?"
"Hush!" whispered the count and turned to Simon. "Have you seen the

"I know a thing or two myself!" said Nastasya Ivanovna.

scare away the beast, Daniel'll give it you!"
"Well, Nastasya Ivanovna!" whispered the count, winking at him. "If you

Nastasya Ivanovna.
peaked cap on his head. He was the buffoon, who went by a woman's name,
person was a gray-bearded old man in a woman's cloak, with a tall
plain that he had had a lesson) and stopped behind the count. This
chat. A third person rode up circumspectly through the wood (it was
thirty years, and understanding the mood he was in expected a pleasant
glancing at his master with whom he had lived on the best of terms for
The thin, hollow-cheeked Chekmar, having got everything ready, kept

outing.
wrapped up in his fur coat, he looked like a child taken out for an
rather moist and glittered more than usual, and as he sat in his saddle,
He was somewhat flushed with the wine and the drive. His eyes were

washed it down with half a bottle of his favorite Bordeaux.
count had drunk a silver cupful of mulled brandy, taken a snack, and
horseman and keen rider to hounds. Before the hunt, by old custom, the
the edge of the wood stood Mitka, the count's other groom, a daring
Two wise old dogs lay down unleashed. Some hundred paces farther along
wolfhounds, who had, however, grown fat like their master and his horse.
now somewhat stiff in the saddle. Chekmar held in leash three formidable
Beside him was Simon Chekmar, his personal attendant, an old horseman

about with a smile.
settled himself in the saddle, and, feeling that he was ready, looked
the bushy edge of the road where he was to stand, arranged his reins,
heart a keen sportsman, knew the rules of the hunt well, and rode to
His horses and trap were sent home. Count Ilya Rostov, though not at
and comfortable horse, Viflyanka, which was turning gray, like himself.
on his hunting knives and horn, he mounted his good, sleek, well-fed,
where a wolf might come out. Having straightened his coat and fastened
with his black horses over the winter rye to the place reserved for him,
Ilya Rostov, cheerful, flushed, and with quivering cheeks, drove up
to be late, and the huntsmen had not yet reached their places when Count
The old count, knowing his son's ardor in the hunt, hurried so as not

unaided. They all took up their places.
shaggy old dog with a hanging jowl, famous for having tackled a big wolf
answering "Uncle's" remark by this call to his borzoi. Karay was a
"That's as may happen," answered Rostov. "Karay, here!" he shouted,

don't let her slip!"
"Well, nephew, you're going for a big wolf," said "Uncle." "Mind and

out--went round above the ravine.
Natasha where she was to stand--a spot where nothing could possibly run
with "Uncle" where they should set on the hounds, and having shown
the huntsmen were already nearing it. Rostov, having finally settled
The oasis of the Otradnoe covert came in sight a few hundred yards off,

nothing to hold on to."
fall off your horse," he added, "because--that's it, come on!--you've
"A good thing too, little countess," said "Uncle," "only mind you don't

to our places and won't budge."
"You mustn't think we'll be in anyone's way, Uncle," she said. "We'll go

it.
distance that ought to separate them at that moment. Natasha understood
Nicholas, and looked sternly at his sister, trying to make her feel the
"In the first place, Trunila is not a 'dog,' but a harrier," thought

referring to her favorite hound.
"Nicholas, what a fine dog Trunila is! He knew me," said Natasha,

"Uncle" sternly.
"Good morning, good morning! But don't go overriding the hounds," said

"Good morning, Uncle! We are going too!" shouted Petya.

like to combine frivolity with the serious business of hunting.
"Uncle" looked round disapprovingly at Petya and Natasha. He did not

and reined him in without effort with a firm hand.
at his horse. Natasha sat easily and confidently on her black Arabchik
appointed to look after her. Petya, who was laughing, whipped and pulled
who always kept close to her, by Michael, a huntsman, and by a groom
face and shining eyes, galloped up to them. She was followed by Petya
side by side. Natasha, muffled up in shawls which did not hide her eager
The hounds were joined into one pack, and "Uncle" and Nicholas rode on

"That's where I'm going. Shall we join up our packs?" asked Nicholas.

the cubs from under your very nose."
are at Korniki with their hounds. That's it. Come on!... They'll take
expression.) "Take the covert at once, for my Girchik says the Ilagins
thing you're going. That's it! Come on!" (This was "Uncle's" favorite
neighbor.) "I knew you wouldn't be able to resist it and it's a good
a distant relative of the Rostovs', a man of small means, and their
"That's it. Come on!... I was sure of it," began "Uncle." (He was

"Good morning, Uncle!" said Nicholas, when the old man drew near.

fresh-looking, handsome old man with a large gray mustache.
dogs appeared out of the mist, approaching the Rostovs. In front rode a
When they had gone a little less than a mile, five more riders with

hound could be heard.
the snort of a horse, the crack of a whip, or the whine of a straggling
was still, warm, and silent. Occasionally the whistle of a huntsman,
seemed to descend evenly and imperceptibly toward the earth, the air
splashing into puddles as they crossed a road. The misty sky still
The horses stepped over the field as over a thick carpet, now and then

along the road and field leading to the Otradnoe covert.
fence they all spread out evenly and quietly, without noise or talk,
business, his place, what he had to do. As soon as they had passed the
Each dog knew its master and its call. Each man in the hunt knew his

thirty dogs and twenty horsemen.
belonging to members of the family, there were about a hundred and
and more than forty borzois, so that, with the borzois on the leash
whippers-in. Besides the family, there were eight borzoi kennelmen
They were taking fifty-four hounds, with six hunt attendants and

small trap straight to a spot reserved for him.
groom in attendance on him, while the count himself was to drive in a
The old count's horse, a sorrel gelding called Viflyanka, was led by the
across the threshing ground to a field leading to the Otradnoe wood.
chestnut Donets, and whistling to his own leash of borzois, set off
a pack of hounds and huntsmen on ahead to find the quarry, mounted his
tell him something. He had a look at all the details of the hunt, sent
attending to trifles, went past Natasha and Petya who were trying to
with a stern and serious air which showed that now was no time for
In an hour's time the whole hunting party was at the porch. Nicholas,

with the others.
very good spirits on this fifteenth of September, prepared to go out
but had now handed it all completely over to his son's care, being in
The old count, who had always kept up an enormous hunting establishment


CHAPTER IV





lady.
careful as he went not to inflict any accidental injury on the young
cast down his eyes and hurried out as if it were none of his business,
have anything to do with a young lady seemed to him impossible. He
It seemed to Daniel irksome and improper to be in a room at all, but to

added to the huntsman.
tell them to saddle for us, and Michael must come with my dogs," she
"Yes, I'll go. I shall certainly go," said Natasha decisively. "Daniel,

"But you can't. Mamma said you mustn't," said Nicholas to Natasha.

"'No barrier bars a Russian's path'--we'll go!" shouted Petya.

us about it."
are going by yourself, are having the horses saddled and said nothing to
"You know it is my greatest pleasure," said Natasha. "It's not fair; you

"We are going, but only wolf hunting: it would be dull for you."
intended to hunt seriously, he did not want to take Natasha and Petya.
"Yes, we are going," replied Nicholas reluctantly, for today, as he

help going."
wouldn't go, but I knew that today is the sort of day when you couldn't
"You are going?" asked Natasha. "I knew you would! Sonya said you

Petya ran in at the same time.
finished dressing and with her old nurse's big shawl wrapped round her.
go Natasha came in with rapid steps, not having done up her hair or
ordered the horses to be saddled. But just as Daniel was about to
the hounds were fit (Daniel himself wished to go hunting), Nicholas
Having finished his inquiries and extorted from Daniel an opinion that

open under the sky once more.
that was necessary so as to get from under that ceiling, out into the
breaking something in the master's apartment, and he hastened to say all
just inside the door, trying to speak softly and not move, for fear of
surroundings of human life. Daniel himself felt this, and as usual stood
like seeing a horse or a bear on the floor among the furniture and
study. Though Daniel was not a big man, to see him in a room was
Five minutes later Daniel and Uvarka were standing in Nicholas' big

"Yes, sir."

"Then put off feeding them."

"As you please."

Uvarka."
"We ought to go, don't you think so?" said Nicholas. "Come to me with

mile and a half from the house.)
knew, had moved with her cubs to the Otradnoe copse, a small place a
howling there." (This meant that the she-wolf, about whom they both
pause. "He says she's moved them into the Otradnoe enclosure. They were
"I sent Uvarka at dawn to listen," his bass boomed out after a minute's

Daniel did not answer, but winked instead.

scratching Milka behind the ears.
"It's a good day, eh? For a hunt and a gallop, eh?" asked Nicholas,

resist it?" those eyes seemed to be asking.
eyes gazed from under his brows at his master, who was silent. "Can you
as a proto-deacon's and hoarse with hallooing--and two flashing black
"What orders, your excellency?" said the huntsman in his deep bass, deep

resolutions, as a lover forgets in the presence of his mistress.
irresistible passion for sport which makes a man forget all his previous
the hounds, and the huntsman that he was being carried away by that
"Daniel!" Nicholas said timidly, conscious at the sight of the weather,

huntsman.
and who considered himself above them, was all the same his serf and
to his master. Nicholas knew that this Daniel, disdainful of everybody
to his master and looked at him scornfully. This scorn was not offensive
everything that is only seen in huntsmen. He doffed his Circassian cap
long bent whip in his hand, and that look of independence and scorn of
man with hair cut straight over his forehead, Ukrainian fashion, a
came Daniel the head huntsman and head kennelman, a gray, wrinkled old
unites the deepest bass with the shrillest tenor, and round the corner
"O-hoy!" came at that moment, that inimitable huntsman's call which

against his legs.
headlong toward the porch with lifted tail, began rubbing himself
sight of his master from the garden path, arched his back and, rushing
him right on his nose and mustache. Another borzoi, a dog, catching
hind legs, lay down like a hare, and then suddenly jumped up and licked
with prominent black eyes, got up on seeing her master, stretched her
decaying leaves and of dog. Milka, a black-spotted, broad-haunched bitch
Nicholas went out into the wet and muddy porch. There was a smell of
and at a short distance merged into the dull, moist veil of mist.
the kitchen garden looked wet and black and glistened like poppy seed
transparent drops which fell on the freshly fallen leaves. The earth in
particles of drizzling mist. The bare twigs in the garden were hung with
The only motion in the air was that of the dripping, microscopic
as if the sky were melting and sinking to the earth without any wind.
the window, he saw it was an unsurpassable morning for hunting: it was
On the fifteenth, when young Rostov, in his dressing gown, looked out of
sharp, but toward evening the sky became overcast and it began to thaw.
All that day the hounds remained at home. It was frosty and the air was

undisturbed litter of wolf cubs.
a distant expedition, starting from the oak grove where there was an
a three days' rest and then, on the sixteenth of September, to go on
so jaded that at a meeting of the huntsmen it was decided to give them
sportsman Rostov had not merely reached hard winter condition, but were
the best time of the year for the chase. The hounds of that ardent young
beginning to scatter, and the young wolves were bigger than dogs. It was
hares had already half changed their summer coats, the fox cubs were
become golden and bright-red islands amid the green winter rye. The
August had still been green islands amid black fields and stubble, had
spring buckwheat. The wooded ravines and the copses, which at the end of
trodden down by the cattle, and against the pale-yellow stubble of the
bright green stood out sharply against the brownish strips of winter rye
an earth saturated by autumn rains. The verdure had thickened and its
The weather was already growing wintry and morning frosts congealed


CHAPTER III





which his father kept a large establishment.
passionate enthusiasm to what was to him a new pursuit--the chase--for
no further part in any business affairs, but devoted himself with
the old countess to weep tears of joy. After that, young Rostov took
poor. Well then, this!" and he tore up the note, and by so doing caused
Anna Mikhaylovna and I don't like Boris, but they were our friends and
"This," answered Nicholas. "You say it rests with me. Well, I don't like

two thousand rubles, and asked him what he thought of doing with it.
informed him that she had a promissory note from Anna Mikhaylovna for
meddle in business affairs. But once the countess called her son and
don't understand at all," said he to himself, and after that he did not
and the stakes at cards meant, but carrying forward to another page I
from page to page," he thought. "I used to understand what a 'corner'
"Devil take all these peasants, and money matters, and carryings forward

it all less than you do."
"No, Papa. Forgive me if I have caused you unpleasantness. I understand

business. I am old. I..."
but he did not know how to remedy it). "No, I beg you to attend to the
mismanaged his wife's property and was to blame toward his children,
"No, my dear boy" (the count, too, felt embarrassed. He knew he had

done, I have done; but, if you like, I won't speak to him again."
"Papa, he is a blackguard and a thief! I know he is! And what I have

carried forward--and you did not look at the other page."
"You were angry that he had not entered those 700 rubles. But they were

this crazy world."
"I knew," thought Nicholas, "that I should never understand anything in

told me all about it."
"But you know, my dear boy, it's a pity you got excited! Mitenka has

smile, said to him:
Next day the old count called his son aside and, with an embarrassed

tiptoe and listened, as he lighted one pipe after another.
excitement might have on her son. She went several times to his door on
improve, but on the other hand felt anxious as to the effect this
lodge, was calmed by the thought that now their affairs would certainly
The countess, who heard at once from the maids what had happened at the

with resolute strides and went into the house.
The young count paid no heed to them, but, breathing hard, passed by

where the steward's high bedstead stood with its patchwork quilt.
faces out of the door of a room where a bright samovar was boiling and
Mitenka's wife and sisters-in-law thrust their heads and frightened

knew of its protective qualities.)
hide there, and many of the residents at Otradnoe, hiding from Mitenka,
at Otradnoe. Mitenka himself, returning tipsy from the town, used to
shrubbery. (This shrubbery was a well-known haven of refuge for culprits
Mitenka flew headlong down the six steps and ran away into the

see your face here again, you villain!"
at convenient moments between the words, shouting, "Be off! Never let me
the neck and applied his foot and knee to his behind with great agility
the face and with bloodshot eyes, dragged Mitenka out by the scruff of
Then with no less fear and delight they saw how the young count, red in

my father!... Robbing us!..." and so on.
"Robber!... Ungrateful wretch!... I'll hack the dog to pieces! I'm not

abuse, dreadful words, ejaculated one after the other.
roaring and snapping and rising louder and louder, and then words of
passage, heard with fear and delight first the young count's voice
a peasant delegate, and the village clerk, who were waiting in the
of the accounts with Mitenka did not last long. The village elder,
frightened and bewildered Mitenka. The conversation and the examination
what an account of everything might be Nicholas knew even less than the
was going, to Mitenka's lodge and demanded an account of everything. But
went, angry and scowling and without answering questions as to where he
burden as quickly as possible, on the third day after his arrival he
matters for which his mother had called him home. To throw off this
worried by the impending necessity of interfering in the stupid business
After reaching home Nicholas was at first serious and even dull. He was


CHAPTER II





always ended with these words.) "He is an excellent man!"
from him! However, God grant that everything turns out well!" (She
her girlhood, but I know what she is like every time we receive a letter
being so bright: that's because she's living through the last days of
is very delicate. Don't tell Natasha. And don't attach importance to her
before December. What can be keeping him? Illness, probably! His health
a daughter's future married happiness, "he writes that he won't come
Andrew's, with that latent grudge a mother always has in regard to
"You see he writes," said she, showing her son a letter of Prince

had doubts about this marriage.
and somewhat to his satisfaction, that in the depth of her soul she too
touched on this topic with his mother, he discovered, to his surprise
"Why this delay? Why no betrothal?" he thought. Once, when he had

something not quite right about this intended marriage.
not seen her with Prince Andrew. It always seemed to him that there was
He could not believe that her fate was sealed, especially as he had
Nicholas and even made him regard Bolkonski's courtship skeptically.
even-tempered and calm and quite as cheerful as of old. This amazed
all like a girl in love and parted from her affianced husband. She was
Her brother often wondered as he looked at her. She did not seem at

Nicholas was silent and agreed with her.

"You don't at all understand," she said.

it so.
to enter a family against the father's will, and that she herself wished
to him that it could not be otherwise, and that it would be a bad thing
for a year; but Natasha attacked her brother with exasperation, proving
Nicholas expressed his disapproval of the postponement of the marriage

calm and contented now. Not at all as before."
peace and settled. I know that no better man than he exists, and I am
my teacher, and with Denisov, but this is quite different. I feel at
"How shall I put it?" replied Natasha. "I was in love with Boris, with

you very much in love?"
"Very glad," answered Nicholas. "He is an excellent fellow.... And are

"Well, are you glad?" Natasha asked. "I am so tranquil and happy now."

Otradnoe and showed him his last letter.
She told him about her romance with Prince Andrew and of his visit to

"Yes, yes, yes!" cried Natasha, joyfully.

"On the contrary, but what dignity? A princess!" he whispered to her.

"How? Am I uglier?"

"You're not the same at all," he said.

laughed whenever he looked at her.
already breaking. As for Natasha, for a long while Nicholas wondered and
boy of thirteen, merry, witty, and mischievous, with a voice that was
Petya and Natasha surprised Nicholas most. Petya was a big handsome
faithful, unalterable love of this girl had a gladdening effect on him.
She exhaled happiness and love from the time Nicholas returned, and the
and promised nothing more than she was already, but that was enough.
their affairs. Sonya was nearly twenty; she had stopped growing prettier
be, and which, as Nicholas soon found out, was due to the bad state of
was a certain uneasiness and occasional discord, which there used not to
and mother were much the same, only a little older. What was new in them
hurry?"--Nicholas began to settle down in his old home world. His father
expectation--the feeling that "everything is just the same, so why did I
After the rapture of meeting, and after that odd feeling of unsatisfied

his home.
tip, and on arriving he ran breathlessly, like a boy, up the steps of
the last post station before Otradnoe he gave the driver a three-ruble
attraction is in inverse proportion to the square of the distance. At
though this feeling of his was subject to the law by which the force of
of home grew stronger the nearer he approached it--far stronger, as
how things would be at Otradnoe and what he would find there. Thoughts
three roans and Dozhoyveyko, his quartermaster, and to wonder anxiously
squadron; but when he had gone more than halfway he began to forget his
Rostov's thoughts, as is usual in such cases, were behind him, with the
During the first half of the journey--from Kremenchug to Kiev--all

post station.
and then they put him in his sleigh and escorted him as far as the first
soldiers of the third squadron tossed him too, and shouted "hurrah!"
Basov; the tipsy officers tossed, embraced, and dropped Rostov; the
bands and two choirs of singers. Rostov danced the Trepak with Major
subscription was fifteen rubles a head, and at which there were two
regiment, but the whole brigade--gave Rostov a dinner to which the
obtained his leave. His hussar comrades--not only those of his own
somewhere where everything was stupid and confused. A week later he
without him--he knew he must go away from this good, bright world to
one in honor of their Polish Mademoiselle Borzozowska) would take place
Mademoiselle Przazdziecka (out of rivalry to the Uhlans who had given
seemed that the ball the hussars were giving in honor of the Polish
he would sell for two thousand rubles; incomprehensible as it
Count Golukhovski, who was bargaining for the horses Rostov had betted
that he would go away without having sold his three roans to the Polish
Order of St. Anne for the last maneuvers; strange as it was to think
extremely--whether he was promoted to a captaincy or would receive the
go away without having heard from the staff--and this interested him
home. Difficult and strange as it was for him to reflect that he would
turned up in the evening that he was applying for leave and was going
(Denisov's servant who had remained with him) and his comrades who
he returned with the horse all in a lather, he informed Lavrushka
gray stallion that had not been ridden for a long time, and when
after-dinner nap he gave orders to saddle Mars, an extremely vicious
to go home on leave. Why he had to go he did not know; but after his
The right thing now was, if not to retire from the service, at any rate

matter-of-fact man which showed him what he ought to do.
This letter touched Nicholas. He had that common sense of a

wretched," wrote the countess.
you, come at once if you do not wish to make me and the whole family
and things were going from bad to worse. "For God's sake, I implore
so much, and was so good-natured, that everybody took advantage of him
would all have to go begging. The count was so weak, and trusted Mitenka
matters in hand, their whole property would be sold by auction and they
persuaded him to return. She wrote that if he did not come and take
his mother, written without his father's knowledge, and that letter
put it off. But in the spring of that year, he received a letter from
about Sonya and about the confusion of their affairs, and Nicholas again
before she was married, but then came the maneuvers, and considerations
hesitated whether he should not apply for leave in order to see Natasha
might dispense with permission from his dotard father. For a moment he
was no such great honor after all, and that if he loved Natasha he
have been there to show that fellow Bolkonski that connection with him
home; and secondly, from his hussar point of view, he regretted not to
cared more than for anyone else in the family, should be lost to the
Nicholas. In the first place he was sorry that Natasha, for whom he
the old prince made difficulties. This letter grieved and mortified
Bolkonski, and that the wedding would be in a year's time because
from his parents, in which they told him of Natasha's engagement to
which said nothing of when he would return. In 1810 he received letters
French, beginning: "My dear Mamma," and ending: "Your obedient son,"
complicated; and he replied to his mother in cold, formal letters in
love and his promise to her. It was all dreadfully difficult and
stewards, quarrels, and intrigues, its ties, society, and with Sonya's
its embarrassments and affairs to be straightened out, its accounts with
sooner or later he would have to re-enter that whirlpool of life, with
entanglements of life, he was living so calmly and quietly. He felt that
take him away from surroundings in which, protected from all the
Reading these letters, Nicholas felt a dread of their wanting to

back to gladden and comfort his old parents.
into greater and greater disorder, and that it was time for him to come
more frequent complaints from his mother that their affairs were falling
contented with his life. Of late, in 1809, he found in letters from home
and respected by his comrades, subordinates, and superiors, and was well
acquaintances would have considered rather bad form, but who was liked
Rostov had become a bluff, good-natured fellow, whom his Moscow

already commanded the squadron he had taken over from Denisov.
after 1807, he continued to serve in the Pavlograd regiment, in which he
Nicholas Rostov experienced this blissful condition to the full when,

irreproachable idleness.
military service has consisted and will consist in this compulsory and
is the lot of a whole class--the military. The chief attraction of
blessedness. And such a state of obligatory and irreproachable idleness
duty, he would have found one of the conditions of man's primitive
find a state in which he felt that though idle he was fulfilling his
inner voice tells us we are in the wrong if we are idle. If man could
our moral nature is such that we cannot be both idle and at ease. An
because we have to seek our bread in the sweat of our brows, but because
retained a love of idleness, but the curse weighs on the race not only
condition of the first man's blessedness before the Fall. Fallen man has
The Bible legend tells us that the absence of labor--idleness--was a


CHAPTER I





BOOK SEVEN: 1810 - 11





was a sinner who loved her father and little nephew more than God.
(Nicholas), her resolve weakened. She wept quietly, and felt that she
But afterwards, when she saw her father and especially little Koko

sighing..." thought Princess Mary.
reach that eternal, quiet haven, where there is neither sorrow nor
my legs fail, and I'll lie down and die somewhere, and shall at last
used to it or getting to love it, I shall go farther. I will go on till
"I shall come to a place and pray there, and before having time to get

eternal joy and bliss.
reaching at last the place where there is no more sorrow or sighing, but
saint's shrine to another, free from envy, earthly love, or desire, and
on her back, along the dusty road, directing her wanderings from one
Theodosia's side, dressed in coarse rags, walking with a staff, a wallet
running away from home. In imagination she already pictured herself by
that several times she was on the point of abandoning everything and
simple speech, mechanical to them but to her so full of deep meaning,
Often, listening to the pilgrims' tales, she was so stimulated by their

put her project into execution.
Princess Mary paused, uncertain whether the time had not already come to
Often, approaching the chest of drawers containing this secret treasure,
herself: a coarse smock, bast shoes, a rough coat, and a black kerchief.
pilgrims, Princess Mary prepared a pilgrim's complete costume for
and he approved of her intention. Under guise of a present for the
this thought to no one but to her confessor, Father Akinfi, the monk,
strange as it might seem, she must go on a pilgrimage. She disclosed
thought about this for a long time, and at last made up her mind that,
become a pilgrim herself. When Theodosia had gone to sleep Princess Mary
life suddenly came to Princess Mary with such force that she resolved to
her life, the thought that Theodosia alone had found the true path of
a room with a lamp dimly lit before the icon Theodosia was talking of
heavy chains. Princess Mary was particularly fond of her. Once, when in
Theodosia, who for over thirty years had gone about barefoot and worn
There was one pilgrim, a quiet pockmarked little woman of fifty called

is no life or truth!"
well as for those who protect one: higher than that life and truth there
no one any harm but praying for all--for those who drive one away as
wander in hempen rags from place to place under an assumed name, doing
the cares of worldly welfare, in order without clinging to anything to
him but for fear of causing him to sin. To leave family, home, and all
door, afraid of being seen by the prince, not for fear of ill-usage by
these despised God's folk who, wallet on back, come to me by the back
is it that no one realizes this?" thought Princess Mary. "No one except
a probation; yet we cling to it and think to find happiness in it. "How
came down to earth and told us that this life is but for a moment and is
instant. Not only do we know this ourselves, but Christ, the Son of God,
eternal souls, for the attainment of benefits which endure but for an
and suffered and tormented one another and injured their souls, their
distinguished and wealthier match for Andrew. And they all struggled
to another woman. Her father objected to this because he wanted a more
wife, she died, but that was not enough: he wanted to bind his happiness
impossible, visionary, sinful happiness. Prince Andrew had loved his
toiling, suffering, struggling, and harming one another, to obtain that
short-sightedness of men who seek enjoyment and happiness here on earth:
observation she had of life, the greater was her wonder at the
prince's knowledge. The longer she lived, the more experience and
folk--the half-witted and other pilgrims who visited her without the
of her life. This comforting dream and hope were given her by God's
heart had a hidden dream and hope that supplied the chief consolation
must have personal hopes, Princess Mary in the profoundest depths of her
Princess Mary's joys and consolations; but besides that, since everyone
Little Nicholas and his education, her brother Andrew, and religion were

idea.
letter, but comforted him with hopes of reconciling their father to the
Frenchwoman. She wrote to Prince Andrew about the reception of his
noticed that her father was really associating more and more with the
And latterly, to her surprise and bewilderment, Princess Mary

splendid princess!"
"Why shouldn't I marry her?" he asked his daughter. "She'll make a

amiabilities to Mademoiselle Bourienne.
for irony a fresh one was now added--allusions to stepmothers and
expression in his treatment of his daughter. To his former pretexts
But repressed vexation at his son's poor-spirited behavior found
After this outburst the prince did not speak any more about the matter.

name! Go out into the frost... the frost... the frost!"
live with him too?" he added, turning to Princess Mary. "Go in heavens
in my house--let him marry and live by himself. Perhaps you will go and
without a stepmother either! Only one thing, no more women are wanted
stepmother and I'll marry Bourienne!... Ha, ha, ha! He mustn't be
him that he may marry tomorrow if he likes. She will be little Nicholas'
eh? Yes, a nice stepmother little Nicholas will have! Write and tell
"Marry, marry, my boy!... A good family!... Clever people, eh? Rich,

and, raising his voice more and more, cried:
The princess was about to reply, but her father would not let her speak

long--I shall soon set him free."
"Write and tell your brother to wait till I am dead.... It won't be

letter to her father. The next day the old prince said to her quietly:
After long hesitations, doubts, and prayers, Princess Mary gave the

hope that he may consent to reduce the term by four months."
and to let me know how he looks at the whole matter and whether there is
question, and beg you to choose a good moment to hand him the letter
destroy half my happiness. I am now writing to him about the same
anger, now that he may perhaps remain with us such a short time, would
always shall be independent; but to go against his will and arouse his
and my relations with Father. I want nothing from him. I have been and
as it is I have to postpone my return for three months. You know me
doctors did not keep me here at the spas I should be back in Russia, but
that period, have passed, and my resolution is firmer than ever. If the
then insisted on a delay of a year and now already six months, half of
"the matter was not then so definitely settled as it is now. My father
of his displeasure without attaining her object. "Besides," he wrote,
father to give his consent, irritating him and having to bear the brunt
to his father. He had not done so for fear Princess Mary should ask her
resolve when he had last visited Bald Hills, though he had spoken of it
was. He asked his sister to forgive him for not having told her of his
as he did now and that only now did he understand and know what life
and confiding affection for his sister. He wrote that he had never loved
The whole letter breathed loving rapture for his betrothed and tender
surprising news. He informed her of his engagement to Natasha Rostova.
from Prince Andrew in Switzerland in which he gave her strange and
In the middle of the summer Princess Mary received an unexpected letter


CHAPTER XXVI





MARY

friend, Mademoiselle Bourienne, sends you kisses.
my dear friend. May God keep you in His holy and mighty care. My dear
running on too long and am at the end of my second sheet. Good-by,
he would choose her for a wife, and frankly I do not wish it. But I am
is not the kind of girl who could please Prince Andrew. I do not think
little angel a stepmother. Secondly because, as far as I know, that girl
deep in his heart for him ever to decide to give her a successor and our
speaks about the wife he has lost, the grief of that loss has gone too
certainly not her; and this is why: first, I know that though he rarely
the little Rostova. I do not think my brother will ever marry again, and
that you write about--I mean the report of my brother's betrothal to
way rumors fly from Petersburg to Moscow, especially such false ones as
arrival in Petersburg he received only his due. I always wonder at the
here, from his peasants up to the gentry, is incalculable. On his
relation, but I never doubted it. The good he has done to everybody
cultivated, and capable of the young men. Forgive my vanity as a
write that in Petersburg he is spoken of as one of the most active,
which the doctors recommended long ago. I hope it will cure him. You
nervous. I am anxious about him and glad he is taking this trip abroad
he has grown physically much weaker. He has become thinner and more
that life is not over for him. But together with this mental change
heart of gold to which I know no equal. He has realized, it seems to me,
become as I used to know him when a child: kind, affectionate, with that
his sorrow he only this year quite recovered his spirits. He has again
absence. He, as I wrote you before, has changed very much of late. After
Our family life goes on in the old way except for my brother Andrew's

be decided very shortly.
disputes about Buonaparte which would be inevitable. In any case it will
derive from a course of treatment he would lose as a result of the
of expressing his views regardless of anybody. All the benefit he might
Moscow; for he foresees the encounters that would result from his way
political views that my father is reluctant to speak of going to
cannot stand this. It seems to me that it is chiefly because of his
accepted as a great man, still less as Emperor of France. And my father
Buonaparte, who only at Bald Hills in the whole world, it seems, is not
that goes on in the world and especially about the honors conferred on
from my father's remarks and his talks with Michael Ivanovich I know all
Great Catherine! As you know, I am quite indifferent to politics, but
sovereigns of Europe and particularly with our own, the grandson of the
the notion that Buonaparte is negotiating on equal terms with all the
you know, chiefly directed to political questions. He cannot endure
any contradiction and is becoming irritable. This irritability is, as
is this: my father's health is growing noticeably worse, he cannot stand
be surprised to hear that the reason for this is Buonaparte! The case
wish to see you, I do not think so and do not want to do so. You will
You ask whether we shall spend next winter in Moscow. In spite of my

our good.
governed only by infinite love for us, and so whatever befalls us is for
a single hair of our heads will fall without His will. And His will is
of the Gospel truth which has become for me a principle of life: not
certain. I write all this to you, dear friend, only to convince you
then have dismissed them with horror, but now they are very clear and
the moment of our loss, these thoughts could not occur to me; I should
influence on me and on my brother in spite of all our grief. Then, at
her alone, that early and terrible death has had the most beneficent
there receive a place I dare not hope for myself. But not to speak of
Andrew, with the purest regrets and memories, but probably she will
as a mother. As it is, not only has she left us, and particularly Prince
young wife she was irreproachable; perhaps she could not have been so
innocent to have the strength to perform all a mother's duties. As a
love for His creatures. Perhaps, I often think, she was too angelically
generally incomprehensible to us, is but a manifestation of His infinite
of the infinite goodness of the Creator, whose every action, though
why she had to die, and in what way that death was but an expression
then, and already I, with my petty understanding, begin to see clearly
die. And what do you think, dear friend? Five years have passed since
anyone, but in whose soul there were never any unkind thoughts, had to
had to die, so I asked why that angel Lise, who not only never wronged
impression on me. Just as you ask destiny why your splendid brother
and one I shall never forget--that of my dear sister-in-law--left that
to themselves and to others, are left living. The first death I saw,
to God, while cruel, useless, harmful persons, or such as are a burden
harming no one but necessary to the happiness of others--are called away
cause, kind and noble beings able to find happiness in life--not merely
explain to us what without its help man cannot comprehend: why, for what
will not say comfort us--but save us from despair. Religion alone can
excellent mother. Oh, my friend! Religion, and religion alone, can--I
special providence of God who, loving you, wishes to try you and your
Your loss is so terrible that I can only explain it to myself as a

Sorrow, it seems, is our common lot, my dear, tender friend Julie.


own brother, killed in Turkey.
of marrying to her brother, and who was at that time in mourning for her
Julie Karagina in Petersburg, whom she had dreamed (as all girls dream)
Soon after Prince Andrew had gone, Princess Mary wrote to her friend

departure they were dissatisfied with one another.
his father about something, and Princess Mary noticed that before his
nothing to her about his love. Before he left he had a long talk with
long time past. She felt that something had happened to him, but he said
gentle, and more affectionate than Princess Mary had known him for a
During the winter Prince Andrew had come to Bald Hills and had been gay,

love, and that she did.
do with the justice or injustice of other people? She had to endure and
lovingly suffered for mankind though He Himself was God. What had she to
and simple law--the law of love and self-sacrifice taught us by Him who
"justice." All the complex laws of man centered for her in one clear
And what is justice? The princess never thought of that proud word
could her father, whom she knew loved her in spite of it all, be unjust?
cost her no effort to forgive him. Could he be to blame toward her, or
He continually hurt Princess Mary's feelings and tormented her, but it

would joke about them.
Princess Mary's presence how she liked our village priests and icons and
would say. Or, turning to Mademoiselle Bourienne, he would ask her in
yourself! A pity! Prince Andrew wants a son and not an old maid," he
"You want to make him"--little Nicholas--"into an old maid like
superstitiousness of old maids, or the petting and spoiling of children.
and ridicule. Whatever was spoken of he would bring round to the
religion--and these were the favorite subjects of the prince's attacks
two passions and consequently two joys--her nephew, little Nicholas, and
as to torture her mentally as harshly as possible. Princess Mary had
of unprovoked anger. He seemed carefully to seek out her tender spots so
it was Princess Mary who generally bore the brunt of his frequent fits
health and temper became much worse. He grew still more irritable, and
During that year after his son's departure, Prince Nicholas Bolkonski's


CHAPTER XXV





child gets up after a long illness with a changed expression of face.
her old self again, but with a change in her moral physiognomy, as a
her, she recovered from her mental sickness just as suddenly and became
But a fortnight after his departure, to the surprise of those around

now and then, "Oh, why did he go away?"
sat in her room dry-eyed, taking no interest in anything and only saying
afterwards. Nor did she cry when he was gone; but for several days she
wonder whether he really ought not to stay and which he remembered long
her hand for the last time. "Don't go!" she said in a tone that made him
what awaited her. She did not even cry when, on taking leave, he kissed
dry-eyed, occupied with most trivial matters as if not understanding
Natasha. Flushed and agitated she went about the house all that day,
could have foreseen how the separation from her lover would act on
Neither her father, nor her mother, nor Sonya, nor Prince Andrew himself

has a heart of gold."
advice and help! He is a most absent-minded and absurd fellow, but he
Mademoiselle Sophie, whatever may happen, to turn to him alone for
"Whatever trouble may come," Prince Andrew continued, "I beg you,

"What can happen?"

this, then: whatever may happen to you when I am not here..."
happen. You may cease to... all right, I know I am not to say that. Only
said with sudden seriousness--"I am going away and heaven knows what may
childhood. He has a heart of gold. I beg you, Natalie," Prince Andrew
"Do you know I have entrusted him with our secret? I have known him from

absent-mindedness, some of which had even been invented about him.
And as usual when speaking of Pierre, she began to tell anecdotes of his

"Yes, he's a dear, but very absurd."

"You have known Bezukhov a long time?" he asked. "Do you like him?"

inviting Prince Andrew to come too. He did so.
and Natasha sat down beside a little chess table with Sonya, thereby
seemed disconcerted and embarrassed. He was talking to the countess,
him Pierre, who had not been to the Rostovs' once since the ball. Pierre
On the eve of his departure from Petersburg Prince Andrew brought with

him turn pale and cold.
drawing near had not terrified her, just as the mere thought of it made
completely happy if the thought of the separation awaiting her and
such a laugh she always felt nearer to him. Natasha would have been
when he did he abandoned himself entirely to his laughter, and after
loved to hear and see how Prince Andrew laughed. He seldom laughed, but
of the mad, merry moods characteristic of her, and then she particularly
What if what he seeks in me is not there?" Sometimes she fell into one
look for in me? He is trying to discover something by looking at me!
scrutinizingly at her. She asked herself in perplexity: "What does he
she spoke she noticed with fear and joy that he gazed attentively and
could tell a story very well), Natasha listened to him with pride; when
alone, even when they did not wish it. When Prince Andrew spoke (he
she should be in the way and tried to find excuses for leaving them
sighed as she looked at them; Sonya was always getting frightened lest
advice about Petya's education or Nicholas' service. The old countess
Sometimes the old count would come up, kiss Prince Andrew, and ask his

with us."
thought; "but I know you wish to avoid any pretext for finding fault
"How I should have loved him!" said Natasha, immediately guessing his

"I cannot take him away from his grandfather, and besides..."

"Why not?" asked Natasha in a frightened tone.

him--and said that his son would not live with them.
Andrew blushed, as he often did now--Natasha particularly liked it in
constantly divined. Once she began questioning him about his son. Prince
speak of it. Natasha shared this as she did all his feelings, which she
spoke of their future life. Prince Andrew was afraid and ashamed to
go away and the couple, left alone, still remained silent. They rarely
together everyone kept silent. Sometimes the others would get up and
accompanies the presence of a betrothed couple. Often when all sitting
In the house that poetic dullness and quiet reigned which always

Nicholas in 1805, and many other incidents betokening that it had to be.
her nurse had noticed on his first visit, and Andrew's encounter with
Petersburg, and the likeness between Natasha and Prince Andrew which
been of it: Prince Andrew's coming to Otradnoe and their coming to
wonder at how it had all happened, and at the evident omens there had
household both among themselves and in his presence expressed their
and Natasha, and about albums and fancywork with Sonya. Sometimes the
talk about rural economy with the count, fashions with the countess
pursued their usual way of life, in which he took his part. He could
days they grew accustomed to him, and without restraint in his presence
she was not afraid of him and no one else ought to be. After a few
appeared to be different, but was really just like all of them, and that
the family to get used to him, proudly assuring them all that he only
he seemed a man from another world, and for a long time Natasha trained
first the family felt some constraint in intercourse with Prince Andrew;
different beings: then they were artificial, now natural and sincere. At
yet they were nothing to one another; they felt themselves now quite
now. Both liked to recall how they had regarded each other when as
sprang up between them. It was as if they had not known each other till
their engagement, quite different, intimate, and natural relations
the familiar thou, but said you to her, and kissed only her hand. After
but did not behave to Natasha as an affianced lover: he did not use
this, but Prince Andrew was firm. He came every day to the Rostovs',
reject him. Naturally neither Natasha nor her parents wished to hear of
months she felt that she did not love him she would have full right to
not wish to bind Natasha and gave her perfect freedom. If after six
that he had given his word and bound himself forever, but that he did
was responsible for the delay he ought to bear the whole burden of it;
was not announced; Prince Andrew insisted on that. He said that as he
No betrothal ceremony took place and Natasha's engagement to Bolkonski


CHAPTER XXIV





affianced lover.
From that day Prince Andrew began to frequent the Rostovs' as Natasha's

their blessing.
The father and mother came into the room and gave the betrothed couple

so happy."
"No, no! I'll do anything!" she said, suddenly checking her tears. "I am

commiseration and perplexity.
awful!" She looked into her lover's face and saw in it a look of
burst into sobs. "I shall die, waiting a year: it's impossible, it's
"It's awful! Oh, it's awful! awful!" Natasha suddenly cried, and again

his face expressed the impossibility of altering that decision.
"And can't it be helped?" she asked. Prince Andrew did not reply, but

Natasha did not hear him.
Prince Andrew began to explain to her the reasons for this delay.

year?..."
the marriage was to be postponed for a year. "But why a year? Why a
"A whole year!" Natasha repeated suddenly, only now realizing that

"In a year you will learn to know yourself...."

convinced that she spoke the truth.
very day you first came to Otradnoe I have loved you," she cried, quite
"Why do you say that?" Natasha interrupted him. "You know that from the

to love..." said Prince Andrew with an unnatural smile.
secret, and should you find that you do not love me, or should you come
make me happy in a year, but you are free: our engagement shall remain a
Andrew, "it will give you time to be sure of yourself. I ask you to
"Hard as this year which delays my happiness will be," continued Prince

in the meaning of his words.
Natasha listened with concentrated attention, trying but failing to take

yourself."
through so much in life. I am afraid for you, you do not yet know
"Forgive me!" he said. "But you are so young, and I have already been

"No," she replied, but she had not understood his question.

my every word and deed? Yes, but what did he ask me?"
life, that now I am grown up, that on me now lies a responsibility for
Can it be true? Can it be true that there can be no more playing with
equal of this strange, dear, clever man whom even my father looks up to?
thought Natasha--"is it possible that I am now to be the wife and the
"Is it possible that I--the 'chit of a girl,' as everybody called me,"

Andrew, still looking into her eyes.
"Did your mother tell you that it cannot be for a year?" asked Prince

not so bright and poetic as the former, was stronger and more serious.
the duty that now bound him to her forever. The present feeling, though
at her devotion and trustfulness, and an oppressive yet joyful sense of
desire, but there was pity for her feminine and childish weakness, fear
changed; there was no longer the former poetic and mystic charm of
in his heart his former love for her. Something in him had suddenly
Prince Andrew held her hands, looked into her eyes, and did not find

might, and then kissed him.
closer to him, paused for an instant as if asking herself whether she
"Oh, I am so happy!" she replied, smiled through her tears, bent over

"What is it? What's the matter?"

and, catching her breath more and more quickly, began to sob.
"Yes, yes!" Natasha murmured as if in vexation. Then she sighed loudly

"Do you love me?"

She drew near to him and stopped. He took her hand and kissed it.

Why speak, when words cannot express what one feels?"
her face. Her face said: "Why ask? Why doubt what you cannot but know?
He looked at her and was struck by the serious impassioned expression of

"I have loved you from the very first moment I saw you. May I hope?"

world." Prince Andrew came up to her with downcast eyes.
"Yes, everything! He alone is now dearer to me than everything in the
become everything to me?" she asked herself, and immediately answered,
in and saw him she paused. "Is it possible that this stranger has now
Natasha never remembered how she entered the drawing room. When she came

reproachfully, with a deep sigh, as her daughter ran away.
coldly it seemed to Natasha. "Go... go," said the mother, sadly and
"Go, go to him. He is asking for your hand," said the countess,

"Well, Mamma?... Well?..."

up and flew to her.
something as she rapidly crossed herself. Seeing her mother she jumped
the bed, pale and dry eyed, and was gazing at the icons and whispering
Sonya said that Natasha was in her bedroom. Natasha was sitting on

"Lord have mercy upon us!" she repeated while seeking her daughter.

"I will send her to you," said the countess, and left the room.

"It is unavoidable," said Prince Andrew with a sigh.

"It is true that Natasha is still young, but--so long as that?..."

year. And I wished to tell you of that," said Prince Andrew.
condition of his consent that the wedding is not to take place for a
"My father, to whom I have told my plans, has made it an express

sure my husband will consent," said the countess, "but your father..."
son, but felt that to her he was a stranger and a terrifying man. "I am
forehead as he stooped to kiss her hand. She wished to love him as a
mixed feeling of estrangement and tenderness pressed her lips to his
"Yes," replied the countess. She held out her hand to him, and with a

said Prince Andrew.
"I will speak to her when I have your consent.... Do you give it to me?"

will depend on her...."
and I accept your offer. I am glad. And my husband... I hope... but it
into her eyes. "Your offer..." (she grew confused) "is agreeable to us,
"Your offer..." she began at last sedately. He remained silent, looking

The countess' face flushed hotly, but she said nothing.

Andrew.
"I have come, Countess, to ask for your daughter's hand," said Prince

her mother and went out.
Natasha glanced with frightened imploring eyes at Prince Andrew and at

"Go, Natasha! I will call you," said the countess in a whisper.

mistaken. Yes, at once, that very instant, her fate would be decided.
Again he glanced at her, and that glance convinced her that she was not

"At once? This instant!... No, it can't be!" she thought.

straight at Prince Andrew with wide-open eyes.
something gripped her throat, and regardless of manners she stared
Natasha knew that she ought to go away, but was unable to do so:

"I am at your disposal," she murmured.

The countess lowered her eyes, sighing deeply.

talk with you, Countess," he added after a moment's pause.
got back last night," he said glancing at Natasha; "I want to have a
father's. I had to talk over a very important matter with him. I only
"I have not been to see you all this time because I have been at my

haste to say what he had to.
Andrew interrupted her by answering her intended question, obviously in
"It is long since we had the pleasure..." began the countess, but Prince

beside the sofa.
brightened. He kissed the countess' hand and Natasha's, and sat down
an agitated and serious face. As soon as he saw Natasha his face
Before the countess could answer, Prince Andrew entered the room with

unbearable! I don't want... to be tormented? What am I to do?..."
"Mamma! Bolkonski has come!" she said. "Mamma, it is awful, it is

Pale and agitated, Natasha ran into the drawing room.

she hardly heard his voice through the closed doors.
herself, her face was pale. It was he. She knew this for certain, though
not see herself. She listened to the sounds in the hall. When she saw
then footsteps were heard. Natasha was looking at the mirror, but did
In the hall the porch door opened, and someone asked, "At home?" and

immediately felt this.
however much they left her in peace she could not now be at peace, and
young, and in nobody's way if only they leave her in peace." But
speaking as some third, collective, male person. "Pretty, a good voice,
delight in, herself. "How charming that Natasha is!" she said again,
walk. That morning she had returned to her favorite mood--love of, and
would not let him, and having closed the door behind him continued her
A footman wanted to come in to clear away something in the room but she

I need nobody."
seemed to say as she caught sight of herself. "Well, and very nice too!
she glanced into it. "There, that's me!" the expression of her face
as gladly as she had to the sounds of her own voice. Passing a mirror
shoes) and listening to the regular tap of the heel and creak of the toe
step from the heel to the toe (she had on a new and favorite pair of
not stepping simply on the resounding parquet but treading with each
it is," she said to herself, and she began walking up and down the room,
cheerful. "What's the good of making so much of it? Things are nice as
whole empty ballroom, and slowly dying away; and all at once she felt
expected it) to the charm of the notes reverberating, filling the
particularly pleased her. She listened joyfully (as though she had not
she stood still in the middle of the room and sang a musical phrase that
began singing her solfeggio. When she had finished her first exercise
the ballroom, which she particularly liked for its loud resonance, and
abandoned since the ball. Having finished her morning tea she went to
mornings, and that day she returned to the old way of life which she had
she knew had the peculiar property of conducing to cheerfulness in the
The day after this conversation Natasha put on the old dress which

now become quite calm, quite calm."
"And I don't at all want to get married. And I am afraid of him; I have

on quietly:
Her voice trembled, and she again nearly cried, but recovered and went

just came and then left off, left off..."
"Leave off, Mamma! I don't think, and don't want to think about it! He

mother's words, suddenly interrupted her:
The countess began to soothe Natasha, who after first listening to her

it is being punished.
to cry. Her tears were those of an offended child who does not know why
Once she came to her mother, tried to say something, and suddenly began

misery.
Strong as was her inward grief, this wound to her vanity intensified her
knew about her disappointment and was laughing at her and pitying her.
blushed continually and was irritable. It seemed to her that everybody
wept secretly at night and did not go to her mother in the evenings. She
and wandered from room to room like a shadow, idle and listless; she
Three weeks passed in this way. Natasha had no desire to go out anywhere

had gone to see his father, could not explain his absence to herself.
Pierre did not come either and Natasha, not knowing that Prince Andrew
day, but he did not come. On the second and third day it was the same.
Next day after her talk with her mother Natasha expected Bolkonski all


Andrew returned to Petersburg.
Three weeks after the last evening he had spent with the Rostovs, Prince

father's wish--to propose, and postpone the wedding for a year.
prince himself) would die before then, and he decided to conform to his
his fiancee's, would not stand a year's test, or that he (the old
Prince Andrew saw clearly that the old man hoped that his feelings, or

nothing would make him alter his decision.
Mind, the last..." concluded the prince, in a tone which showed that
you please--is still as great, marry! And that's my last word on it.
tutor for Prince Nicholas. Then if your love or passion or obstinacy--as
a year: go abroad, take a cure, look out as you wanted to for a German
father said, looking ironically at his son, "I beg you to put it off for
be a pity to entrust to a chit of a girl. "Fourthly and finally," the
on this), while she was very young. Thirdly, he had a son whom it would
as he had been and his health was poor (the old man laid special stress
birth, wealth, or rank. Secondly, Prince Andrew was no longer as young
In the first place the marriage was not a brilliant one as regards

adopting a quiet tone, discussed the whole matter.
he employed the diplomacy he reserved for important occasions and,
the old man, "then they might do as they please." With his son, however,
ending. "If only they would let me end my days as I want to," thought
life or introduce anything new into it, when his own life was already
inward wrath. He could not comprehend how anyone could wish to alter his
His father received his son's communication with external composure, but

this he started for the country next day.
Prince Andrew needed his father's consent to his marriage, and to obtain


CHAPTER XXIII





him, the gloomier seemed his own.
sad expression in his eyes. The brighter Prince Andrew's lot appeared to
"Yes, yes," Pierre assented, looking at his friend with a touched and

happy! You understand me? I know you are glad for my sake."
"I cannot help loving the light, it is not my fault. And I am very

"Darkness and gloom," reiterated Pierre: "yes, yes, I understand that."

darkness...."
other half is everything where she is not, and there is all gloom and
halves: one half is she, and there all is joy, hope, light: the
that I knew in the past. The whole world is now for me divided into two
such love," said Prince Andrew. "It is not at all the same feeling
"I should not have believed anyone who told me that I was capable of

himself.
mastered him as at something strange, apart from and independent of
would do without his consent; then he marveled at the feeling that had
would either make his father consent to this marriage and love her, or
sacrifice his own happiness to his father's caprice, and spoke of how he
boldly and lightly made plans for an extended future, said he could not
to speak openly; and to him he told all that was in his soul. Now he
disillusionment? Pierre was the only person to whom he made up his mind
a new man. Where was his spleen, his contempt for life, his
Andrew. Prince Andrew seemed, and really was, quite a different, quite
changed, his brow became smooth, and he listened gladly to Prince
"Well, go on, go on. I am very glad," said Pierre, and his face really

know the condition I am in? I must talk about it to someone."
"But do listen," returned Prince Andrew, holding him by the arm. "Do you

"She does, I know," Pierre cried fiercely.

Pierre's eyes.
"Don't talk rubbish..." said Prince Andrew, smiling and looking into

"She loves you."

"But what of her?"

there will not be a happier man than you."
don't philosophize, don't doubt, marry, marry, marry.... And I am sure
such a treasure... she is a rare girl.... My dear friend, I entreat you,
to pace up and down the room. "I always thought it.... That girl is
"I? I? What did I tell you?" said Pierre suddenly, rising and beginning

you speak?"
without her! But can she love me?... I am too old for her.... Why don't
the world, I have not lived till now. At last I live, but I can't live
suffered, but I would not exchange even that torment for anything in
but the feeling is stronger than I. Yesterday I tormented myself and
"Yes, yes! Who else should it be? I should never have believed it,

"With Natasha Rostova, yes?" said he.

the sofa beside Prince Andrew.
Suddenly Pierre heaved a deep sigh and dumped his heavy person down on

before. I am in love, my friend!"
and I have come to do so today. I never experienced anything like it
"Well, dear heart," said he, "I wanted to tell you about it yesterday

smiled at him with the egotism of joy.
his face, paused in front of Pierre and, not noticing his sad look,
Prince Andrew, with a beaming, ecstatic expression of renewed life on

their work.
air of escaping from the ills of life with which unhappy people look at
I, you see, am hard at it." He pointed to his manuscript book with that
"Ah, it's you!" said Pierre with a preoccupied, dissatisfied air. "And

with tobacco smoke, when someone came in. It was Prince Andrew.
of the Scottish lodge of Freemasons at a table in his low room cloudy
upstairs in a shabby dressing gown, copying out the original transaction
midnight, after he had left the countess' apartments, he was sitting
labors, hoping to drive away the evil spirit that threatened him. Toward
presented itself; and he forced himself to work day and night at Masonic
insignificant in comparison with eternity; again the question: for what?
and about Natasha and Prince Andrew; and again everything seemed to him
and his friend's. He tried equally to avoid thinking about his wife,
Andrew accentuated his gloom by the contrast between his own position
the feeling he had noticed between his protegee Natasha and Prince
of all things human came to him oftener than before. At the same time
oppressed and ashamed in court society, and dark thoughts of the vanity
gentleman of the bedchamber, and from that time he had begun to feel
his wife with the royal prince, Pierre had unexpectedly been made a
and had made desperate efforts to combat it. Since the intimacy of
Since the ball he had felt the approach of a fit of nervous depression

struck everyone by his preoccupied, absent-minded, and morose air.
gentlemen. Pierre, who had come downstairs, walked through the rooms and
late become a frequent visitor of hers, and many brilliant ladies and
ambassador was there, and a foreign prince of the blood who had of
That day Countess Helene had a reception at her house. The French

of his love for Natasha and his firm resolve to make her his wife.
At that very time Prince Andrew was sitting with Pierre and telling him

tears of joy and excitement and embracing her mother.
"Darling Mummy, how I love you! How happy I am!" cried Natasha, shedding

mother.
"Don't, Natasha! Pray to God. 'Marriages are made in heaven,'" said her

"Mamma, one need not be ashamed of his being a widower?"

written in Natasha's album.
her mother, thoughtfully, referring to some verses Prince Andrew had
"What else did he say to you? What are those verses? Read them..." said

then, directly I saw him I felt something peculiar."
It is fate. Clearly it is fate that everything led up to this! Already
we are here. And it had to happen that we should meet at that ball.
"And it had to happen that he should come specially to Petersburg while

him, as it seemed, not indifferent to her.
then chosen (she was firmly convinced she had done so) and of finding
this strange, unexpected happiness of meeting again the very man she had
at Otradnoe she had fallen in love with him. It was as if she feared
It seemed to Natasha that even at the time she first saw Prince Andrew

have thought!..."
alarmed at the feeling she was aware of in herself. "And could we ever
such a thing never happened to me before," she said, surprised and
"All the same I shan't sleep. What silliness, to sleep! Mummy! Mummy!

"No, my love; I am frightened myself," answered her mother. "Now go!"

you asleep?"
does that mean? Does it mean that it's the real thing? Yes? Mamma, are
feel afraid in his presence. I am always afraid when I'm with him. What
"But such a... such a... never happened to me before!" she said. "Only I

asked her about Boris.
asked her where they were going to spend the summer, and then how he had
her how he had complimented her, how he told her he was going abroad,
lay a long time in her mother's bed gazing straight before her. She told
But all the same that night Natasha, now agitated and now frightened,

about that," said Natasha.
"Mamma! For heaven's sake don't ask me anything now! One can't talk

Natasha and whispered: "Well, what?"
In the evening, when Prince Andrew had left, the countess went up to

not bring himself to do so.
his timidity. She felt that he wanted to say something to her but could
she remained alone with him for a moment. Prince Andrew surprised her by
she was with them. Natasha grew pale, in a panic of expectation, when
Sonya was afraid to leave Natasha and afraid of being in the way when
artificial conversation about trifles as soon as he looked her way.
at Prince Andrew when he talked to Natasha and timidly started some
bound to happen. The countess looked with sad and sternly serious eyes
whole house, there was a feeling of awe at something important that was
the soul of the frightened yet happy and enraptured Natasha, but in the
without concealing it he tried to be with Natasha all day. Not only in
Everyone in the house realized for whose sake Prince Andrew came, and

Rostovs and spent the rest of the day there.
Next day, having been invited by the count, Prince Andrew dined with the


CHAPTER XXII





the general had begun such a discussion and so Berg drew Pierre to it.
among the men and a dispute about something important and clever. Now
parties he wished to imitate. They had not yet had a loud conversation
only one thing was lacking that he had always seen at the evening
raising his voice at the card table, and the samovar and the tea cakes;
Everything was similar: the ladies' subtle talk, the cards, the general
The party was very successful and quite like other parties he had seen.
Berg was satisfied and happy. The smile of pleasure never left his face.

the affairs in Spain.
should take part in an argument between the general and the colonel on
But at that moment Berg came to Pierre and began insisting that he

something and how she flushed as she replied.
Natasha and sat down beside her. Pierre saw how Prince Andrew asked her
eyes and restlessness in his movements, Prince Andrew approached
but no, I will talk to you later on," and with a strange light in his
to a newly initiated Brother to present to the woman he loved.) "I...
that pair of women's gloves?" (He referred to the Masonic gloves given
"I must... I must have a talk with you," said Prince Andrew. "You know

surprise, and noticing the glance he turned on Natasha as he rose.
"Well?" asked Pierre, seeing his friend's strange animation with

jesting remarks he rose, taking Pierre by the arm, and drew him aside.
with his fifty-year-old Moscow cousins, and in the midst of these
liveliness he began chaffing Pierre about the need to be very careful
"Oh, undoubtedly!" said Prince Andrew, and with sudden and unnatural


    * "Cousinhood is a dangerous neighborhood."


cousinage est un dangereux voisinage. * Don't you think so?"
"Yes, you know between cousins intimacy often leads to love. Le

unexpectedly.
"Oh, there was childish love?" suddenly asked Prince Andrew, blushing

"I expect he has told you of his childish love for Natasha?"

"Yes, I know him..."

"You are friendly with Boris, aren't you?" asked Vera.

Prince Andrew frowned and remained silent.

love much in vogue at that time).
was very far gone in the land of tenderness..." (alluding to a map of
she said to Pierre, "even our dear cousin Boris, who, between ourselves,
quite lately she never cared seriously for anyone. Now you know, Count,"
"I think no one has been more courted than she," she went on, "but till

continued with a still more subtle smile:
Andrew to knit his brows with discomfort: he was about to rise, but Vera
very susceptible." This return to the subject of Natalie caused Prince
stifles real feeling in her. And it must be confessed that Natalie is
days a girl has so much freedom that the pleasure of being courted often
"our days" and that human characteristics change with the times--"in our
imagining that they have discovered and appraised the peculiarities of
"our days" as people of limited intelligence are fond of doing,
"Yes, that is true, Prince. In our days," continued Vera--mentioning

and looked up at Pierre who was just approaching them.
attractive a woman is the more constant she is likely to be," he added,
solve so delicate a question, and then I have noticed that the less
smile under which he wished to hide his embarrassment, "to be able to
"I know your sister too little," replied Prince Andrew, with a sarcastic

true love. What do you think, Prince?"
man once for all and remain true to him forever? That is what I consider
attachments? Could she, like other women" (Vera meant herself), "love a
glance. What do you think of Natalie? Could she be constant in her
discerning, Prince, and understand people's characters so well at a
"What do you think?" Vera was saying with an arch smile. "You are so

thing that rarely happened with him.
by her self-satisfied talk, but that Prince Andrew seemed embarrassed, a
When Pierre went up to them he noticed that Vera was being carried away

that she had to employ her diplomatic tact.
intellectual a guest as she considered Prince Andrew to be, she felt
with him about feelings in general and about her sister. With so
and, seizing a moment when Prince Andrew was alone, began a conversation
party, subtle allusions to the tender passion were absolutely necessary
Andrew's attentions to Natasha, decided that at a party, a real evening
were talking secrets, sat down beside them. Vera, having noticed Prince
Prince Andrew. Pierre went up to his friend and, asking whether they
Sonya and Boris, and Vera with a subtle smile was saying something to
like that, and Pierre was released. Natasha on one side was talking with
After six rubbers the general got up, saying that it was no use playing

neglect the game.
and a feeling that was both joyful and painful agitated him and made him
"Something very important is happening between them," thought Pierre,

rubbers he watched her and his friend.
his back to Natasha and now facing her, but during the whole of the six
Pierre changed places several times during the game, sitting now with

youthful expression in his friend's face.
Prince Andrew went up to Pierre, and the latter noticed a new and

again become what she had been at the ball.
alight in her. She was completely transformed and from a plain girl had
the bright glow of some inner fire that had been suppressed was again
at him, flushed and evidently trying to master her rapid breathing. And
look of tender solicitude. She, having raised her head, was looking up
Prince Andrew was standing before her, saying something to her with a

surprise.
"What has happened to her?" he asked himself with still greater

room while he was picking up his tricks, glanced again at Natasha.
Pierre, hearing greetings and the steps of someone who had entered the
out a whole suit and to his partner's delight taking five tricks,
at him, made some reply to Boris who sat down beside her. After playing
sitting by her sister at the tea table, and reluctantly, without looking
"What's the matter with her?" thought Pierre, glancing at her. She was

her look of gentle indifference to everything around.
only less pretty than at the ball, but only redeemed from plainness by
change that had come over her since the ball. She was silent, and not
happened to be directly facing Natasha, and was struck by a curious
with Count Rostov, the general, and the colonel. At the card table he
Pierre, as one of the principal guests, had to sit down to boston


CHAPTER XXI





else.
the Panins had at their party. Everything was just as it was everywhere
which stood exactly the same kind of cakes in a silver cake basket as
old, the young with the young, and the hostess at the tea table, on
next to himself the most important guest. The old people sat with the
the table for boston. The general sat down by Count Ilya Rostov, who was
shoulder, and with parental authority superintended the setting out of
especially so the general, who admired the apartment, patted Berg on the
bowing and scraping. Everything was just as everybody always has it,
at the sound of the disconnected talk, the rustling of dresses, and the
satisfaction at the sight of all this movement in their drawing room,
evening parties. Berg and Vera could not repress their smiles of
Rostovs, and the party became unquestionably exactly like all other
Boris came a lady with the colonel, then the general himself, then the
condescension and patronage in his treatment of Berg and Vera. After
Before long Boris, Berg's old comrade, arrived. There was a shade of

talk, tea, and lighted candles.
well and was as like as two peas to every other evening party with its
that, even if only one guest was present, their evening had begun very
of the masculine element, both husband and wife felt with satisfaction
conversation was very incoherent and Vera was angry at the intrusion
Austrian campaign and the reasons why he had declined them. Though the
personal considerations as to the proposals made him to take part in the
with Austria, and unconsciously jumped from the general subject to
interrupted his wife's remarks and touched on the question of the war
Berg, having decided that masculine conversation was required,
with conversation about the French embassy, at once began accordingly.
Vera, having decided in her own mind that Pierre ought to be entertained

guest.
party, interrupting each other in their efforts to entertain their
chair for himself, and Berg and Vera immediately began their evening
the question of selection. Pierre disturbed the symmetry by moving a
undecided on the matter himself, eventually left the visitor to settle
or of the sofa for his dear guest, but being apparently painfully
Berg, having generously offered to disturb the symmetry of an armchair
neatness, and order; so it was quite comprehensible and not strange that
impossible to sit down anywhere without disturbing its symmetry,
They received Pierre in their small, new drawing-room, where it was

said he.
"It can't be helped: men must sometimes have masculine conversation,"

Berg smiled again.

different people."
Vera, "because I know what interests each of them and what to say to
"But please don't interrupt me when I am entertaining the guests," said

"This is what comes of knowing how to conduct oneself."
"This is what comes of knowing how to make acquaintances," thought Berg.

the honor of this visit.
another, both smiling with self-satisfaction, and each mentally claiming
Just then Count Bezukhov was announced. Husband and wife glanced at one

the fichu with a happy and kindly smile.
"Princess Yusupova wore one exactly like this," said Berg, pointing to

society."
"Yes," answered Vera, "I don't at all want that. We must live for

following an unconscious sequence of ideas.
"The only thing is, we mustn't have children too soon," he continued,

lips.
fichu for which he had paid a good price, kissing her straight on the
Berg rose and embraced his wife carefully, so as not to crush her lace


    * To be a man.


selfish, ascribe common sense to themselves alone.
that all men, though they understand nothing and are conceited and
only by her husband and generalizing from that observation, supposed
judging by his wife, thought all women weak and foolish. Vera, judging
same understood life wrongly, as according to Vera all men did. Berg,
sense of superiority over her good, conscientious husband, who all the
what it was ein Mann zu sein. * Vera at the same time smiling with a
woman who could not understand all that constitutes a man's dignity,
paused, reflecting that this dear wife of his was after all but a weak
Berg smiled with a sense of his superiority over a weak woman, and

goes without saying that one must be conscientious and methodical."
obtained all this? Chiefly by knowing how to choose my aquaintances. It
her straightened out a turned-up corner of the carpet.) "And how have I
be your husband." (He rose and kissed Vera's hand, and on the way to
waiting for a vacancy to command a regiment, and have the happiness to
but by promotions.) "My comrades are still nobodies, while I am only
managed from my first promotion." (Berg measured his life not by years
"You can get to know something, you can ask for something. See how I

does one get satisfaction from acquaintances.
could and should be acquainted with people above one, because only then
his new uniform, sat beside his wife explaining to her that one always
and new furniture sat Berg and his wife. Berg, closely buttoned up in
In their new, clean, and light study with its small busts and pictures

for their guests' arrival.
Having prepared everything necessary for the party, the Bergs were ready

Bergs' house, not at ten but at fifteen minutes to eight.
Contrary to his habit of being late, Pierre on that day arrived at the

favor."
is very good to me. We shall have supper, Count. So you will do me the
eight, please. We shall make up a rubber. Our general is coming. He
"But don't be late, Count, if I may venture to ask; about ten minutes to

not refuse, and promised to come.
to run into some expense for the sake of good society--that Pierre could
he grudged spending money on cards or anything harmful, he was prepared
but select company, and why this would give him pleasure, and why though
Berg explained so clearly why he wanted to collect at his house a small
Bergs beneath her, could be cruel enough to refuse such an invitation.
Only Countess Helene, considering the society of such people as the

countess and you to do me the honor of coming to tea and to supper."
friends." (He smiled still more pleasantly.) "I wished to ask the
"and so I wish to arrange just a small party for my own and my wife's
perfect conviction that this information could not but be agreeable),
"I have now quite settled in my new rooms, Count" (Berg said this with

"What is it you wish, Colonel? I am at your service."

with you," he said with a smile.
could not grant my request, but I hope, Count, I shall be more fortunate
"I have just been to see the countess, your wife. Unfortunately she

temples as the Emperor Alexander wore his hair.
brand-new uniform, with his hair pomaded and brushed forward over his
Moscow and Petersburg, came to see him. Berg arrived in an immaculate
One morning Colonel Berg, whom Pierre knew as he knew everybody in


CHAPTER XX





but while one has life one must live and be happy!" thought he.
to be happy, and now I do believe in it. Let the dead bury their dead,
when he said one must believe in the possibility of happiness in order
much strength and youth in me," he said to himself. "Pierre was right
England, Switzerland and Italy. "I must use my freedom while I feel so
charge, then he ought to retire from the service and go abroad, and see
to his son's education by finding a tutor and putting the boy in his
began making happy plans for the future. He decided that he must attend
said he to himself. And for the first time for a very long while he
confined frame, when life, all life with all its joys, is open to me?"
appeared in a new light. "Why do I strive, why do I toil in this narrow,
her, but only picturing her to himself, and in consequence all life
his head that he was in love with Natasha; he was not thinking about
stepped out of a stuffy room into God's own fresh air. It did not enter
by his sleeplessness: his soul was as fresh and joyful as if he had
he sat up in bed, then got up, then lay down again not at all troubled
habit, but soon realized that he could not sleep. Having lit his candle
Prince Andrew left the Rostovs' late in the evening. He went to bed from

liked her singing as he liked everything she did.
she ought not to have asked it. He smiled, looking at her, and said he
liked her voice. She asked this and then became confused, feeling that
As soon as Natasha had finished she went up to him and asked how he

she sang.
and even she, was. This contrast weighed on and yet cheered him while
illimitable within him and that limited and material something that he,
sense of the terrible contrast between something infinitely great and
for the future?... Yes and no. The chief reason was a sudden, vivid
His former love? The little princess? His disillusionments?... His hopes
absolutely nothing to weep about yet he was ready to weep. What about?
stirred in his soul. He felt happy and at the same time sad. He had
him. He looked at Natasha as she sang, and something new and joyful
suddenly felt tears choking him, a thing he had thought impossible for
and listened to her. In the midst of a phrase he ceased speaking and
and began singing. Prince Andrew stood by a window talking to the ladies
After dinner Natasha, at Prince Andrew's request, went to the clavichord

found in it a new enjoyment.
longer and was no longer alien to him, but he himself having entered it
already begun to disconcert him. Now this world disconcerted him no
that in the Otradnoe avenue and at the window that moonlight night had
alien to him and brimful of joys unknown to him, a different world,
In Natasha Prince Andrew was conscious of a strange world completely

overflowing with life!"
the best possible setting for this strikingly poetic, charming girl,
treasure they possess in Natasha; but they are kindly folk and form
are capital people, who of course have not the slightest idea what a
Andrew could not refuse to stay to dinner. "Yes," he thought, "they
especially in Petersburg as a pleasant surprise, were such that Prince
people. The old count's hospitality and good nature, which struck one
severely, now seemed to him to consist of excellent, simple, and kindly
simply and cordially. The whole family, whom he had formerly judged
ball dress. She and all the Rostov family welcomed him as an old friend,
house dress in which Prince Andrew thought her even prettier than in her
Natasha was one of the first to meet him. She was wearing a dark-blue

pleasant impression on his mind, in her own home.
call, he wanted to see that original, eager girl who had left such a
at the ball. Apart from considerations of politeness which demanded the
and among them at the Rostovs' with whom he had renewed acquaintance
Next day Prince Andrew called at a few houses he had not visited before,


CHAPTER XIX





work.
felt astonished that he could have spent so much time on such useless
applying to them the Personal Rights he had divided into paragraphs, he
he remembered the peasants and Dron the village elder, and mentally
Bogucharovo, his occupations in the country, his journey to Ryazan;
and he felt ashamed of himself. Then he vividly pictured to himself
translated the articles of the Roman and French codes into Russian,
recalled his labors on the Legal Code, and how painstakingly he had
promptly all that related to the gist of the business was evaded. He
procedure was discussed at those meetings, and how sedulously and
how carefully and at what length everything relating to form and
of the meetings of a committee of which Berg was a member. He remembered
one, had already been prepared and submitted to the Emperor. He thought
were trying to pass over in silence simply because another, a very poor
of army reform, which had been accepted for consideration and which they
recalled his exertions and solicitations, and the history of his project
Petersburg during those last four months as if it were something new. He
When he reached home Prince Andrew began thinking of his life in

Andrew's ears long after he had left the house.
Speranski was doing. That precise, mirthless laughter rang in Prince
connected with him, or ever to have attributed importance to what
expected anything from Speranski and from any of his own activities
impenetrable eyes, and felt that it had been ridiculous of him to have
They said no more. Prince Andrew looked closely into those mirrorlike,

"I promised to go to a reception."

"Where are you off to so early?" asked Speranski.

Prince Andrew went up to Speranski and took his leave.
interrupted several times by applause. When the verses were finished
he had composed about various well-known Petersburg people. He was
assumed a pose and began reciting some humorous verses in French which
wonderful talent!" he said to Prince Andrew, and Magnitski immediately
"Now for the recitation!" said Speranski on returning from his study. "A

and quietly with one another.
the general merriment stopped and the guests began to converse sensibly
Speranski and he took them to his study. As soon as he had left the room
into the drawing room. Two letters brought by a courier were handed to
to the servant and got up. All rose and continuing to talk loudly went
remarking, "Nowadays good wine rides in a carriage and pair," passed it
Having sat some time at table, Speranski corked a bottle of wine and,

silent.
no connection with the previous conversation. For a few moments all were
the conversation from taking an unpleasant course, told a story that had
contrary opinion. Speranski smiled and, with an evident wish to prevent
which they all agreed in approving, Prince Andrew began to express a
of a conversation that was started about Napoleon's Spanish affairs,
The men remained at table over their port--English fashion. In the midst

seemed unnatural to Prince Andrew.
little girl with his white hand and kissed her. And that gesture, too,
After dinner Speranski's daughter and her governess rose. He patted the

salt of mirth, and they were not even aware that such a thing existed.
might have been funny, but it lacked just that something which is the
There was nothing wrong or unseemly in what they said, it was witty and

not jest with them.
tossed aside each time like a cork thrown out of the water, and he could
He tried several times to join in the conversation, but his remarks were

out of harmony with the general mood. They all seemed very gay.
on the spirits of the company, but no one took any notice of his being
note. Prince Andrew did not laugh and feared that he would be a damper
him unpleasantly, and the incessant laughter grated on him like a false
Andrew mirthless and tiresome. Speranski's high-pitched voice struck
to enliven him and amuse themselves. But their gaiety seemed to Prince
in a circle of friends, and his guests, understanding his wish, tried
Evidently Speranski liked to rest after his labors and find amusement

former lively tone.
vehemence. Gervais intervened with a joke, and the talk reverted to its
to the conversation. Magnitski starting quizzing Stolypin about his
under the former order of things--threatening to give a serious turn
conversation and began excitedly talking of the abuses that existed
stupidity of everybody concerned. Stolypin, stuttering, broke into the
Gervais gave a long account of an official revision, remarkable for the
dignitary, when asked his opinion, replied that he thought so too.
ridicule. Speranski related how at the Council that morning a deaf
that the only possible attitude toward them was one of good humored
company the insignificance of those people was so definitely accepted
service, related to people in the service. It seemed that in this
still funnier. Most of the anecdotes, if not relating to the state
had finished his story someone else was anxious to relate something
consist of the contents of a book of funny anecdotes. Before Magnitski
At dinner the conversation did not cease for a moment and seemed to

unattractive.
mysterious and fascinating in Speranski suddenly became plain and
Speranski but someone else. Everything that had formerly appeared
regret, and disillusionment. It seemed to him that this was not
Prince Andrew looked at the laughing Speranski with astonishment,

turning again to the narrator he began to laugh afresh.
this is a dinner for recreation, with not a word about business!" and
turning to Magnitski and interrupting his story. "We have agreed that
"Very pleased to see you, Prince," he said. "One moment..." he went on,

Still laughing, Speranski held out his soft white hand to Prince Andrew.

manner.
softly with a hissing chuckle, and Speranski in a high-pitched staccato
bass guffaw as he munched a piece of bread and cheese. Gervais laughed
Magnitski's words were again crowned by laughter. Stolypin gave a deep
Magnitski was going to say. When Prince Andrew entered the room
relating an anecdote, and Speranski was laughing in advance at what
guests surrounded him. Magnitski, addressing himself to Speranski, was
the Council of State, stood at the table with a beaming countenance. His
the same waistcoat and high white stock he had worn at the meeting of
a gray swallow-tail coat with a star on the breast, and evidently still
windows at a small table laid with hors-d'oeuvres. Speranski, wearing
He entered the dining room. The whole company were standing between two

laughter from a statesman made a strange impression on him.
before heard Speranski's famous laugh, and this ringing, high pitched
Speranski--was distinctly ejaculating ha-ha-ha. Prince Andrew had never
laugh--a laugh such as one hears on the stage. Someone--it sounded like
anteroom Prince Andrew heard loud voices and a ringing staccato
guests were Gervais, Magnitski, and Stolypin. While still in the
daughter (long-faced like her father) and her governess. The other
five o'clock. There were no ladies present except Speranski's little
gathering of Speranski's intimate acquaintances already assembled at
monastery), Prince Andrew, who was rather late, found the friendly
house, remarkable for its extreme cleanliness (suggesting that of a
owned in the Taurida Gardens. In the parqueted dining room this small
At the appointed hour, however, he entered the modest house Speranski

surroundings, but now he felt disinclined to go to it.
Andrew, especially as he had not yet seen Speranski in his domestic
circle of the man he so admired had greatly interested Prince
when inviting him. The prospect of that dinner in the intimate home
evening at Speranski's, "with only a few friends," as the host had said
Andrew had felt in the impending reforms. He was going to dine that
And this simple reflection suddenly destroyed all the interest Prince

any happier or better?"
what the Emperor was pleased to say at the Council? Can all that make me
simple thought occurred to him: "What does it matter to me or to Bitski
listened with quiet irony to Bitski's enthusiastic account of it. A very
taken place, did not affect him, and even seemed quite insignificant. He
such importance, and was surprised that this event, now that it had
State, which he had so impatiently awaited and to which he had attached
Prince Andrew listened to the account of the opening of the Council of

history," he concluded.
"Ah, yes! Today's events mark an epoch, the greatest epoch in our

emphasizing certain words and opening his eyes significantly.
must be reorganized and the accounts published," recounted Bitski,
authority but on secure bases. The Emperor said that the fiscal system
estates of the realm, he said that the government must rest not on
deliver. "The Sovereign plainly said that the Council and Senate are
extraordinary. It had been a speech such as only constitutional monarchs
and he spoke of it enthusiastically. The Emperor's speech had been
of that morning's sitting of the Council of State opened by the Emperor,
preoccupied air and at once began talking. He had just heard particulars
had he got rid of his hat before he ran into Prince Andrew's room with a
but who for that very reason appear to be the warmest partisans. Hardly
who choose their opinions like their clothes according to the fashion,
and of Speranski, and a diligent Petersburg newsmonger--one of those men
the societies in Petersburg, and a passionate devotee of the new ideas
The visitor was Bitski, who served on various committees, frequented all

often did, and was glad when he heard someone coming.
and could get nothing done. He kept criticizing his own work, as he
But either from fatigue or want of sleep he was ill-disposed for work

work.
thought about yesterday's ball, and after his morning tea he set to
un-Petersburg-like about her that distinguishes her." That was all he
little Rostova is very charming. There's something fresh, original,
on it long. "Yes, it was a very brilliant ball," and then... "Yes, that
Next day Prince Andrew thought of the ball, but his mind did not dwell


CHAPTER XVIII





they ought all to be happy.
loving one another; none of them capable of injuring another--and so
the people at the ball alike were good, kind, and splendid people,
"Especially such a capital fellow as Bezukhov!" In Natasha's eyes all
"How can people be dissatisfied with anything?" thought Natasha.

"Yes, I am very glad," he said.

Pierre smiled absent-mindedly, evidently not grasping what she said.

"How delightful it is, Count!" said she. "Isn't it?"

happiness.
She wished to help him, to bestow on him the superabundance of her own
Pierre's gloomy, unhappy look struck her. She stopped in front of him.

On her way to supper Natasha passed him.

over his spectacles seeing no one.
deep furrow ran across his forehead, and standing by a window he stared
his wife occupied in court circles. He was gloomy and absent-minded. A
At that ball Pierre for the first time felt humiliated by the position

evil, unhappiness, or sorrow.
completely kind and good and does not believe in the possibility of
ever been in her life. She was at that height of bliss when one becomes
father and instantly dropped again. Natasha was happier than she had
Andrew noticed how her thin arms rose quickly as if to embrace her
"I have never enjoyed myself so much before!" she said, and Prince

you ask such a question?"
once but only looked up with a smile that said reproachfully: "How can
his daughter whether she was enjoying herself. Natasha did not answer at
the dancers. He invited Prince Andrew to come and see them, and asked
When the cotillion was over the old count in his blue coat came up to

slipping on her bodice, settled herself beside him.
she are rare here," he thought, as Natasha, readjusting a rose that was
won't be dancing here a month before she will be married.... Such as
what is certain is that that girl is so charming, so original, that she
"What rubbish sometimes enters one's head!" thought Prince Andrew, "but

watched her. She did go first to her cousin.
my wife," said Prince Andrew to himself quite to his own surprise, as he
"If she goes to her cousin first and then to another lady, she will be

ladies for the figure.
When her partner left her Natasha ran across the room to choose two
you and I understand it all," and much, much more was said in her smile.
keep asking me, and I'm glad of it, I'm happy and I love everybody, and
"I'd be glad to sit beside you and rest: I'm tired; but you see how they

put her hand gaily on the man's shoulder, smiling at Prince Andrew.
tired and panting and evidently thought of declining, but immediately
breath, was returning to her seat when another dancer chose her. She was
cotillion, having completed one of the figures, Natasha, still out of
unimportant matters; he admired her shy grace. In the middle of the
tenderness, sitting beside her and talking of the simplest and most
mistakes in speaking French. With her he behaved with special care and
Natasha, with her surprise, her delight, her shyness, and even her
someone there not of the conventional society stamp. And such was
Like all men who have grown up in society, Prince Andrew liked meeting

ashamed of in what Prince Andrew had overheard.
and tried to excuse herself, as if there had been something to be
had involuntarily overheard her. Natasha blushed at that recollection
she had been unable to sleep that moonlight night, and told her how he
reminded her of their first encounter in the Otradnoe avenue, and how
cotillions before supper Prince Andrew was again her partner. He
the ball became livelier after his departure. For one of the merry
did not even see the Emperor, and only noticed that he had gone because
success and was honored by the special attention of So-and-so, but she
and So-and-so did and said this and that, and that Helene had great
particularly gracious he was to a certain lady, or that Prince So-and-so
that the Emperor talked a long time with the French ambassador, and how
nothing of what occupied everyone else. Not only did she fail to notice
Sonya, she did not cease dancing all the evening. She noticed and saw
so that, flushed and happy, and passing on her superfluous partners to
the aide-de-camp who had opened the ball, and several other young men,
After Prince Andrew, Boris came up to ask Natasha for a dance, and then


CHAPTER XVII





breathing deeply and watching the other dancers.
felt himself revived and rejuvenated when after leaving her he stood
so near him than the wine of her charm rose to his head, and he
slender supple figure and felt her stirring so close to him and smiling
pretty girl who caught his eye; but scarcely had he embraced that
because Pierre pointed her out to him and because she was the first
caused by the Emperor's presence, he danced, and had chosen Natasha
to him, wishing also to break up the circle of restraint he disliked,
possible from the political and clever talk which everyone addressed
Prince Andrew liked dancing, and wishing to escape as quickly as

was absolutely necessary.
who would have felt very much ashamed had she not been assured that this
her person, while Natasha was like a girl exposed for the first time,
hardened by a varnish left by the thousands of looks that had scanned
looked thin and her bosom undeveloped. But Helene seemed, as it were,
arms and neck were not beautiful--compared to Helene's her shoulders
herself, while her face beamed with ecstatic happiness. Her slender bare
dancing shoes did their work swiftly, lightly, and independently of
day and Natasha danced exquisitely. Her little feet in their white satin
to enter the circle. Prince Andrew was one of the best dancers of his
raised her hand to Prince Andrew's shoulder. They were the second couple
seemed to say by the smile that replaced the threatened tears, as she
"I have long been waiting for you," that frightened happy little girl

brightened into a happy, grateful, childlike smile.
Natasha's face, prepared either for despair or rapture, suddenly
invitation. He asked her to waltz. That tremulous expression on
he held out his arm to grasp her waist before he had completed his
belying Peronskaya's remarks about his rudeness, and approaching Natasha
remembers me," said Prince Andrew with a low and courteous bow quite
"I have the pleasure of being already acquainted, if the countess

heightened color.
"Allow me to introduce you to my daughter," said the countess, with

pleasure on his face approached Countess Rostova.
remembered her conversation at the window, and with an expression of
He recognized her, guessed her feelings, saw that it was her debut,
despairing, dejected expression of Natasha's face caught his eye.
must dance." He stepped forward in the direction Pierre indicated. The
baron, "we will finish this conversation elsewhere--at a ball one
"Where is she?" asked Bolkonski. "Excuse me!" he added, turning to the

he said.
"You always dance. I have a protegee, the young Rostova, here. Ask her,"

Pierre came up to him and caught him by the arm.

and the women who were breathlessly longing to be asked to dance.
Prince Andrew was watching these men abashed by the Emperor's presence,

had not yet gathered courage to enter the circle.
gazing now at the sovereign and now at the men intending to dance who
were current. But not listening to what Firhoff was saying, he was
reliable information about that sitting, concerning which various rumors
and participating in the work of the legislative commission, could give
held next day. Prince Andrew, as one closely connected with Speranski
talking to him about the first sitting of the Council of State to be
front row of the circle not far from the Rostovs. Baron Firhoff was
stockings and dancing shoes, stood looking animated and bright in the
Prince Andrew, in the white uniform of a cavalry colonel, wearing

the waltz.
ready to cry because it was not she who was dancing that first turn of
seemed to flash as she whirled round. Natasha gazed at them and was
while at every third beat his partner's velvet dress spread out and
music, being the rhythmic click of the spurs on his rapid, agile feet,
and turned her, the only sound audible, apart from the ever-quickening
circle, then at the corner of the room he caught Helene's left hand
deliberation started smoothly, gliding first round the edge of the
in his art, grasping his partner firmly round her waist, with confident
it on his shoulder without looking at him. The aide-de-camp, an adept
Bezukhova and asked her to dance. She smilingly raised her hand and laid
dancing. An aide-de-camp, the Master of Ceremonies, went up to Countess
looked smilingly down the room. A minute passed but no one had yet begun
distinct, precise, enticingly rhythmical strains of a waltz. The Emperor
were already close to the wall, and from the gallery resounded the
Rostovs requesting them to stand farther back, though as it was they
with three) and the music ceased. A worried aide-de-camp ran up to the
At last the Emperor stopped beside his last partner (he had danced

green dress.
listen to or look at Vera, who was telling her something about her own
nowhere else for the family to talk but here at the ball. She did not
This family gathering seemed humiliating to Natasha--as if there were

and his wife, who were not dancing, came up to them.
looks at a wall. Boris passed them twice and each time turned away. Berg
smilingly talking to a partner on his arm and looked at Natasha as one
passed by, evidently not recognizing them. The handsome Anatole was
interested in them and not wanted by anyone. Prince Andrew with a lady
as in the depths of a forest amid that crowd of strangers, with no one
of the room. She and the countess and Sonya were standing by themselves
wanted to cry. Peronskaya had left them. The count was at the other end
time, had begun to sound like a sad reminiscence to Natasha's ears. She
The strains of the polonaise, which had continued for a considerable

dancing with me."
how I long to dance, how splendidly I dance, and how they would enjoy
looking at her!' No, it's impossible," she thought. "They must know
if they were saying, 'Ah, she's not the one I'm after, so it's not worth
notice me? They do not even seem to see me, or if they do they look as
the first to dance? Is it possible that not one of all these men will
thought: "Is it possible no one will ask me, that I shall not be among
of those great people whom Peronskaya was pointing out--she had but one
height of joy or misery. She was not concerned about the Emperor or any
frightened eyes gazed straight before her, evidently prepared for the
rising and falling regularly, and with bated breath and glittering,
She stood with her slender arms hanging down, her scarcely defined bosom
of women who crowded near the wall, not having been invited to dance.
felt that she would be left with her mother and Sonya among a minority
up, or preparing to take up, their positions for the polonaise. Natasha
named. More than half the ladies already had partners and were taking
ambassadors, ministers, and various generals, whom Peronskaya diligently
music. The host followed with Marya Antonovna Naryshkina; then came
room leading his hostess by the hand but not keeping time to the
Everyone moved back, and the Emperor came smiling out of the drawing

their places for the polonaise.
detriment of their toilets. The men began to choose partners and take
forgetfulness of all the rules of decorum, pushed forward to the
asking them to move aside. Some ladies, with faces betraying complete
hostess. A young man, looking distraught, pounced down on the ladies,
the drawing-room door, at which the Emperor reappeared talking to the
hurried there and back again. Then the crowd hastily retired from
made a rush for the doors, and several persons with excited faces
ravish quite..." The Emperor passed on to the drawing room, the crowd
had been set to it, beginning: "Alexander, Elisaveta, all our hearts you
played the polonaise in vogue at that time on account of the words that
as if anxious to get the first moments of the reception over. The band
his host and hostess. He walked in rapidly, bowing to right and left
the sounds of music that had immediately struck up. Behind him walked
back, and between the two rows, which separated, the Emperor entered to
Suddenly everybody stirred, began talking, and pressed forward and then


CHAPTER XVI





    * "He is all the rage just now."


give it to him if he treated me as he does those ladies."
talking to him and he has turned away," she said, pointing at him. "I'd
project or other. Just look how he treats the ladies! There's one
after his father. And he's hand in glove with Speranski, writing some
present la pluie et le beau temps. * He's too proud for anything. Takes
"Oh, you know him?" said Peronskaya. "I can't bear him. Il fait a

with us at Otradnoe."
Natasha, pointing out Prince Andrew. "You remember, he stayed a night
"There's someone else we know--Bolkonski, do you see, Mamma?" said

better-looking.
Bolkonski, who seemed to her to have grown much younger, happier, and
recognized the shorter and younger man in the white uniform: it was
talking to a tall man wearing stars and a ribbon. Natasha at once
man of middle height, and in a white uniform, who stood by a window
But before he reached them Pierre stopped beside a very handsome, dark

partners to her.
for her in particular. He had promised to be at the ball and introduce
as Peronskaya had called him, and knew he was looking for them, and
Natasha looked joyfully at the familiar face of Pierre, "the buffoon,"

looking for someone.
were passing through a crowd at a fair. He pushed through, evidently
and nodding to right and left as casually and good-naturedly as if he
Pierre, swaying his stout body, advanced, making way through the crowd

Pierre. "Put him beside his wife and he looks a regular buffoon!"
one in spectacles is the universal Freemason," she went on, indicating
Marya Antonovna! And how simply she is dressed! Lovely! And that stout
Ah, here she is! Yes, she is still the most beautiful of them all, our
the French are charming, very charming. No one more charming in society.
inquiry about Caulaincourt. "Looks as if he were a king! All the same,
yes, that's the French ambassador himself!" she replied to the countess'
Drubetskoy, is also very attentive to her. They say she has millions. Oh
isn't he? I hear they will marry him to that rich girl. But your cousin,
looking at something over the heads of the ladies. "He's handsome,
handsome officer of the Horse Guards who passed by them with head erect,
"That is Bezukhova's brother, Anatole Kuragin," she said, indicating a

here come her suitors."
"She is a splendid match, a millionairess," said Peronskaya. "And look,

daughter.
She pointed to a lady who was crossing the room followed by a very plain

run after."
about her. But see, those two, though not good-looking, are even more
court to her. Beautiful and clever... they say Prince--is quite mad
is quite equal to Marya Antonovna. See how the men, young and old, pay
Peronskaya, indicating Helene who had just entered. "How lovely! She
"Ah, here she is, the Queen of Petersburg, Countess Bezukhova," said

who was surrounded by ladies laughing at something he said.
said, indicating an old man with a profusion of silver-gray curly hair,
"That is the Dutch ambassador, do you see? That gray-haired man," she

the ball.
Peronskaya was pointing out to the countess the most important people at

"There are some like ourselves and some worse," she thought.

and this observation helped to calm her.
her and looking at her. She realized that those noticing her liked her,
that crowd. Natasha heard and felt that several people were asking about
the Emperor. The countess took up a position in one of the front rows of
In the ballroom guests stood crowding at the entrance doors awaiting

"Charming!" said he, kissing the tips of his fingers.

eyes and asked the count which was his daughter.
girlhood and her own first ball. The host also followed Natasha with his
her she may have recalled the golden, irrecoverable days of her own
a special smile in addition to her usual smile as hostess. Looking at
rested longer on the slim Natasha. She looked at her and gave her alone
hair, both curtsied in the same way, but the hostess' eye involuntarily
The two girls in their white dresses, each with a rose in her black


    * "Delighted to see you."


manner.
"Charme de vous voir," * greeted the Rostovs and Peronskaya in the same
for half an hour repeating the same words to the various arrivals,
more. The host and hostess, who had already been standing at the door
greetings deafened Natasha, and the light and glitter dazzled her still
On entering the ballroom the regular hum of voices, footsteps, and
from the others. All was blended into one brilliant procession.
Natasha looked in the mirrors and could not distinguish her reflection

diamonds and pearls on their bare necks and arms.
landing reflected ladies in white, pale-blue, and pink dresses, with
also talking in low tones and wearing ball dresses. The mirrors on the
became her best. Before and behind them other visitors were entering,
with all her might to conceal it. And this was the very attitude that
ridiculous, and she moved on almost fainting from excitement and trying
at her heart. She could not assume that pose, which would have made her
clearly, her pulse beat a hundred to the minute, and the blood throbbed
fortunately for her, she felt her eyes growing misty, she saw nothing
air she considered indispensable for a girl on such an occasion. But,
remember how she must behave at a ball, and tried to assume the majestic
brightly illuminated stairs between the flowers. Only then did she
fur cloak, and, beside Sonya and in front of her mother, mounted the
over the red baize at the entrance, she entered the hall, took off her
carriage. She understood all that awaited her only when, after stepping
so out of keeping was it with the chill darkness and closeness of the
prospect was so splendid that she hardly believed it would come true,
the Emperor, and all the brilliant young people of Petersburg. The
the ball, in those brightly lighted rooms--with music, flowers, dances,
for the first time vividly imagined what was in store for her there at
In the damp chill air and crowded closeness of the swaying carriage, she

had time to think of what lay before her.
Natasha had not had a moment free since early morning and had not once


CHAPTER XV





themselves in their carriages and drove off.
at eleven o'clock, careful of their coiffures and dresses, they settled
She praised the Rostovs' toilets. They praised her taste and toilet, and

was as full of rapturous admiration as the Rostovs' servants had been.
yellow dress, wearing her badge as maid of honor, her old lady's maid
ears just as carefully, and when she entered her drawing room in her
perfumed, and powdered in just the same way. She had washed behind her
to her it was a matter of routine. Her ugly old body was washed,
gone through the same process as the Rostovs, but with less flurry--for
Peronskaya was quite ready. In spite of her age and plainness she had

But they had still to call at the Taurida Gardens.
At a quarter past ten they at last got into their carriages and started.

"And Sonya! They are lovely!"
"What a beauty--a very queen!" said the nurse as she came to the door.

"Never mind, I'll run it up, it won't show," said Dunyasha.

"Oh goodness! What has happened? Really it was not my fault!"

could not move fast enough and a piece of gauze was torn off.
and she rushed forward so that the maids who were tacking up her skirt
"Mamma, your cap, more to this side," said Natasha. "I'll arrange it,"

be rumpled.
He would have embraced her but, blushing, she stepped aside fearing to

you!"
"Oo-oo, my beauty!" exclaimed the count, "she looks better than any of

and velvet gown.
At that moment, with soft steps, the countess came in shyly, in her cap

work once more.
the front of her little shawl and, still kneeling on the floor, set to
minute," said the resolute Dunyasha taking a needle that was stuck on
"Well, if it's too long we'll take it up... we'll tack it up in one

knees after her young lady.
"Really, madam, it is not at all too long," said Mavra, crawling on her

too long.
Natasha stepped back to look at herself in the pier glass. The dress was

looked at Natasha, "say what you like, it's still too long."
"Say what you like," exclaimed Sonya, in a despairing voice as she

mouth to the other with her tongue.
pulling the skirt straight and shifting the pins from one side of her
"If you please, Miss! allow me," said the maid, who on her knees was

the middle of the room smoothing out the folds of the gauze.
"Oh, Papa! how nice you look! Charming!" cried Natasha, as she stood in

and his hair pomaded.
wearing a blue swallow-tail coat, shoes and stockings, and was perfumed
Sonya slammed the door to. A minute later they let the count in. He was

covered her whole face.
as he opened the door--speaking from under the filmy skirt which still
"In a minute! In a minute! Don't come in, Papa!" she cried to her father

Natasha began putting on the dress.

held.
this to express a consciousness of the airiness and purity of what she
with two fingers, and blowing and shaking something off it, as if by
"It's ready, Miss," said the maid, holding up the shortened gauze dress

is some scent. Peronskaya must be tired of waiting."
"Whenever will you be ready?" asked the count coming to the door. "Here

"Give me my thimble, Miss, from there..."

"Mavra, quicker, darling!"

up high on one uplifted hand.
countess and Sonya, and a fourth held the whole of the gossamer garment
thread. A third with pins in her mouth was running about between the
maids were turning up the hem and hurriedly biting off the ends of
The cause of the delay was Natasha's skirt, which was too long. Two

skirt.
her gray hair, ran back to the maids who were turning up the hem of her
head this way and that, she fastened on the cap and, hurriedly kissing
Sonya, scrutinized her, and then ran to her mother. Turning her mother's
her dancing shoes showed, and in her mother's dressing jacket, ran up to
When her hair was done, Natasha, in her short petticoat from under which

still to get dressed and they had to call at the Taurida Gardens.
They had decided to be at the ball by half past ten, and Natasha had

"But it's already ten."

"Don't do it without me!" called Natasha. "You won't do it right."

"I have only my cap to pin on."

"Directly! Directly! And you, Mamma?"

"Aren't you ready? It is nearly ten," came the countess' voice.

"Oh, dear! Well then, wait. That's right, Sonya."

Natasha's hair.
"Allow me, Miss! I can't do it like that," said the maid who was holding

Sonya sat down and Natasha pinned the ribbon on differently.

here!"
was dressing it had not time to release. "That bow is not right. Come
her head and clutching with both hands at her hair which the maid who
"That's not the way, that's not the way, Sonya!" cried Natasha turning

through it.
dainty finger, was fixing on a last ribbon that squeaked as the pin went
the middle of the room and, pressing the head of a pin till it hurt her
jacket thrown over her slender shoulders. Sonya stood ready dressed in
behindhand. She was still sitting before a looking-glass with a dressing
the countess, but Natasha, who had bustled about helping them all, was
hairdressing was almost done. Sonya was finishing dressing and so was
silk stockings and white satin shoes with ribbons were already on; the
ears washed, perfumed, and powdered, as befits a ball; the openwork
Everything essential had already been done; feet, hands, necks, and

hair dressed a la grecque.
white gauze over pink silk slips, with roses on their bodices and their
countess was to wear a claret-colored velvet dress, and the two girls
possible. Sonya and her mother put themselves entirely in her hands. The
all--she herself, Mamma, and Sonya--should be as well dressed as
her powers since morning had been concentrated on ensuring that they
morning and had been in a fever of excitement and activity all day. All
Natasha was going to her first grand ball. She had got up at eight that

yet dressed.
o'clock, but it was already five minutes to ten, and the girls were not
They were to call for her at her house in the Taurida Gardens at ten

was to accompany them to the ball.
countess and piloted the provincial Rostovs in Petersburg high society,
court of the Dowager Empress, who was a friend and relation of the
Marya Ignatevna Peronskaya, a thin and shallow maid of honor at the

it should be.
dresses would not be ready, or that something would not be arranged as
Rostov family, many fears that the invitation would not arrive, that the
There had been many discussions and preparations for this ball in the

to be present, were still hurrying to get dressed.
A third of the visitors had already arrived, but the Rostovs, who were

mentioned by name the greatest dignitaries of the day.
One person, better dressed than the rest, seemed to know everyone and

the plumes?..." was whispered among the crowd.
"The Emperor?... No, a minister.... prince... ambassador. Don't you see

crowd and caps were doffed.
Almost every time a new carriage drove up a whisper ran through the

at the entrance.
with a clatter, and then walked hurriedly and noiselessly over the baize
cautiously descended the carriage steps which were let down for them
wearing uniforms, stars, and ribbons, while ladies in satin and ermine
footmen and footmen in plumed hats. From the carriages emerged men
Carriages kept driving away and fresh ones arriving, with red-liveried
police officers and even the police master himself stood at the porch.
which was carpeted with red baize, and not only gendarmes but dozens of
innumerable lights. Police were stationed at the brightly lit entrance
The grandee's well-known mansion on the English Quay glittered with

diplomatic corps and the Emperor himself were to be present.
grandee of Catherine's day was giving a ball and midnight supper. The
On the thirty-first of December, New Year's Eve, 1809 - 10 an old


CHAPTER XIV





which he ceased coming to the Rostovs'.
Next day the countess called Boris aside and had a talk with him, after


reality, and even more so because it was different.
world of dreams, where everything was as light and beautiful as in
Dunyasha had left the room had already passed into yet another happier
fall asleep, called Dunyasha the maid to put out the candle, and before
on her bed, laughed at the pleasant thought that she would immediately
She hummed a scrap from her favorite opera by Cherubini, threw herself

splendidly... and her voice! One can really say it's a wonderful voice!"
then she is pretty, uncommonly pretty, and agile--she swims and rides
continued this man. "She is unusually intelligent, charming... and
men--who was saying it of her. "There is everything, everything in her,"
and imagining it was some very wise man--the wisest and best of
charming she is," she went on, speaking of herself in the third person,
Mamma does not understand. It is wonderful how clever I am and how...
fell in love with Nicholas and does not wish to know anything more. Even
with her enormous plait of hair. "No, how could she? She's virtuous. She
"Sonya?" she thought, glancing at that curled-up, sleeping little kitten

could understand all that she understood and all there was in her.
It was a long time before she could sleep. She kept thinking that no one

ran barefoot to her own room.
"You're not asleep?" Natasha jumped up, snatched up her slippers, and
"Little countess!" the count's voice called from behind the door.

red.... How can I explain it to you?"
"No, he is a Freemason, I have found out. He is fine, dark-blue and

"You flirt with him too," said the countess, laughing.

square."
understand.... Bezukhov, now, is blue, dark-blue and red, and he is
Natasha continued: "Don't you really understand? Nicholas would

"What rubbish you're talking!" said the countess.

clock.... Don't you understand? Narrow, you know--gray, light gray..."
nice. Only not quite my taste--he is so narrow, like the dining-room
anybody ever so much in love with you? And he's very nice, very, very
hand. "But, Mamma, is he very much in love? What do you think? Was
saying, "June," and continued, kissing, "July, August," on the other
seized the countess' hands and kissed a knuckle of the little finger,
You're awfully like me, just such another giggler.... Wait..." and she
"Don't laugh, stop!" cried Natasha. "You're shaking the whole bed!

went off into a good humored, unexpected, elderly laugh.
"Just so, just so," repeated the countess, and shaking all over, she

"Just so. There's no need for me to marry him. But... just so."

"How so, my pet?"

smiled and looked at her mother. "Not to marry, but just so," she added.
won't marry, but let him come if he enjoys it and I enjoy it." Natasha
Natasha in the tone of one being deprived of her property. "Well, I
"How can you know? No, Mamma, don't speak to him! What nonsense!" said

"Because I know it will end in nothing...."

"Why not, if he likes to?"

talk with Boris. He need not come so often...."
"He was not always old. But this is what I'll do, Natasha, I'll have a

"I know! Cyril Matveich... but he is old."

"I'll tell you some things about myself. I had a cousin..."

"Crazy?" repeated Natasha.

wealthy match, and now he's half crazy."
it torments him for nothing. He may already have found a suitable and
injure you in the eyes of other young men who visit us, and above all
dating from your childish days, and to see him so intimate with you may
"It won't do, my love! Not everyone will understand this friendship

that contemplation seemed to have forgotten all she had wished to say.
turning to her mother, who was tenderly gazing at her daughter and in
April, May. Speak, Mamma, why don't you say anything? Speak!" said she,
knuckles, then the next knuckle, whispering, "January, February, March,
over and began kissing first one knuckle, then the space between the
her, kissed it on the back and then on the palm, then again turned it
Natasha did not let her finish. She drew the countess' large hand to

"Natasha, I am in earnest..."

"But if I want to..."

"Leave off talking nonsense," said the countess.

 "But if I want to..." said Natasha.

"I know. It is not right, darling!"

"How do you know?"

and because you yourself don't love him."
"Because he is young, because he is poor, because he is a relation...

"Why not?" said Natasha, without changing her position.

know you can't marry him."
"You have quite turned his head, and why? What do you want of him? You

"Well, what then?" said she.

Natasha was listening and considering.

peculiarly serious and concentrated expression.
only saw her daughter's face in profile. That face struck her by its
sphinxes carved on the corners of the bedstead, so that the countess
was lying looking steadily straight before her at one of the mahogany
As she said this the countess looked round at her daughter. Natasha

that...."
What are you thinking about? You have quite turned his head, I can see
nice. He is very nice, and I love him like a son. But what then?...
"Natasha, you are sixteen. At your age I was married. You say Boris is

"Tell me, Mamma! He's nice?"
about. Don't say it--I know. No, do tell me!" and she removed her hand.
"About Boris... I know," she said seriously; "that's what I have come

Natasha put her hand on her mother's mouth.

"What is it tonight?--But I have to tell you..."

club were one of the greatest pleasures of both mother, and daughter.
These visits of Natasha's at night before the count returned from his

assumed a serious expression.
settled down beside her under the quilt, spread out her arms, and
and waited until Natasha, after turning over a couple of times, had
"Well, what is it tonight?" said the mother, having arranged her pillows

or making her feel uncomfortable or displeased.
she clasped her mother she always managed to do it without hurting her
Natasha seemed rough, but she was so sensitive and tactful that however
neck, she kissed her on the throat. In her behavior to her mother
throat and another... that'll do!" And seizing her mother round the
"Mamma, can we have a talk? Yes?" said Natasha. "Now, just one on your

"Now then, now then!" said she.

her kind, weak way.
stern face, but seeing, that Natasha's head was covered, she smiled in
mother. The countess finished her prayers and came to the bed with a
inaudibly, now covering herself up head and all, and now peeping at her
down, raising her knees to her chin, kicking out and laughing almost
over to the wall, and began snuggling up the bedclothes as she settled
the one below. Natasha jumped on it, sank into the feather bed, rolled
couch was high, with a feather bed and five pillows each smaller than
jumped onto the bed the countess had feared might become her grave. This
slipping one little foot against the other, pushed off her slippers and
her mother was still praying she ran on tiptoe to the bed and, rapidly
unconsciously put out her tongue as if chiding herself. Seeing that
her mother in prayer, suddenly checked her rush, half sat down, and
this couch will be my grave?" Natasha, flushed and eager, seeing
round and frowned. She was finishing her last prayer: "Can it be that
curlpapers, ran in. The countess--her prayerful mood dispelled--looked
a dressing jacket with slippers on her bare feet and her hair in
bowing to the ground in prayer, her door creaked and Natasha, also in
under her white cotton cap, knelt sighing and groaning on a rug and
without her false curls, and with her poor little knob of hair showing
One night when the old countess, in nightcap and dressing jacket,


CHAPTER XIII





day, and yet he continued to spend whole days with the Rostovs.
left off visiting Helene and received reproachful notes from her every
knowing what he was doing or why he came, or how it would all end. He
he went away in a fog, without having said what he meant to, and not
letting it be understood how delightful was the present; and every day
album, making him write in it, did not allow him to allude to the past,
with Boris as of old. She sang him his favorite songs, showed him her
entangled. It seemed to her mother and Sonya that Natasha was in love
entering on such an explanation. From day to day he became more and more
let her marry him. But he failed to do so and felt awkward about
she could not be his wife, that he had no means, and they would never
her that the old times must be forgotten, that in spite of everything...
seemed to him that he ought to have an explanation with Natasha and tell
and began calling often and spending whole days at the Rostovs'. It
Natasha, but despite that resolution he called again a few days later
marry her would be dishonorable. Boris made up his mind to avoid meeting
his career, while to renew their former relations without intending to
because to marry her, a girl almost without fortune, would mean ruin to
him just as much as ever, but that he must not yield to that feeling,
him. After his first visit Boris said to himself that Natasha attracted
same inquisitive, challenging, and rather mocking eyes still looked at
He did not stay more than ten minutes, then rose and took his leave. The
round more frequently toward her, and broke off in what he was saying.
brows. This gaze disturbed and confused Boris more and more. He looked
All this time Natasha sat silent, glancing up at him from under her

invitations he had received from N.N. and S.S.
highest aristocracy, to an ambassador's ball he had attended, and to
not accidentally, Natasha felt, that he alluded, when speaking of the
with mild irony old times in Moscow and Moscow acquaintances. It was
lips about the amusements of the highest Petersburg society, recalling
like a skin, and he spoke with a particularly refined compression of his
with his right hand the cleanest of gloves that fitted his left hand
He sat rather sideways in the armchair next to the countess, arranging
comme il faut and in the latest fashion. This Natasha noticed at once.
Boris' uniform, spurs, tie, and the way his hair was brushed were all

occasionally.
the weight of that resolute and affectionate scrutiny and glanced at her
countess, silently and minutely studied her childhood's suitor. He felt
Natasha sat down and, without joining in Boris' conversation with the

"And is Papa older?" she asked.

"I should think so!" replied Natasha's laughing eyes.

"How handsome you have grown!"

change in her.
Boris kissed Natasha's hand and said that he was astonished at the

countess.
"Well, do you recognize your little madcap playmate?" asked the

expression on his face pleased Natasha.
Natasha entered, and his face expressed rapturous astonishment. This
four years before; and so he was taken aback when quite a different
under her curls and boisterous, childish laughter, as he had known her
Boris remembered Natasha in a short dress, with dark eyes shining from

with a more than cordial smile.
of his arrival she almost ran into the drawing room, flushed and beaming
the Rostovs' drawing room Natasha was in her own room. When she heard
Petersburg, plans which might very easily be realized. When he entered
beginning to make plans for marrying one of the richest heiresses in
important personage whose complete confidence he enjoyed, and he was
a brilliant position in the service thanks to the patronage of an
position in society thanks to his intimacy with Countess Bezukhova,
Natasha could not be binding either on her or on him. He had a brilliant
her and her parents feel that the childish relations between himself and
most poetic recollection. But he went with the firm intention of letting
He drove to their house in some agitation. The memory of Natasha was his

on them.
which he had entered. When the Rostovs came to Petersburg Boris called
and gratefully of the merits of her son and the brilliant career on
to hold herself with particular dignity, and always spoke rapturously
Anna Mikhaylovna also had of late visited them less frequently, seemed

Boris was mentioned.
"Nowadays old friends are not remembered," the countess would say when

of him.
this conjecture was confirmed by the sad tone in which her elders spoke
Sometimes it occurred to Natasha that he did not wish to see her, and

Otradnoe, but had never been to see them.
Rostovs. He had been in Moscow several times, and had passed near
Since Boris left Moscow in 1805 to join the army he had not seen the

tormented her.
her engagement to Boris was a jest or an important, binding promise
mentioning. But in the secret depths of her soul the question whether
episode as of some childish, long-forgotten matter that was not worth
Boris happened to be mentioned, she spoke quite freely of that
ago. Since then she had not seen him. Before Sonya and her mother, if
had counted on her fingers with Boris after they had kissed four years
Natasha was sixteen and it was the year 1809, the very year to which she


CHAPTER XII





thousand as well. Yes, yes! Kiss me."
dear fellow, I'll give you twenty thousand and a note of hand for eighty
"Yes, yes, all right!" said the count hurriedly. "Only excuse me, my

note of hand for only sixty thousand."
ready money. "Or at least twenty thousand, Count," he added, "and then a
for him to arrange his new life without receiving thirty thousand in
shoulder, and said that he was very grateful, but that it was impossible
for eighty thousand rubles. Berg smiled meekly, kissed the count on the
avoid further importunity, saying that he would give a note of hand
The conversation ended by the count, who wished to be generous and to

having definite means to maintain my wife, I should be acting badly...."
"Because, consider, Count--if I allowed myself to marry now without

part of the dowry in advance, he would have to break matters off.
know for certain how much Vera would have and did not receive at least
conversation. But Berg, smiling pleasantly, explained that if he did not
And patting Berg on the shoulder he got up, wishing to end the

like it. You shall be satisfied...."
that came into his head. "I like your being businesslike about it.... I
long-foreseen inquiry that without consideration he gave the first reply
know what Vera's dowry would be. The count was so disconcerted by this
a pleasant smile, respectfully asked his future father-in-law to let him
the wedding Berg entered the count's study early one morning and, with
another time of borrowing money on a note of hand. A few days before
count thought of giving her the Ryazan estate or of selling a forest, at
question of the dowry, nor spoken to his wife about it. At one time the
the wedding, but the count had not yet decided in his own mind the
Berg had already been engaged a month, and only a week remained before

he any money.
have to be sold, so that it was impossible to give it to Vera. Nor had
other was mortgaged and the interest so much in arrears that it would
hundred serfs; but one of these estates had already been sold, and the
he had assigned to each of them, for her dowry, an estate with three
to, or what dowry he could give Vera. When his daughters were born
affairs. He did not know at all how much he had, what his debts amounted
the cause of his embarrassment, but it resulted from the state of his
count felt this most. He would probably have been unable to state
sufficiently and of being so ready to get her off their hands. The old
constraint was evident, as if they were ashamed of not having loved Vera
In the family's feeling toward this wedding a certain awkwardness and
possession of the family, but the rejoicing was external and insincere.
proposal, the holiday tone of joyousness usual at such times took
After the first feeling of perplexity aroused in the parents by Berg's

of happiness.
blew a small round ring of tobacco smoke, perfectly embodying his dream
and said "to take tea with us," and quickly doubling up his tongue he
will be coming," he was going to say, "to dine," but changed his mind
She is so... you know?... Unpleasant... But my fiancee!... Well, you
different--an unpleasant character and has not the same intelligence.
Now the other sister, though they are the same family, is quite
"And I love her, because her character is sensible and very good.

Berg blushed and smiled.

me..."
it? But above all, she is a handsome, estimable girl, and she loves
connections and some means. In our times that is worth something, isn't
share and a husband his. I have my position in the service, she has
money--I consider that dishonorable--but a wife should bring her
and my good management we can get along nicely. I am not marrying for
Provinces--and I can live in Petersburg on my pay, and with her fortune
are now provided for--I have arranged that rent for them in the Baltic
were in any way unsuitable. But on the contrary, my papa and mamma
it all, and should not marry if I had not thought it all out or if it
because he knew that everyone has friends, "you see, I have considered
"You see," said Berg to his comrade, whom he called "friend" only

consent.
and sensible, no one up to now had proposed to her. So they gave their
been taken out everywhere, and though she was certainly good-looking
the suitor could not but know; and above all, Vera was twenty-four, had
excellent. Moreover, the Rostovs' affairs were seriously embarrassed, as
since he himself was so firmly convinced that it was good, indeed
that the Rostovs involuntarily came to think it would be a good thing,
Berg's chief characteristic was such a naive and good natured egotism
Livonian gentleman should propose marriage to a Countess Rostova; but
flattering to him. At first it seemed strange that the son of an obscure
Berg's proposal was at first received with a perplexity that was not


    * "That girl shall be my wife."


position and his own, he decided that the time had come to propose.
his mind to marry her. Now in Petersburg, having considered the Rostovs'
German, "das soll mein Weib werden," * and from that moment had made up
theater, Berg had pointed out Vera Rostova to him and had said in
Four years before, meeting a German comrade in the stalls of a Moscow

him and an assured position in society.
with his superiors, and a moral young man with a brilliant career before
denied that he was a painstaking and brave officer, on excellent terms
Though some skeptics smiled when told of Berg's merits, it could not be

lucrative posts in Petersburg.
1809 he was a captain in the Guards, wore medals, and held some special
this, and he received two decorations for the Finnish war also. In
so insistently that everyone again believed it had been necessary to do
done after Austerlitz, he related this occurrence at such length and
the commander in chief and had taken it to his commander. Just as he had
up the scrap of a grenade that had killed an aide-de-camp standing near
In the Finnish war he also managed to distinguish himself. He had picked

obtained two decorations for Austerlitz.
everyone believed in the merit and usefulness of his deed, and he had
narrated that episode so persistently and with so important an air that
Austerlitz and held a perfectly unnecessary sword in his left. He
Not in vain had Berg shown everybody his right hand wounded at

to propose.
daughter, Countess Vera, the attentions a young man pays when he intends
him, and Berg who spent whole days at the Rostovs' and paid the eldest
Pierre whom the count had met in the street and dragged home with
became frequent visitors at the Rostovs' house in Petersburg were Boris,
who had obtained a post in Petersburg. Among the men who very soon
maid of honor, Pierre Bezukhov, and the son of their district postmaster
Otradnoe, impoverished old squires and their daughters, Peronskaya a
and the most diverse people met at their suppers. Country neighbors from
The Rostovs lived in the same hospitable way in Petersburg as in Moscow,

inquiring to what set they belonged, here looked down on them.
provincials, and the very people they had entertained in Moscow without
acquaintances was a mixed and indefinite one. In Petersburg they were
themselves giving it a thought, yet in Petersburg their circle of
Though in Moscow the Rostovs belonged to the best society without

accepted.
Soon after their arrival in Petersburg Berg proposed to Vera and was

also, as he said, to let the lassies enjoy themselves for the last time.
for an official post, so he had come to Petersburg to look for one and
only resource obviously presenting itself to the old count was to apply
particular--was such that the debts inevitably increased every year. The
the way of life at Otradnoe--Mitenka's management of affairs, in
serving modestly in an obscure regiment, spending comparatively little,
Though Nicholas Rostov had kept firmly to his resolution and was still

had spent in the country.
The Rostovs' monetary affairs had not improved during the two years they


CHAPTER XI





my debauchery if Thou utterly desertest me!
if I am myself the cause, teach me what I should do! I shall perish of
help me! My God, if Thy forsaking me is Thy doing, Thy will be done; but
that I was doing wrong, but could not tear myself away from them. Lord,
of the Song of Songs. And looking at those drawings I dreamed I felt
seemed to know that this maiden was nothing else than a representation
garments and with a transparent body, flying up to the clouds. And I
its pages I saw a beautiful representation of a maiden in transparent
represented the love adventures of the soul with its beloved. And on
were excellent drawings. And in my dream I knew that these drawings
by bowing his head. I opened the book, and on all the pages there
book of sheets of drawing paper; I said, "I drew that," and he answered
he gradually recovered and went with me into my study carrying a large
telling the truth?" And suddenly I saw him lying like a dead body; then
have known you had I met you by chance," and I thought to myself, "Am I
on his head and his features were quite changed. And I said, "I should
him in my arms, and saw that his face was young, but that he had no hair
thou noticed that my face is different?" I looked at him, still holding
to meet him. I embraced him and kissed his hands, and he said, "Hast
the process of regeneration had already taken place in him, and I rushed
Alexeevich came in from the drawing room. I seemed to know at once that
I was in Moscow in my house, in the big sitting room, and Joseph
I had a dream from which I awoke with a throbbing heart. I saw that

9th December


duties."
received a letter from my benefactor in which he wrote about "conjugal
not." Joseph Alexeevich's face had looked young and bright. That day I
men. And the light shineth in darkness; and the darkness comprehended it
found in my mind the text from the Gospel: "The life was the light of
be ashamed to do it, and suddenly everything vanished. And I awoke and
gave me to understand that that was my duty. But I replied that I should
this he replied that one should not deprive a wife of one's embraces and
with my wife as he advised, I was not living with her as her husband. To
incredulously; and even more abashed, I said that though I was living
I replied that sloth was my chief temptation. He shook his head
you know it? I think you know it already." Abashed by this question,
too. And he said, "Tell me frankly what is your chief temptation? Do
on the edge of it and I burned with longing to caress him and lie down
found ourselves in my bedroom where there is a double bed. He lay down
me; but he did not reply, gave me a kind look, and then we suddenly
felt abashed and asked whether what he had been saying did not concern
looked at me with vexation and jumped up, breaking off his remarks. I
me. And tears came into my eyes, and I was glad he noticed this. But he
to myself the condition of my inner man and the grace of God sanctifying
sensibility, and not listening to what he was saying I began picturing
the floor. He was telling me something, and I wished to show him my
the room and something strange happened. We were sitting or lying on
but so softly that I could not hear it. Then it seemed that we all left
and he was quietly telling me something about the teaching of our order,
as soon as I drew near I saw that his face had changed and grown young,
not please him, and I wished to come close to him and embrace him. But
incessantly with other people and suddenly remembered that this could
was very glad and wished to entertain him. It seemed as if I chattered
I dreamed that Joseph Alexeevich was sitting in my house, and that I

7th December


dream.
to enter that temple of virtue to a vision of which I attained in my
which unites in itself the strength of all the former ones, and aid me
help me to tear from myself these dogs--my passions especially the last,
and beautiful building. I woke up. O Lord, great Architect of Nature,
pointing me to a broad avenue and garden, and in the garden was a large
the other. I looked round and saw Brother A. standing on the fence and
dragged myself up, so that my leg hung down on one side and my body on
fence which I could scarcely reach with my hands. After much effort I
I stepped on it, but it bent and gave way and I began to clamber up a
me to a building to enter which we had to pass along a narrow plank.
heavier it grew. And suddenly Brother A. came and, taking my arm, led
biting me. I lifted it up, but the higher I lifted it the bigger and
my hands. Scarcely had I torn it off before another, a bigger one, began
thigh with its teeth and would not let go. I began to throttle it with
dogs, but I went on undismayed. Suddenly a smallish dog seized my left
I dreamed that I was walking in the dark and was suddenly surrounded by

drowsing off I clearly heard a voice saying in my left ear, "Thy day!"
so that he too may benefit. After dinner I fell asleep and as I was
grant that in his presence I may rather see my own vileness, and behave
to my rudeness while I on the contrary nourish contempt for him. O God,
myself above him and so become much worse than he, for he is lenient
cannot get on with him at all. The cause of this is my egotism. I set
silent, and I recollected myself only when it was too late. My God, I
up and said much that was unpleasant and even rude to him. He became
first, and I said something disagreeable to him. He replied. I flared
came and began relating various adventures. His coming vexed me from the
anger, but I did not sufficiently repent. Afterwards Boris Drubetskoy
myself and drove away that thought only when I found myself glowing with
mind gave him the most malevolent and bitter replies. I recollected
him no answer. Now I recalled every detail of that meeting and in my
perfect peace of mind in spite of my wife's absence. At the time I gave
meeting me in Moscow after our duel, said he hoped I was enjoying
imagination pictured an occurrence of four years ago, when Dolokhov,
paced up and down the large hall. I wished to meditate, but instead my
Awoke late, read the Scriptures but was apathetic. Afterwards went and

3rd December


Christ, the Holy Spirit, Him!...
produces other bodies. Mercury is a fluid, volatile, spiritual essence.
of which it attracts mercury, seizes it, holds it, and in combination
salt by its fiery nature it arouses a desire in the latter by means
and salt. Sulphur is of an oily and fiery nature; in combination with
life. The Trinity--the three elements of matter--are sulphur, mercury,
holy science of our order all is one, all is known in its entirety and
everything to comprehend it, and kill everything to examine it. In the
sacred all-embracing teaching is clear to me. Human sciences dissect
The distinction between the poor teachings of mundane science and our
support me in the path of virtue. In his presence doubt has no place.
which means the All. Talks with Brother V. strengthen, refresh, and
is the name of the ruler of all. The third name is the name unutterable
revealed to me. Adonai is the name of the creator of the world. Elohim
advised me to hold fast by brother A. Though I am unworthy, much was
I have had a long and instructive talk alone with Brother V., who


the following was written:
 After this, three pages were left blank in the diary, and then


find the true path out of the labyrinth of lies!
Brothers and to the Grand Master. Great Architect of Nature, help me to
I could not be eloquent, nor could I frankly mention my doubts to the
and I wished really to stab his bare breast with the sword I held to it.
temple it seemed to me that he was smiling contemptuously at my words,
to me insincere, and all the time I stood alone with him in the dark
desire spiritual improvement, I had no cause to doubt him, but he seemed
holy order and is too preoccupied and satisfied with the outer man to
according to my observation he is incapable of feeling respect for our
members of our lodge (a question to which I could not reply) and that
from the fact that he had asked me several times whether N. and S. were
merely to be intimate and in favor with members of our lodge. Apart
me. It seemed to me that his object in entering the Brotherhood was
lead him into the path of truth, but evil thoughts of him did not leave
overcome. That is why I should really like to save him from evil and
harboring a feeling of hatred toward him which I vainly tried to
the time I was alone with him in the dark chamber. I caught myself
I nominated him and was the Rhetor. A strange feeling agitated me all
magnificence of the spectacle. It was Boris Drubetskoy who was admitted.
took place. The new decoration of the Premises contributed much to the
Holy Spirit. Brother O. was very eloquent. In the evening the admission
sciences, the seven virtues, the seven vices, and the seven gifts of the
interpretation of the seven pillars and steps of the Temple, the seven
Rhetor. I feel myself weak and unworthy. Then our talk turned to the
talk about the reception of a new Brother. They laid on me the duty of
is my enemy. Brothers G. V. and O. visited me and we had a preliminary
is required and a quiet onlooker when not called on to assist. My tongue
a true Freemason should be a zealous worker for the state when his aid
criticize them, but remembered my rules and my benefactor's words--that
worldly vanities. He told me of the Emperor's new projects. I began to
but without proper feeling. Brother Urusov came and we talked about
help and strengthen me that I may walk in Thy ways! Read the Scriptures,
I got up late. On waking I lay long in bed yielding to sloth. O God,

27th November


duties, (c) relations with my friends, and the management of my affairs.
from worldliness, but not avoid (a) the service of the state, (b) family
(2) to vanquish lust by self-restraint and repulsion, (3) to withdraw
walk in Thy paths, (1) to conquer anger by calmness and deliberation,
I am going to bed with a happy and tranquil mind. Great God, help me to

laughed loudly at it.
B., and only remembered that I ought not to have done so when everybody
In the evening I went down to the countess and told a funny story about
moderately and after dinner copied out some passages for the Brothers.
alone--the countess had many visitors I do not like. I ate and drank
served on one of the committees.) Returned home for dinner and dined
Alexeevich's advice Pierre had entered the service of the state and
Got up at eight, read the Scriptures, then went to my duties. (By Joseph

24th November


that time:
Pierre went on with his diary, and this is what he wrote in it during


CHAPTER X





many spiritual doubts and joys.
all this time in Pierre's soul, revealing much to him and causing him
a complex and difficult process of internal development was taking place
nothing but harmed nobody and was a first-rate, good-natured fellow. But
and absurd husband of a distinguished wife, a clever crank who did
In the eyes of the world Pierre was a great gentleman, the rather blind

much."
"What a strange antipathy," thought Pierre, "yet I used to like him very

freedom of his movements.
Pierre; it constricted his limbs and destroyed the unconsciousness and
drawing room (and he was almost always there) had a physical effect upon
believed implicitly. Yet strange to say Boris' presence in his wife's
heart"--a statement which, though gathered from an unknown source, he
an instance of a bluestocking being carried away by affairs of the
her former infatuations," he told himself. "There has never been
"No, now that she has become a bluestocking she has finally renounced

a husband to his wife, and secondly by not allowing himself to suspect.
protected himself from the danger of its repetition, first by not being
from the mortification to which his wife had subjected him that he now
disturbed Pierre. He had suffered so painfully three years before
particularly dignified and sad deference. This shade of deference also
that smile made Pierre uncomfortable. Toward him Boris behaved with a
child. Her smile for him was the same as for everybody, but sometimes
from Erfurt. Helene spoke of him as "mon page" and treated him like a
the most intimate friend of the Bezukhov household since Helene's return
Drubetskoy, who had already achieved great success in the service, was
Among the many young men who frequented her house every day, Boris

seriously.
Petersburg" was so well established that no one took his freaks
concerning the queer husband of "the most distinguished woman in
in accord with the accepted tone of the moment. But the general opinion
or not, lispingly expressed his views, which were sometimes not at all
and, regardless of whether any "gentlemen of the embassy" were present
them all. Sometimes he joined in a conversation which interested him
everybody, equally pleased to see everyone, and equally indifferent to
his wife's drawing room as one enters a theater, was acquainted with
artificially and therefore inspires involuntary respect. He entered
indifference, and benevolence toward all, which cannot be acquired
wife's circle, which did not interest him, that air of unconcern,
interests and his sincere contempt for all else, had acquired in his
the last two years, as a result of his continual absorption in abstract
advantageous background to his elegant and tactful wife. Pierre during
drawing room, he served, by the contrast he presented to her, as an
way, and far from spoiling the high tone and general impression of the
that absent-minded crank, a grand seigneur husband who was in no one's
Pierre was just the husband needed for a brilliant society woman. He was


     * (2) "Of a charming woman, as witty as she is lovely."

     * "That's a superb animal."


profound meaning in it of which she herself had no conception.
everybody would go into raptures over every word of hers and look for a
established that she could say the emptiest and stupidest things and
Bezukhova's reputation as a lovely and clever woman became so firmly
pleasure in the deception, at any rate it remained unexposed and Helene
needed to run such a salon, or because those who were deceived found
out at any moment. But whether because stupidity was just what was
were like those of a conjuror who always expects his trick to be found
poetry, and philosophy were discussed. At these parties his feelings
perplexity and fear, her evenings and dinner parties, where politics,
she was very stupid, sometimes attended, with a strange feeling of
secrets to her, so that in a way Helene was a power. Pierre, who knew
secretaries of the embassy, and even ambassadors, confided diplomatic
attending Helene's evenings, to have something to say in her salon, and
was regarded as a diploma of intellect. Young men read books before
Bezukhova's presence. To be received in the Countess Bezukhova's salon
letters. Bilibin saved up his epigrams to produce them in Countess
belle." *(2) The distinguished Prince de Ligne wrote her eight-page
gaining the reputation "d' une femme charmante, aussi spirituelle que
him was that during these last two years his wife had succeeded in
Pierre, for she had become even handsomer than before. What did surprise
animal." * Her success as a beautiful and elegant woman did not surprise
had noticed her in the theater and said of her: "C'est un superbe
notabilities. At Erfurt her success had been brilliant. Napoleon himself
and had brought from there these connections with the Napoleonic
Helene had been at Erfurt during the famous meeting of the Emperors

their intellect and polished manners.
the French embassy and by many belonging to that circle and noted for
husband, took a very prominent place. She was visited by the members of
In this group Helene, as soon as she had settled in Petersburg with her
Napoleonic alliance, the circle of Count Rumyantsev and Caulaincourt.
own particular tone. The largest of these was the French circle of the
and at the grand balls was divided into several circles, each with its
At that time, as always happens, the highest society that met at court


CHAPTER IX





regeneration.
upper floor of this big house and am experiencing a happy feeling of
not know how hard it was for me to see her again. I have settled on the
that I had nothing to forgive. It gave me joy to tell her this. She need
forget the past, to forgive me whatever wrong I may have done her, and
what I wrote to Joseph Alexeevich. I told my wife that I begged her to
union with her have only a spiritual aim. That is what I decided, and
my cross. But if I forgive her for the sake of doing right, then let
everyone--especially to one so closely bound to me--and that I must bear
to refuse a suppliant, and ought to reach a helping hand to
my conversations with him, and deduced from it all that I ought not
I went to my room and reread Joseph Alexeevich's letters and recalled
to seek. Had my benefactor been here he would have told me what to do.
what she wanted. In my perplexity I did not know whose aid and advice
I once let myself see her I should not have strength to go on refusing
was innocent and unhappy at my desertion, and much more. I knew that if
said that Helene was here and that she implored me to hear her; that she
I am again living with my wife. My mother-in-law came to me in tears and

Petersburg, 23rd November


in future note down all my actions.
he gave me a notebook, the one I am now writing in and in which I will
myself personally above all to keep a watch over myself, and to that end
self-knowledge and self-perfecting. Besides this he advised me for
diverting the Brothers from pride, to turn them toward the true path
to take up only second-grade posts in the lodge, to try, while
advised me not to avoid intercourse with the Petersburg Brothers, but
to me that the numbers three and seven are the basis of everything. He
to me fully the meaning of the Great Square of creation and pointed out
not yet feel himself sufficiently prepared. My benefactor then explained
which--in spite of the purity and loftiness of his inner man--he does
Joseph Alexeevich is never weary of life though he loves death, for
the more remarkable because, in spite of his great physical sufferings,
innate love of death or of rebirth to a new life." These words are all
Only the vicissitudes of life can show us its vanity and develop our
conflict, and (3) The attainment of the chief virtue--love of death.
by comparison, (2) Self-perfecting, which can only be attained by
our three chief aims: (1) Self-knowledge--for man can only know himself
my dear sir, it is only in the midst of worldly cares that we can attain
of our life we shall more quickly reach our aim, but on the contrary,
perfecting himself. We often think that by removing all the difficulties
said to me, "the chief duty of a true Mason, as I have told you, lies in
depth of my soul I agreed with him. Talking of my family affairs he
Joseph Alexeevich condemned my speech and my whole activity, and in the
attracted by social activity and puffed up by pride. On this ground
profligacy. Illuminism is not a pure doctrine, just because it is
the human race while ourselves setting an example of baseness and
impurity we are unworthy to receive, or seek the reformation of
this aim, we occupy ourselves either with the mystery which in our
greatest efforts of us; and so, led astray by pride, losing sight of
of circumstances. But at the same time just this aim demands the
self-purification. Only to this aim can we always strive independently
is the principal aim of these three? Certainly self-reformation and
improvement of the human race by striving for such purification. Which
purification and reformation of oneself for its reception, and (3) The
the order: (1) The preservation and study of the mystery. (2) The
He surprised me by asking whether I remembered the threefold aim of
at once lit up for me my whole past and the future path I should follow.
and thoughtful for a good while, told me his view of the matter, which
my rupture with the Brothers. Joseph Alexeevich, having remained silent
to our Petersburg lodge, of the bad reception I had encountered, and of
I told him everything as best I could, and told him what I had proposed
smile what I had learned and gained in the Prussian and Scottish lodges.
Jerusalem, and he responded in the same manner, asking me with a mild
on which he lay. I made the sign of the Knights of the East and of
at science. He received me graciously and made me sit down on the bed
late at night, except when he eats his very plain food, he is working
ever heard him utter a groan or a word of complaint. From morning till
years been suffering from a painful disease of the bladder. No one has
I have experienced. Joseph Alexeevich is living poorly and has for three
I have just returned from my benefactor, and hasten to write down what

Moscow, 17th November


Alexeevich. This is what he noted in his diary:
one night prepared for a journey and started for Moscow to see Joseph
Without replying either to his wife or his mother-in-law, Pierre late

whether he lived with his wife or not?
Compared to what preoccupied him, was it not a matter of indifference
any step. Had his wife come to him, he would not have turned her away.
was only because in his state of depression he did not feel able to take
If he did not at once give his consent to a reunion with his wife, it

thought.
"No one is right and no one is to blame; so she too is not to blame," he

liberty nor his resolution to punish his wife.
influence of the depression that possessed him he valued neither his
Nothing in life seemed to him of much importance, and under the
was, this was not even unpleasant to him. Nothing mattered to him.
that they wanted to reunite him with his wife, and in the mood he then
important matter. Pierre saw that there was a conspiracy against him and
him imploring him to come if only for a few minutes to discuss a most
At the same time his mother-in-law, Prince Vasili's wife, sent to

forgiving the penitent.
and that he was neglecting one of the first rules of Freemasonry by not
advice expressed the opinion that his severity to his wife was wrong
conversation upon Pierre's matrimonial affairs, by way of fraternal
less than the others forced his way in to see him and, turning the
Following this letter one of the Masonic Brothers whom Pierre respected

return to Petersburg from abroad.
At the end of the letter she informed him that in a few days she would

wished to devote her whole life to him.
him to see her, telling him how grieved she was about him and how she
It was just then that he received a letter from his wife, who implored

home receiving no one and going nowhere.
days after the delivery of his speech at the lodge he lay on a sofa at
Again Pierre was overtaken by the depression he so dreaded. For three


CHAPTER VIII





usual formalities he left the lodge and went home.
be accepted. He was told that it would not, and without waiting for the
Pierre did not answer him and asked briefly whether his proposal would
alone, but also a love of strife that had moved him in the dispute.
reproved Bezukhov for his vehemence and said it was not love of virtue
At the end of the meeting the Grand Master with irony and ill-will


     monarchical institutions.
     * The Illuminati sought to substitute republican for


understood it.
wanted most was to convey his thought to others just as he himself
limitations and alterations he could not agree to, as what he always
who seemed to be on his side understood him in their own way with
presenting itself identically to two persons. Even those members
the endless variety of men's minds, which prevents a truth from ever
supporting him. At that meeting he was struck for the first time by
meeting. Parties were formed, some accusing Pierre of Illuminism, others
more and more warmth. It was long since there had been so stormy a
Master began answering him, and Pierre began developing his views with
of Illuminism, * met it with a coldness that surprised Pierre. The Grand
the lodge. The majority of the Brothers, seeing in it dangerous designs
This speech not only made a strong impression, but created excitement in

accomplished much for the welfare of mankind."
everything will be possible for our order, which has already in secret
each of them again training two others and all being closely united,
"As soon as we have a certain number of worthy men in every state,

within the limits of virtue. Our order should provide means to that end.
therefore necessary that everyone should be able to satisfy his passions
passions; but we must strive to direct them to a noble aim, and it is
a charm palpable to those senses. It is impossible to eradicate the
now necessary that man, governed by his senses, should find in virtue
special strength, but now we need much more powerful methods. It is
was of course sufficient. The novelty of Truth endowed her with
"At that time, when everything was plunged in darkness, preaching alone

the example and instruction of the best and wisest men.
It taught men to be wise and good and for their own benefit to follow
virtue the victory over vice. This aim was that of Christianity itself.
except what impedes the great aim of our order, which is to obtain for
governments can continue in their customary course and do everything
destroying the bonds of citizenship, and beside which all other
universal sway, which should be diffused over the whole world without
aware of it. In a word, we must found a form of government holding
of the protectors of disorder and to control them without their being
Only then will our order have the power unobtrusively to bind the hands
raising worthy men from the dust and attaching them to our Brotherhood.
at the punishment of vice and folly, and patronizing talent and virtue:
men of firmness and virtue bound together by unity of conviction--aiming
"The whole plan of our order should be based on the idea of preparing

violence.
evil while men remain what they are, and also because wisdom needs no
Every violent reform deserves censure, for it quite fails to remedy
everything, repel force by force?... No! We are very far from that.
to be done in these circumstances? To favor revolutions, overthrow
are gravely hampered by the political institutions of today. What is
receive a lasting reward for his virtue. But in these great endeavors we
and must endeavor to secure that the honest man may, even in this world,
"To attain this end we must secure a preponderance of virtue over vice

of purpose and possessed of authority and power.
folly, and form of those devoted to us a body linked together by unity
wisest men, boldly yet prudently overcome superstitions, infidelity, and
education of the young, unite ourselves in indissoluble bonds with the
principles in harmony with the spirit of the times, undertake the
of virtue," he read, "we must cleanse men from prejudice, diffuse
"For the dissemination of pure truth and to secure the triumph

must act." Pierre raised his notebook and began to read.
the seclusion of our lodge--we must act--act! We are drowsing, but we
speech in his hand, "it is not sufficient to observe our mysteries in
"Dear Brothers," he began, blushing and stammering, with a written

his address.
meeting was a full one. After the usual ceremonies Pierre rose and began
he had to deliver to them from the highest leaders of their order. The
which Pierre promised to communicate to the Petersburg Brothers what
A solemn meeting of the lodge of the second degree was convened, at

preparing something for them and concealing it.
ingratiate themselves with him, and it seemed to them all that he was
in Russia. The Petersburg Freemasons all came to see him, tried to
him much that might conduce to the advantage of the Masonic cause
mysteries, had been raised to a higher grade, and was bringing back with
confidence of many highly placed persons, had been initiated into many
from correspondence with those abroad that Bezukhov had obtained the
In the summer of 1809 Pierre returned to Petersburg. Our Freemasons knew

abroad to be initiated into the higher secrets of the order.
from its original principles. And so toward the end of the year he went
suspected that Russian Masonry had taken a wrong path and deviated
on externals. He did not think of doubting Freemasonry itself, but
at any rate as he saw it here, sometimes seemed to him based merely
Pierre began to feel dissatisfied with what he was doing. Freemasonry,

and of whom there were very many in the lodge.
young Brothers who were influential through their connections or rank,
anything, but joined the Freemasons merely to associate with the wealthy
observations were men who had no belief in anything, nor desire for
particularly those who had lately joined. These according to Pierre's
Finally, to the fourth category also a great many Brothers belonged,

of the principal lodge.
purport or significance. Such were Willarski and even the Grand Master
the strict performance of these forms without troubling about their
nothing in Freemasonry but the external forms and ceremonies, and prized
In the third category he included those Brothers (the majority) who saw

and comprehensible path, but hoped to do so.
seeking and vacillating, who had not yet found in Freemasonry a straight
In the second category Pierre reckoned himself and others like him,

aspect of Freemasonry.
but he did not share their interests. His heart was not in the mystical
chiefly belonged, including, Pierre thought, Joseph Alexeevich himself,
Solomon. Pierre respected this class of Brothers to which the elder ones
the meaning of the square and all the various figures of the temple of
God, the three primordial elements--sulphur, mercury, and salt--or
science of the order: with questions of the threefold designation of
or in human affairs, but were exclusively occupied with the mystical
put those who did not take an active part in the affairs of the lodges
He divided the Brothers he knew into four categories. In the first he

dwell arose in his soul.
all his belongings to his neighbor, and doubts on which he tried not to
remembered the Masonic vow in which each Brother promised to devote
members, of whom half were as well able to pay as himself, Pierre
to thirty rubles received for the most part in promises from a dozen
ordinary life. Often after collecting alms, and reckoning up twenty
and insignia he saw the uniforms and decorations at which they aimed in
society mostly as weak and insignificant men. Under the Masonic aprons
Freemasonry and not as Prince B. or Ivan Vasilevich D., whom he knew in
life, and it was difficult for him to regard them merely as Brothers in
Moscow. All the members of the lodges were men Pierre knew in ordinary
from the affairs of the Petersburg lodges, and lived almost entirely in
Joseph Alexeevich was not in Petersburg--he had of late stood aside

involuntarily waded knee-deep in the bog.
his other foot down and sank deeper still, became stuck in it, and
sank in. To make quite sure of the firmness of the ground, he put
steps onto the smooth surface of a bog. When he put his foot down it
the Freemasons he had experienced the feeling of one who confidently
closer bound he involuntarily became to the order. When he had joined
At the same time he felt that the deeper the ground sank under him the
upon it, the more Masonic ground on which he stood gave way under him.
the end of a year began to feel that the more firmly he tried to rest
Amid the turmoil of his activities and distractions, however, Pierre at

bachelor circles in which he moved.
it immoral and humiliating could not resist the temptations of the
dissipations. He liked to dine and drink well, and though he considered
His life meanwhile continued as before, with the same infatuations and

Petersburg.
He supported almost singlehanded a poorhouse the order had founded in
in regard to which the majority of members were stingy and irregular.
of temples and supplemented as far as he could the collection of alms,
lodges and acquiring authentic charters. He gave money for the erection
lodge meetings, enrolled new members, and busied himself uniting various
position among the Petersburg Freemasons. He arranged dining and funeral
after visiting his estates had involuntarily found himself in a leading
Nearly two years before this, in 1808, Pierre on returning to Petersburg


CHAPTER VII





he worked at formulating the section on Personal Rights.
and, with the aid of the Code Napoleon and the Institutes of Justinian,
request he took the first part of the Civil Code that was being drawn up
section of the committee for the revision of the laws. At Speranski's
Regulations and--what he had not at all expected--was chairman of a
A week later Prince Andrew was a member of the Committee on Army

from which we must break a way out."
"But nobody possesses it, so what would you have? It is a vicious circle

needed which he did not possess.
Prince Andrew said that for that work an education in jurisprudence was

times!"
That is why it is a sin for men like you, Prince, not to serve in these
"We want to give the Senate new juridical powers, but we have no laws.
"And that is all the state has for the millions it has spent," said he.

had stuck labels on the corresponding paragraphs of the different codes.
years, had cost millions, and had done nothing except that Rosenkampf
sarcastically that the Commission had existed for a hundred and fifty
Commission for the Revision of the Code of Laws, Speranski told him
On that first evening Bolkonski spent with him, having mentioned the

sentiment for him the more, and unconsciously to strengthen it.
origin (as in fact many did), caused Prince Andrew to cherish his
that stupid people might meanly despise him on account of his humble
Bonaparte. The fact that Speranski was the son of a village priest, and
passionate admiration for him similar to that which he had once felt for
During the first period of their acquaintance Bolkonski felt a

Andrew.
peculiarity of Speranski's mind that particularly attracted Prince
doubt, "Is not all I think and believe nonsense?" And it was just this
impossible to express all one thinks; and that he had never felt the
which to Prince Andrew seemed so natural, namely, that it is after all
of reason. It was evident that the thought could never occur to him
most was his absolute and unshakable belief in the power and authority
In general the trait of Speranski's mentality which struck Prince Andrew

descend to the level of the original discussion.
and thought, and, having deduced the refutation he needed, would again
question to metaphysical heights, pass on to definitions of space, time,
resource was one he very frequently employed.) He would transfer a
logical, or suddenly rise to the realm of metaphysics. (This last
of a satirist, and laugh ironically at his opponents; now grow severely
take up the position of a practical man and condemn dreamers; now that
boldly, it seemed to Prince Andrew, from one to another. Now he would
made use of every kind of mental device, except analogy, and passed too
diversity of lines of argument he used to support his opinions. He
excessive contempt for others that he observed in Speranski, and by the
Prince Andrew, he knew not why. He was unpleasantly struck, too, by the
possess power. This mirrorlike gaze and those delicate hands irritated
Andrew involuntarily watched as one does watch the hands of those who
one to penetrate to his soul, and his delicate white hands, which Prince
Andrew. This was Speranski's cold, mirrorlike look, which did not allow
everything was as it should be: only one thing disconcerted Prince
not submit to Speranski's opinions entirely. Everything was right and
argued, it was only because he wished to maintain his independence and
involuntarily agreed with him about everything. If he replied and
seemed so simple and clear in Speranski's exposition that Prince Andrew
capable of applying the standard of reason to everything. Everything
life reasonably, considered important only what was rational, and was
he would himself have wished to be--one who explained all the facts of
for the welfare of Russia. In Prince Andrew's eyes Speranski was the man
his energy and persistence had attained power, which he was using solely
He saw in him a remarkable, clear-thinking man of vast intellect who by
Andrew the feeling he had experienced toward him at their first meeting.
This first long conversation with Speranski only strengthened in Prince

are and who we are."
all in a way that seemed to say: "We, you and I, understand what they
and the sheep to be safe..." or: "They cannot understand this..." and
rooted custom..." or, with a smile: "But we want the wolves to be fed
once remarked: "We regard everything that is above the common level of
During their long conversation on Wednesday evening, Speranski more than

and profundity of one's own ideas.
understanding the folly of the rest of mankind and the reasonableness
that one's companion is the only man besides oneself capable of
goes hand in hand with self-assurance and consists in a tacit assumption
before Prince Andrew and flattered him with that subtle flattery which
to win him to his side, showed off his dispassionate calm reasonableness
appreciated the other's capacity or because he considered it necessary
did not quite understand him. Moreover, Speranski, either because he
logical turn of mind inspired him with respect all the more because he
his weak, human, unheroic sides; but as it was, Speranski's strange and
the same breeding and traditions, Bolkonski would soon have discovered
man. Had Speranski sprung from the same class as himself and possessed
Speranski he had found this ideal of a perfectly rational and virtuous
perfection toward which he strove, that he readily believed that in
creatures, and he so longed to find in someone the living ideal of that
To Bolkonski so many people appeared contemptible and insignificant

confidentially.
received him tete-a-tete at his own house and talked to him long and
a strong impression on Prince Andrew on the Wednesday, when he
As he had done on their first meeting at Kochubey's, Speranski produced

of nothing.
whole days together that he had no time to notice that he was thinking
remark on the same day in different circles. But he was so busy for
He sometimes noticed with dissatisfaction that he repeated the same

successfully, of what he had thought while in the country.
not even think or find time to think, but only talked, and talked
absorbed the greater part of his vital energy. He did nothing, did
of life, the arrangement of the day so as to be in time everywhere,
or five necessary calls or appointments for certain hours. The mechanism
On returning home in the evening he would jot down in his notebook four

overshadowed by the trifling cares that engrossed him in that city.
whole trend of thought he had formed during his life of seclusion quite
During the first weeks of his stay in Petersburg Prince Andrew felt the


CHAPTER VI





trying to attract as little attention as possible, he left the room.
Closing his eyes, he bowed a la francaise, without taking leave, and

also have the pleasure of a more detailed chat with you."
talking with Magnitski, let you know what may interest you, and shall
me the honor of calling on me on Wednesday," he added, "I will, after
argument which was embarrassing for his companion. "If you will do
Speranski, indicating by a smile that he wished to finish amiably an
"Yet you do not care to avail yourself of the privilege, Prince," said

considers himself bound to maintain his position worthily."
have attained the same end," returned Prince Andrew. "Every courtier
"I do not dispute that, but it cannot be denied that court privileges

privilege."
but helpful to the success of the service, but not a class or court
to the Legion d'honneur of the great Emperor Napoleon, not harmful
"An institution upholding honor, the source of emulation, is one similar

His arguments were concise, simple, and clear.
emulation in pursuit of commendation and rewards, which recognize it.
negative concept of not doing what is blameworthy or it is a source of
privileges harmful to the service; that honor, l'honneur, is either a
Speranski went on to say that honor, l'honeur, cannot be upheld by


    * "If you regard the question from that point of view."


than in Russian but quite calmly.
pronouncing French with evident difficulty, and speaking even slower
"Si vous envisagez la question sous ce point de vue," * he began,

by the change. Probably Prince Andrew's thought interested him.
The smile vanished from Speranski's white face, which was much improved


     sentiment."
     aristocracy appear to me a means of maintaining that
     incontestable. Certain rights and privileges for the
     * "The principle of monarchies is honor seems to me


moyens de soutenir ce sentiment." *
Certains droits et privileges de la noblesse me paraissent etre des
that le principe des monarchies est l'honneur me parait incontestable.
"I am an admirer of Montesquieu," replied Prince Andrew, "and his idea

"What do you mean?" asked Speranski quietly, lowering his eyes.

"And of state interest to some extent," said Prince Andrew.

"Grounds of personal ambition maybe," Speranski put in quietly.

personality.
Speranski. He was too much absorbed in observing the famous man's
he felt a difficulty in expressing himself now while talking with
felt a wish to contradict. Though he usually spoke easily and well,
to be conscious. He did not like to agree with him in everything and
Prince Andrew, trying to resist Speranski's influence, of which he began
"I think, however, that these condemnations have some ground," returned

natural justice."
contemporaries who so condemn this measure which merely reestablishes
"Your father, a man of the last century, evidently stands above our

of the privilege. I began the service from the lower grade."
"No," said Prince Andrew, "my father did not wish me to take advantage

gossip and tittle-tattle."
concerning the ranks allotted to courtiers, which is causing so much
chamber who have not considered themselves offended by the new decree
imitators; and secondly because you are one of those gentlemen of the
a first example, of which it is very desirable that there should be more
you for a long time: first from your action with regard to your serfs,
he had just been talking. This flattered Prince Andrew. "I have known of
and Prince Andrew understood the insignificance of the people with whom
with a mildly contemptuous smile, as if intimating by that smile that he
conversation in which that venerable gentleman involved me," he said
"I had no chance to talk with you, Prince, during the animated

Bolkonski.
room. It was clear that he thought it necessary to interest himself in
and coming up to Prince Andrew took him along to the other end of the
Having talked for a little while in the general circle, Speranski rose

what pleased the sovereign.
smiled and said he could not judge of the advantage or disadvantage of
immeasurable height. When the old man began to speak too loud, Speranski
the old man. He appeared to address condescending words to him from an
extraordinarily disdainful composure with which Speranski answered
white hands--the fate of Russia. Prince Andrew was struck by the
student, who now, Bolkonski thought, held in his hands--those plump
of Speranski's: this man, not long since an insignificant divinity
Prince Andrew without joining in the conversation watched every movement

about his subordinate Pryanichnikov addressed a question to him.
A circle soon formed round Speranski, and the old man who had talked

co-operate in promoting all that is reasonable."
at the full stop. "I hope you will find him sympathetic and ready to
syllable, "and if you like I can put you in touch with him." He paused
Monsieur Magnitski," he said, fully articulating every word and
"The chairman of the Committee on Army Regulations is my good friend

Bolkonski. Speranski smiled more markedly.
Kochubey said a few words about the reception Arakcheev had given

everyone has," he said after a pause.
"I am very glad to make your acquaintance. I had heard of you, as

to Bolkonski with his customary smile and looked at him in silence.
When Kochubey introduced Prince Andrew, Speranski slowly turned his eyes
had kept him, and Prince Andrew noticed this affectation of modesty.
as he had been detained at the palace. He did not say that the Emperor
Speranski told Kochubey he was sorry he had been unable to come sooner

qualities.
reputation--expected to discover in him the perfection of human
anyone new--especially anyone whom, like Speranski, he knew by
who judge those near to them severely, he always on meeting
particular attention. As happens to some people, especially to men
Prince Andrew followed Speranski's every word and movement with

he looked only at the person with whom he was conversing.
speak. He spoke slowly, with assurance that he would be listened to, and
involuntarily do on entering a large company and was in no hurry to
Speranski did not shift his eyes from one face to another as people

talked with Napoleon.
Emperor and his companion at Erfurt, where he had more than once met and
in hospital. This was Speranski, Secretary of State, reporter to the
Prince Andrew had only seen on the faces of soldiers who had been long
were broad, but very plump, soft, and white. Such whiteness and softness
he had never seen such delicate whiteness of face or hands--hands which
nothing; nor had he heard such a refined, smooth, soft voice; above all
half-closed, rather humid eyes, or so firm a smile that expressed
had never seen so resolute yet gentle an expression as that in those
and clumsy gestures possessed such calmness and self-assurance; he
Prince Andrew lived he had never seen anyone who together with awkward
peculiar type that made him easily recognizable. In the society in which
or anticipation, he did not know. Speranski's whole figure was of a
happens at critical moments of life. Whether it was from respect, envy,
Prince Andrew recognized him at once, and felt a throb within him, as
suspended from his neck and a star on his left breast. It was Speranski.
just entering. The newcomer wore a blue swallow-tail coat with a cross
forehead and a long face of unusual and peculiar whiteness, who was
and went to meet a tall, bald, fair man of about forty with a large open
Count Kochubey did not finish. He rose, took Prince Andrew by the arm,

"Yes, that's a difficulty, as education is not at all general, but..."

priceless man, but he's sixty. Is he to go up for examination?"
"Well, I have Pryanichnikov serving under me, a splendid man, a

his legs and glancing round.
"Those who pass the examinations, I suppose," replied Kochubey, crossing

the departments when everybody has to pass examinations?"
rule.... Just the same as now--I ask you, Count--who will be heads of
land if they are set free? It is easy to write laws, but difficult to
"There's one thing I don't understand," he continued. "Who will plow the

"Afraid of being late..." said the old man, looking at Kochubey.

uselessly.
Andrew, trying to extenuate his action so as not to irritate the old man
"It was a small estate that brought in no profit," replied Prince

Catherine's day, turning contemptuously toward Bolkonski.
"Oh, is it you, Prince, who have freed your serfs?" said an old man of

"and about your freed plowmen."
"We were talking to him about you a few days ago," Kochubey continued,

simplicity.
Kochubey shook his head smilingly, as if surprised at Bolkonski's

Andrew.
"What has Speranski to do with the army regulations?" asked Prince

come this evening."
Speranski. He manages everything. I'll speak to him. He has promised to
"Mon cher, even in this case you can't do without Michael Mikhaylovich

anteroom).
same vague irony Prince Andrew had noticed in the Minister of War's
Sila Andreevich (Kochubey spoke of Arakcheev by that nickname with the
the evening at Count Kochubey's. He told the count of his interview with
The day after his interview with Count Arakcheev, Prince Andrew spent

him, were interested in him, and wanted to meet him.
and acquired the serenity that comes with years. People talked about
more manly, lost his former affectation, pride, and contemptuous irony,
greatly improved during these last five years, having softened and grown
the general opinion of all who had known him previously was that he had
of his supposed death and the tragic loss of his wife. Besides this
good match, and almost a newcomer, with a halo of romance on account
society world welcomed him gladly, because he was rich, distinguished, a
reforms, simply because he was the son of his father. The feminine
turned to him expecting his sympathy in their disapproval of the
The party of the old and dissatisfied, who censured the innovations,
liberating his serfs he had obtained the reputation of being a liberal.
he was reputed to be clever and very well read, and secondly because by
party cordially welcomed and courted him, in the first place because
highest and most diverse Petersburg circles of the day. The reforming
Prince Andrew was most favorably placed to secure good reception in the

consciousness.
of the army regulations quickly receded to a secondary place in his
its chief promoter, began to interest him so keenly that the question
reconstruction of which Prince Andrew had a vague idea, and Speranski
was supposed to be a man of genius--Speranski. And this movement of
chief of which was a mysterious person he did not know, but who
Petersburg a vast civil conflict was in preparation, the commander in
existence he learned every day, he felt that now, in 1809, here in
of everyone, and the innumerable committees and commissions of whose
uninitiated, the reserve of the initiated, the hurry and preoccupation
being shaped. From the irritation of the older men, the curiosity of the
circles where the future, on which the fate of millions depended, was
troubled by anxious curiosity and irresistibly attracted to the ruling
experienced the same feeling he had had on the eve of a battle, when
knew to be in power and whose aid he might need. In Petersburg he now
Prince Andrew looked up his former acquaintances, particularly those he
While waiting for the announcement of his appointment to the committee


CHAPTER V





Andrew.
Eh! Call the next one! Who else is there?" he shouted, bowing to Prince
"A member without salary," repeated Arakcheev. "I have the honor...

"I don't want one."

Prince Andrew smiled.

honor should be appointed a member, but without a salary."
"To the Committee on Army Regulations, and I have recommended that your

Andrew.
"To what committee has the memorandum been referred?" inquired Prince

of War needlessly deviating."
resembles an imitation of the French military code and from the Articles
misspelled, and without punctuation: "Unsoundly constructed because
Across the paper was scrawled in pencil, without capital letters,

paper from his writing table. "Here!" and he handed it to Prince Andrew.
committee. I do not approve of it," said Arakcheev, rising and taking a
"I have endorsed a resolution on your memorandum and sent it to the

Prince Andrew politely.
how you propose to deal with the memorandum I have presented," said
"I came at His Majesty the Emperor's wish to learn from your excellency

writing than doing."
carry out the old ones. Nowadays everybody designs laws, it is easier
"You are proposing new military laws? There are many laws but no one to
at Prince Andrew--relapsing gradually into a tone of grumbling contempt.
uttering only the first words amiably and then--again without looking
"You see, my dear sir, I have read your project," interrupted Arakcheev,

deigned to send your excellency a project submitted by me..."
"I am not petitioning about anything. His Majesty the Emperor has

"Sit down," said he. "Prince Bolkonski?"

Arakcheev's eyes turned toward him.

"I am not petitioning, your excellency," returned Prince Andrew quietly.

"What is your petition?" asked Arakcheev.

nose. Arakcheev turned his head toward him without looking at him.
scowling brows above dull greenish-hazel eyes and an overhanging red
forty with a long waist, a long closely cropped head, deep wrinkles,
Prince Andrew entered a plain tidy room and saw at the table a man of

duty said in a whisper, "To the right, at the window."
After this Prince Andrew was conducted to the door and the officer on

his head.
trembling lips--came out and passed through the waiting room, clutching
from the other side of the door, and the officer--with pale face and
a long time. Then suddenly the grating sound of a harsh voice was heard
air was admitted at that terrible door. This officer's audience lasted
an officer who struck Prince Andrew by his humiliated and frightened
been shown in and out of the minister's room by the adjutant on duty,
was told that his turn would come in due course. After some others had
adjutant on duty to take in his name, but received an ironical look and
faces--that of fear. Prince Andrew for the second time asked the
But the moment the door opened one feeling alone appeared on all

his legs and smiling contemptuously to himself.
feeling offended at having to wait so long, sat crossing and uncrossing
to Count Arakcheev. One general (an important personage), evidently
Andreevich" and the words, "Uncle will give it to us hot," in reference
others whispered and laughed. Prince Andrew heard the nickname "Sila
for whom they were waiting. Some walked thoughtfully up and down,
of unconcern and ridicule of themselves, their situation, and the person
higher rank expressed a common feeling of awkwardness, covered by a mask
an audience showed embarrassment and servility; the faces of those of
character. The faces of the unimportant people awaiting their turn for
were well known to him. Count Arakcheev's anteroom had quite a special
anterooms of many important men, and the different types of such rooms
During his service, chiefly as an adjutant, Prince Andrew had seen the

in Count Arakcheev's waiting room.
Andrew as he waited among a number of important and unimportant people
to consider my project, so he alone can get it adopted," thought Prince
concern myself about his personal qualities: he has been commissioned
"He is Minister of War, a man trusted by the Emperor, and I need not

heard of him inspired him with but little respect for the man.
He did not know Arakcheev personally, had never seen him, and all he had

room at nine in the morning.
On the appointed day Prince Andrew entered Count Arakcheev's waiting


War, Count Arakcheev.
Prince Andrew received notice that he was to go to see the Minister of
him graciously, and promised to inform the Emperor. A few days later
his father's. The field marshal made an appointment to see him, received
He mentioned what he had written to an old field marshal, a friend of

project will speak for itself."
the reform of the army regulations to the Emperor personally, but the
thought Prince Andrew, "so it will not do to present my proposal for
"I know myself that one cannot help one's sympathies and antipathies,"

not having served since 1805.
the Emperor's neglect of him by His Majesty's displeasure at Bolkonski's
now found further confirmation of this surmise. The courtiers explained
generally, and in the cold, repellent glance the Emperor gave him, he
to the Emperor and that the latter disliked his face and personality
It had always seemed to Prince Andrew before that he was antipathetic
Emperor, though he met him twice, did not favor him with a single word.
gentleman of the chamber, presented himself at court and at a levee. The
Arakcheev on the military. Soon after his arrival Prince Andrew, as a
Now all these men were replaced by Speranski on the civil side, and

de salut public--were taking shape and being realized.
Kochubey, and Strogonov--whom he himself in jest had called his Comite
into effect with the aid of his associates, Czartoryski, Novosiltsev,
Emperor Alexander had ascended the throne, and which he had tried to put
district tribunals. Now those vague liberal dreams with which the
administrative, and financial, from the Council of State down to the
intended to change the existing order of government in Russia: legal,
Councilor--and not merely these but a whole state constitution,
examinations to qualify for the grades of Collegiate Assessor and State
so agitated society--abolishing court ranks and introducing
one else. At that time the two famous decrees were being prepared that
remained three weeks at Peterhof, receiving Speranski every day and no
August the Emperor was thrown from his caleche, injured his leg, and
reforms were being pushed forward with the greatest energy. That same
when the youthful Speranski was at the zenith of his fame and his
Prince Andrew arrived in Petersburg in August, 1809. It was the time


CHAPTER IV





men up.
At such moments Princess Mary would think how intellectual work dries

within him.
if punishing someone for those secret illogical emotions that stirred
fresh air should remain at home," he would add with extreme logic, as
follows from the fact that it is cold; and not that a child who needs
wear warm clothes, which were designed for that purpose. That is what
to his sister, "he could go out in his smock, but as it is cold he must
"If it were hot," Prince Andrew would reply at such times very dryly

Nicholas can't go out today, it's very cold."
"My dear," Princess Mary entering at such a moment would say, "little

cold, stern, and above all unpleasantly logical.
And if anyone came into his room at such moments he was particularly
fame, with the girl at the window, the oak, and woman's beauty and love.
crime, which altered his whole life and were connected with Pierre, with
he reflected on those irrational, inexpressible thoughts, secret as a
arms behind him, long paced the room, now frowning, now smiling, as
merrily, and inquisitively at him. And Prince Andrew, crossing his
did not now say those former terrible words to him, but looked simply,
grecque looked tenderly and gaily at him out of the gilt frame. She
turn away to the portrait of his dead Lise, who with hair curled a la
went to the mirror, and gazed a long time at his own face. Then he would
interested him, and often when sitting alone in his study he got up,
to Ryazan he found the country dull; his former pursuits no longer
or love. Now reason suggested quite the opposite. After that journey
in the possibility of being useful and in the possibility of happiness
he now, after the lessons he had had in life, allowed himself to believe
arguments, it had seemed obvious that he would be degrading himself if
even remember how formerly, on the strength of similar wretched logical
some kind of work and again played an active part in life. He did not
experience of life must be senselessly wasted unless he applied it to
could ever enter his head. It now seemed clear to him that all his
before he had not understood how the idea of leaving the quiet country
doubted the necessity of taking an active share in life, just as a month
up in his mind. He could not now understand how he could ever even have
to go to Petersburg, and even to re-enter the service, kept springing
sensible and logical considerations showing it to be essential for him
and found all sorts of reasons for this decision. A whole series of
On reaching home Prince Andrew decided to go to Petersburg that autumn


it may be reflected in them all, and they and I may live in harmony!"
lived for myself alone while others live so apart from it, but so that
fly away into the sky, everyone must know me, so that my life may not be
me--everyone must know it: Pierre, and that young girl who wanted to
finally and decisively. "It is not enough for me to know what I have in
"No, life is not over at thirty-one!" Prince Andrew suddenly decided

itself and the moon, and.... all this rushed suddenly to his mind.
ferry, that girl thrilled by the beauty of the night, and that night
the lofty heavens, his wife's dead reproachful face, Pierre at the
best moments of his life suddenly rose to his memory. Austerlitz with
seized by an unreasoning springtime feeling of joy and renewal. All the
"Yes, it is the same oak," thought Prince Andrew, and all at once he was

could have produced.
leaves had sprouted such as one could hardly believe the old veteran
Through the hard century-old bark, even where there were no twigs,
old scars nor old doubts and sorrows were any of them in evidence now.
trembling in the rays of the evening sun. Neither gnarled fingers nor
out a canopy of sappy dark-green foliage, stood rapt and slightly
at the very oak he sought. The old oak, quite transfigured, spreading
side of the road, and without recognizing it he looked with admiration
Prince Andrew. "But where is it?" he again wondered, gazing at the left
"Yes, here in this forest was that oak with which I agreed," thought

trilled, and their voices reverberated now near, now far away.
swayed by the breeze. Everything was in blossom, the nightingales
the right side glittered in the sunlight, wet and shiny and scarcely
and the sappy leaves. The left side of the forest was dark in the shade,
a small cloud had scattered some raindrops lightly, sprinkling the road
The whole day had been hot. Somewhere a storm was gathering, but only

around, were delicately green with fluffy young shoots.
did not jar on the general beauty but, lending themselves to the mood
thick, shady, and dense, and the young firs dotted about in the forest
yet more muffled than they had done six weeks before, for now all was
memorable an impression on him. In the forest the harness bells sounded
into the birch forest where the gnarled old oak had made so strange and
It was already the beginning of June when on his return journey he drove

waiting for the ladies to appear, Prince Andrew set off for home.
Next morning, having taken leave of no one but the count, and not


CHAPTER III





to explain his condition to himself he lay down and fell asleep at once.
thoughts and hopes, contrary to the whole tenor of his life, that unable
In his soul there suddenly arose such an unexpected turmoil of youthful

purpose," thought he.
might say something about him. "There she is again! As if it were on
listened to her voice, for some reason expecting yet fearing that she
"For her I might as well not exist!" thought Prince Andrew while he

if it must be!" and she slammed the casement.
"O God, O God! What does it mean?" she suddenly exclaimed. "To bed then,

there. From time to time he heard a soft rustle and at times a sigh.
Again all was silent, but Prince Andrew knew she was still sitting

"Oh, you only spoil things for me. All right, go, go!"

past one o'clock."
He heard the sound of a scuffle and Sonya's disapproving voice: "It's

"Take care, you'll fall out."

as tight as possible, and flying away! Like this...."
on my heels, putting my arms round my knees like this, straining tight,
Darling, sweetheart, come here! There, you see? I feel like sitting down
"Do just come and see what a moon!... Oh, how lovely! Come here....

Sonya made some reluctant reply.

such a lovely night before!"
Sonya!" she said almost with tears in her voice. "There never, never was
sleep? Only look how glorious it is! Ah, how glorious! Do wake up,
"Sonya! Sonya!" he again heard the first speaker. "Oh, how can you

not stir, for fear of betraying his unintentional presence.
like the moon and its light and the shadows. Prince Andrew, too, dared
dress and even her breathing could be heard. Everything was stone-still,
the window. She was evidently leaning right out, for the rustle of her
"You go to sleep, but I can't," said the first voice, coming nearer to

"Oh, how lovely! Now go to sleep, and there's an end of it."

 Two girlish voices sang a musical passage--the end of some song.

"I won't, I can't sleep, what's the use? Come now for the last time."

"But when are you coming to bed?" replied another voice.

recognized at once.
"Just once more," said a girlish voice above him which Prince Andrew

awake. He heard female voices overhead.
His room was on the first floor. Those in the rooms above were also

elbows on the window ledge and his eyes rested on that sky.
full, in a pale, almost starless, spring sky. Prince Andrew leaned his
white trunk and branches, and above it shone the moon, nearly at its
roof glittered with dew, to the right was a leafy tree with brilliantly
leaves and stems here and there. Farther back beyond the dark trees a
trees grewsome kind of lush, wet, bushy vegetation with silver-lit
black on one side and with a silvery light on the other. Beneath the
very still. Just before the window was a row of pollard trees, looking
into the room. He opened the casement. The night was fresh, bright, and
shutters the moonlight, as if it had long been watching for this, burst
He got up and went to the window to open it. As soon as he opened the

was vexed with himself for having stayed.
him that some necessary documents had not yet arrived from town, and he
stupid old man (as he called Rostov), who had made him stay by assuring
room, the inside shutters of which were closed. He was cross with the
read awhile and then put out his candle, but relit it. It was hot in the
That night, alone in new surroundings, he was long unable to sleep. He

thinking about? Why is she so glad?"
members of the company, and asked himself each time, "What is she
repeatedly glanced at Natasha, gay and laughing among the younger
house was crowded on account of an approaching name day), Prince Andrew
elderly hosts and by the more important of the visitors (the old count's
During the dull day, in the course of which he was entertained by his

the night.
Andrew, as he was to see any new visitor, and insisted on his staying
hunts, theatricals, dinners, and music. He was glad to see Prince
in former years, that is, entertaining almost the whole province with
In 1809 Count Ilya Rostov was living at Otradnoe just as he had done

asked himself with instinctive curiosity.
quitrents. Of what is she thinking? Why is she so happy?" Prince Andrew
the military regulations or of the arrangement of the Ryazan serfs'
life. "What is she so glad about? What is she thinking of? Not of
cheerful in her own separate--probably foolish--but bright and happy
did not know, or wish to know, of his existence and was contented and
the sun so bright, everything around so gay, but that slim pretty girl
Suddenly, he did not know why, he felt a pang. The day was so beautiful,

stranger, ran back laughing without looking at him.
escaped. The girl was shouting something but, seeing that he was a
a white handkerchief on her head from under which loose locks of hair
dark-haired, remarkably slim, pretty girl in a yellow chintz dress, with
the path of his caleche. Ahead of the rest and nearer to him ran a
some trees on the right and saw a group of girls running to cross
of the Rostovs' house at Otradnoe. He heard merry girlish cries behind
he had to speak to the Marshal, was driving up the avenue in the grounds
Prince Andrew, depressed and preoccupied with the business about which

bathe.
green. It was dusty and so hot that on passing near water one longed to
It was now hot spring weather. The whole forest was already clothed in

Prince Andrew went to visit him.
trustee. This Marshal was Count Ilya Rostov, and in the middle of May
in connection with the affairs of the Ryazan estate of which he was
Prince Andrew had to see the Marshal of the Nobility for the district


CHAPTER II





disturbing himself or desiring anything.
anew--but that he must live out his life, content to do no harm, and not
restful in its hopelessness: that it was not for him to begin anything
it were, considered his life afresh and arrived at his old conclusion,
in his soul in connection with that tree. During this journey he, as
A whole sequence of new thoughts, hopeless but mournfully pleasant, rose

our life is finished!"
"Let others--the young--yield afresh to that fraud, but we know life,
"Yes, the oak is right, a thousand times right," thought Prince Andrew.

misshapen, and grim as ever.
too, were flowers and grass, but it stood among them scowling, rigid,
look at that oak, as if expecting something from it. Under the oak,
As he passed through the forest Prince Andrew turned several times to

hopes and your lies."
my sides: as they have grown so I stand, and I do not believe in your
and barked fingers just where they have grown, whether from my back or
cramped dead firs, ever the same, and at me too, sticking out my broken
always a fraud? There is no spring, no sun, no happiness! Look at those
that stupid, meaningless, constantly repeated fraud? Always the same and
"Spring, love, happiness!" this oak seemed to say. "Are you not weary of

the sunshine.
refused to yield to the charm of spring or notice either the spring or
dead-looking evergreen firs dotted about in the forest, and this oak,
stern, and scornful monster among the smiling birch trees. Only the
unsymmetrically, and its gnarled hands and fingers, it stood an aged,
broken off and its bark scarred. With its huge ungainly limbs sprawling
man could embrace, and evidently long ago some of its branches had been
as tall as they. It was an enormous tree, its girth twice as great as a
the birches that formed the forest, it was ten times as thick and twice
 At the edge of the road stood an oak. Probably ten times the age of

coming out.... But the oaks show no sign yet. Ah, here is one oak!"
green already.... How early! The birches and cherry and alders too are
I suppose," he thought as he turned round. "Yes, really everything is
"What is he talking about?" thought Prince Andrew. "Oh, the spring,

"It's pleasant, your excellency!"

"What?"

"How pleasant it is, your excellency!" he said with a respectful smile.

turned on the box toward his master.
But apparently the coachman's sympathy was not enough for Peter, and he
Peter the footman made some remark to the coachman; the latter assented.

forest the horses began to snort and sweated visibly.
among the birches was an unpleasant reminder of winter. On entering the
coarse evergreen color of the small fir trees scattered here and there
of green grass were pushing up and lifting last year's leaves. The
leaves were motionless, and lilac-colored flowers and the first blades
almost hot, no wind could be felt. The birches with their sticky green
birch forest growing on both sides of the road. In the forest it was
stubble land and bushes touched with green here and there, and into a
uphill where the clay had been liquefied by the rain, past strips of
fields of winter rye, downhill where snow still lodged near the bridge,
They went through the muddy village, past threshing floors and green
They crossed the ferry where he had talked with Pierre the year before.

anything, but looked absent-mindedly and cheerfully from side to side.
spring clouds floating across the clear blue sky. He was not thinking of
grass, the first leaves on the birches, and the first puffs of white
Warmed by the spring sunshine he sat in the caleche looking at the new

inherited by his son, whose guardian he was.
In the spring of 1809 he went to visit the Ryazan estates which had been

reform of the army rules and regulations.
our last two unfortunate campaigns, and with drawing up a proposal for a
books, Prince Andrew was at this time busy with a critical survey of
Besides being occupied with his estates and reading a great variety of

in home and foreign affairs.
himself--who never left the country--in knowledge of what was happening
from Petersburg, the very vortex of life, these people lagged behind
and to his surprise noticed that when he or his father had visitors
to Pierre, he diligently followed all that went on, received many books,
Despite the indifference to the affairs of the world he had expressed
"Bogucharovo Cloister," as his father called Prince Andrew's estate.
son, who was still in the care of nurses. The other half he spent in
Prince Andrew spent half his time at Bald Hills with his father and his

the children of the peasants and household serfs.
at his expense, and a priest was paid to teach reading and writing to
commuted for a quitrent. A trained midwife was engaged for Bogucharovo
the kind in Russia. On other estates the serfs' compulsory labor was
free agricultural laborers--this being one of the first examples of
On one of his estates the three hundred serfs were liberated and became

and without fuss or strain on his part this set things going.
He had in the highest degree a practical tenacity which Pierre lacked,

out by Prince Andrew without display and without perceptible difficulty.
changing from one thing to another had never accomplished--were carried
All the plans Pierre had attempted on his estates--and constantly

Prince Andrew had spent two years continuously in the country.


CHAPTER I





BOOK SIX: 1808 - 10





with Napoleon Bonaparte and from all the schemes of reconstruction.
as usual, independently of and apart from political friendship or enmity
science, poetry, music, love, friendship, hatred, and passions--went on
sickness, toil and rest, and its intellectual interests in thought,
Life meanwhile--real life, with its essential interests of health and

departments of government.
directed on the internal changes that were being undertaken in all the
foreign policy, the attention of Russian society was at that time keenly
Alexander's sisters was spoken of. But besides considerations of
court circles the possibility of marriage between Napoleon and one of
old enemy Bonaparte against our old ally the Emperor of Austria, and in
Austria a Russian corps crossed the frontier to co-operate with our
and Alexander were called, was such that when Napoleon declared war on
In 1809 the intimacy between "the world's two arbiters," as Napoleon


CHAPTER XXII





much talk of the grandeur of this important meeting.
the Emperor Napoleon, and in the upper circles of Petersburg there was
In 1808 the Emperor Alexander went to Erfurt for a fresh interview with

he shouted.
"Yes, and to drink," assented Nicholas. "Hullo there! Another bottle!"

"And to drink," said one of the officers, not wishing to quarrel.

all...." said he.
"Our business is to do our duty, to fight and not to think! That's

listeners, but quite relevantly to the course of his own thoughts.
banging the table--very little to the point as it seemed to his
way we shall be saying there is no God--nothing!" shouted Nicholas,
judging and arguing about everything, nothing sacred will be left! That
with him, it means that that is the right thing to do. If once we begin
pleases to recognize Bonaparte as Emperor and to conclude an alliance
means that we have deserved it, it's not for us to judge. If the Emperor
went on. "If we are ordered to die, we must die. If we're punished, it
"We are not diplomatic officials, we are soldiers and nothing more," he

But Rostov did not listen to him.

on the supposition that he was drunk.
justifying himself, and unable to understand Rostov's outburst, except
"But I never said a word about the Emperor!" said the officer,

actions!"
we to argue? We cannot comprehend either the Emperor's aims or his
his face. "How can you judge the Emperor's actions? What right have
"How can you judge what's best?" he cried, the blood suddenly rushing to

surprise of the officers:
began shouting with uncalled-for wrath, and therefore much to the
officers' saying that it was humiliating to look at the French, Rostov
his thoughts, yet could not get rid of them. Suddenly, on one of the
tormenting him without reaching a conclusion. He feared to give way to
couple of bottles of wine by himself. The process in his mind went on
Nicholas ate and drank (chiefly the latter) in silence. He finished a
have been done for, as his troops had neither provisions nor ammunition.
Friedland. They said that had we held out a little longer Napoleon would
the army, were dissatisfied with the peace concluded after the battle of
naturally turned on the peace. The officers, his comrades, like most of
dinner. Two officers of his own division joined him. The conversation
had come in civilian clothes, that he had difficulty in getting a
There he found so many people, among them officers who, like himself,
eat before going away. He went to a hotel he had noticed that morning.
hunger recalled him from these reflections; he had to get something to
The smell of the food the Preobrazhenskis were eating and a sense of

harboring such strange thoughts that he was frightened.
rewarded and Denisov punished and unpardoned. He caught himself
arms and legs and those dead men?... Then again he thought of Lazarev
Emperor, liked and respected by Alexander. Then why those severed
self-satisfied Bonaparte, with his small white hand, who was now an
looked round to see where the smell came from. Next he thought of that
vividly did he recall that hospital stench of dead flesh that he
whole hospital, with arms and legs torn off and its dirt and disease. So
remembered Denisov with his changed expression, his submission, and the
not bring to a conclusion. Terrible doubts rose in his soul. Now he
distance. In his mind, a painful process was going on which he could
Rostov stood at that corner for a long time, watching the feast from a

"Yes, I will."

"You'll call round?"

"Nothing, nothing," replied Rostov.

troubled was Rostov's face.
not refrain from asking what was the matter, so strangely dismal and
"Rostov! How d'you do? We missed one another," he said, and could

house.
banquet. On his way back, he noticed Rostov standing by the corner of a
Boris, too, with his friend Zhilinski, came to see the Preobrazhensk

respond in kind."
Cross to the bravest of the French Guards. It has to be done. He must
and next day Napoleon. Tomorrow our Emperor will send a St. George's
yesterday, 'Alexandre, Russie, grandeur.' One day our Emperor gives it
"The day before yesterday it was 'Napoleon, France, bravoure';
"Have you heard the password?" asked one Guards' officer of another.

"It's a fine thing! First-rate!"

French cap.
"Here's a cap, lads!" shouted a Preobrazhensk soldier, donning a shaggy

life."
"Yes, but what luck for Lazarev! Twelve hundred francs' pension for

"Tomorrow, I hear, the Preobrazhenskis will give them a dinner."

"I have."

saying. "Have you seen Lazarev?"
"What d'you think of the treat? All on silver plate," one of them was

Rostov.
Two officers with flushed faces, looking cheerful and happy, passed by
voices and laughter filled the air round the tables in the square.
civilians drew near merely to see him. A rumble of Russian and French
him, congratulated him, and pressed his hands. Crowds of officers and
Lazarev sat in the place of honor. Russian and French officers embraced

prepared for them.
breaking rank, mingled with the French Guards and sat down at the tables
The Emperors remounted and rode away. The Preobrazhensk battalion,

position.
else. But receiving no orders, he remained for some time in that rigid
as if asking whether he should stand there, or go away, or do something
motionless presenting arms, looked again straight into Alexander's eyes,
with white hands who was doing something to him and, still standing
fastened it to the uniform. Lazarev glanced morosely at the little man
Officious hands, Russian and French, immediately seized the cross and

really did.
Alexander as though sure that the cross would adhere there. And it
the cross on Lazarev's breast and, dropping his hand, turned toward
distinguished from everyone else in the world. Napoleon merely laid
that soldier's breast for the soldier to be forever happy, rewarded, and
Napoleon knew that it was only necessary for his hand to deign to touch
holding the Order touched one of Lazarev's buttons. It was as if
doing was done for the sake of his ally, and the small white hand
looked round at the Emperor Alexander to imply that what he was now
Lazarev (who rolled his eyes and persistently gazed at his own monarch),
fingers together and the badge was between them. Then he approached
in it an Order on a red ribbon. Napoleon, without looking, pressed two
over the outstretched hand and not keeping it waiting a moment, laid
the previous evening at Boris'--ran forward and, bowing respectfully
something from one to another, and a page--the same one Rostov had seen
at once what he wanted, moved about and whispered as they passed
behind him as if to take something. The members of his suite, guessing
Napoleon slightly turned his head, and put his plump little hand out

before the ranks.
colonel in alarm. His face twitched, as often happens to soldiers called
not know where to go. Lazarev stopped, casting a sidelong look at his
"Where are you off to? Stop here!" voices whispered to Lazarev who did

soldier in the rank, stepped briskly forward.
"Lazarev!" the colonel called, with a frown, and Lazarev, the first

"Can it be me?" thought Rostov.

scrutiny.
Kozlovski scanned the ranks resolutely and included Rostov in his

"But we must give him an answer."

remarked:
The Emperor knit his brows with dissatisfaction and, glancing back,

"To whomever Your Majesty commands."

Russian in a low voice.
"To whom shall it be given?" the Emperor Alexander asked Koslovski, in

rushed forward and picked it up.
tore it in doing so, and threw it away. An aide-de-camp behind him
Bonaparte meanwhile began taking the glove off his small white hand,

battalion.
took a few hasty steps toward Prince Kozlovski, the commander of the
"Will Your Majesty allow me to consult the colonel?" said Alexander and

Emperor.
up before him, who all presented arms with their eyes fixed on their
exasperating to Rostov, he ran his eyes over the Russian ranks drawn
Napoleon, accentuating each syllable, as with a composure and assurance
"To him who has borne himself most bravely in this last war," added

and, bending his head, smiled pleasantly.
Alexander's eyes. Alexander listened attentively to what was said to him
This was said by the undersized Napoleon, looking up straight into

every letter.
bravest of your soldiers," said a sharp, precise voice, articulating
"Sire, I ask your permission to present the Legion of Honor to the

might be recognized.
to the Emperors that Rostov, standing in the front row, was afraid he
the crowd standing there. The crowd unexpectedly found itself so close
the right flank of the Preobrazhensk battalion and came straight up to
Alexander and Napoleon, with the long train of their suites, approached

to him.
the Tsar, as if such relations with an Emperor were an everyday matter
treated Bonaparte as an equal and that the latter was quite at ease with
Alexander and Bonaparte. It struck him as a surprise that Alexander
pushing back the crowd, Rostov kept his eyes on every movement of
In spite of the trampling of the French gendarmes' horses, which were

saying something affable to him.
Napoleon's face wore an unpleasant and artificial smile. Alexander was
Alexander, and both Emperors dismounted and took each other's hands.
shouted "Hurrah!" and "Vive l'Empereur!" Napoleon said something to
Napoleon did not sit well or firmly in the saddle. The battalions
so, Rostov, with his cavalryman's eye, could not help noticing that
saddlecloth. On approaching Alexander he raised his hat, and as he did
a very fine thoroughbred gray Arab horse with a crimson gold-embroidered
white vest, and the St. Andrew ribbon over his shoulder. He was riding
He came at a gallop, wearing a small hat, a blue uniform open over a
at the head of them Rostov recognized Napoleon. It could be no one else.
arms, another group of horsemen galloped up to the opposite flank, and
As the Tsar rode up to one flank of the battalions, which presented

French Guards in their bearskin caps on the left.
of the Preobrazhensk regiment stood on the right and a battalion of the
The Emperor rode to the square where, facing one another, a battalion


CHAPTER XXI





ran after him with the crowd.
rode down the street at a gallop. Beside himself with enthusiasm, Rostov
The general bowed his head respectfully, and the monarch mounted and

and he raised his foot to the stirrup.
"I cannot do it, General. I cannot, because the law is stronger than I,"

said in a loud voice, evidently wishing to be heard by all:
his hand on the saddle, the Emperor turned to the cavalry general and
was Rostov) moved nearer to the Emperor. Stopping beside his horse, with
Again the crowd of members of the suite and street gazers (among whom
The Emperor said a few words to him and took a step toward his horse.

to the Emperor.
All the suite drew back and Rostov saw the general talking for some time

division, smiled and beckoned to him.
some of the generals, and, recognizing the former commander of Rostov's
brightening everything around by his glance. He spoke a few words to
and carrying his hat under his arm. He stopped and looked about him,
d'honneur), the monarch came out into the porch, putting on his gloves
boots--and wearing a star Rostov did not know (it was that of the Legion
the Preobrazhensk regiment--white chamois-leather breeches and high
rose again in Rostov's soul in all its old force. In the uniform of
mildness.... And the feeling of enthusiasm and love for his sovereign
that same face and same look and step, and the same union of majesty and
civilians, and again, after two years, saw those features he adored:
Rostov went close to the porch, together with some inquisitive
was heard on the stairs. Forgetting the danger of being recognized,
Emperor's horse, and the faint creak of a footstep Rostov knew at once
horses. Hayne, the same groom who had been at Austerlitz, led up the
gentlemen of the Emperor's suite ran down the stairs and went to their
on the stairs, and the general, leaving him, went to the porch. The
Denisov's case, when hasty steps and the jingling of spurs were heard
Hardly had Rostov handed him the letter and finished explaining

"I'm sorry, sorry for that fine fellow. Give me the letter."

gravely.
general knew. Having heard Rostov to the end, the general shook his head
told him the whole affair, asking him to intercede for Denisov, whom the
jocular face of the general, he took him aside and in an excited voice
Rostov, in dismay, began justifying himself, but seeing the kindly,

which Rostov was serving.
during this campaign, and who had formerly commanded the division in
It was a cavalry general who had obtained the Emperor's special favor

"What are you doing here, sir, in civilian dress?" asked a deep voice.

familiar voice called him and a hand detained him.
making his way out of the house through the brilliant suite when a
of his conduct and repenting of it, Rostov, with downcast eyes, was
shame and arrested in his presence, fully alive now to the impropriety
himself at any moment face to face with the Emperor and being put to
Cursing his temerity, his heart sinking at the thought of finding

many officers and generals in full parade uniform, whom he had to pass.
Rostov went back into the hall and noticed that in the porch there were

you... go," and he continued to put on the uniform the valet handed him.
"What audacity! Hand it in through your commander. And go along with

"Lieutenant Count Rostov."

"Are you an officer?"

"I come from Major Denisov," answered Rostov.

"Whom have you come from? Who are you?"

him.
Rostov turned and was about to go, but the man in the braces stopped

"Later... later! Tomorrow. It's too late..."

"Tell him to come later. He'll be coming out directly, we must go."

"Another petitioner," answered the man with the braces.

"What is it?" asked the person in the other room.

"What is it? A petition?"

Rostov, he stopped short and frowned.
"A good figure and in her first bloom," he was saying, but on seeing

adjoining room.
attracted Rostov's attention. This man was speaking to someone in the
new pair of handsome silk-embroidered braces that, for some reason,
room, and his valet was buttoning on to the back of his breeches a
a batiste shirt that he had evidently only just put on, standing in that
A short stout man of about thirty, in white breeches and high boots and

entered.
but the official who had questioned him opened the door, and Rostov
fascinating and consequently so alarming that he was ready to run away,
was doing; the thought of meeting the Emperor at any moment was so
On hearing this indifferent voice, Rostov grew frightened at what he

leading downstairs), "only it won't be accepted."
"A petition? This way, to the officer on duty" (he was shown the door

tremor in his voice.
"To hand in a letter, a petition, to His Majesty," said Nicholas, with a

"Whom do you want?" someone inquired.

lower floor.
saw a closed door. Below, under the staircase, was a door leading to the
A broad staircase led straight up from the entry, and to the right he

Emperor's house.
people who looked after him with curiosity, he entered the porch of the
greatest happiness,'" Rostov fancied the sovereign saying. And passing
thank me. 'I am happy when I can do good, but to remedy injustice is the
feet and beseech him. He will lift me up, will listen, and will even
the blood that rushed to his heart at the thought. "I will fall at his
thought, expecting every moment to meet the monarch, and conscious of
"No, I won't miss my opportunity now, as I did after Austerlitz," he

the letter in his pocket and went straight to the house.
suddenly with a determination he himself did not expect, Rostov felt for
myself so much the worse for Drubetskoy who drives me to it!" And
in.... It's all nonsense! I'll go in and hand the letter to the Emperor
was entering the house the Emperor occupied. "After all, people do go
being here, what would it matter?" thought he, looking at an officer who
more just, more magnanimous than he? And even if they did arrest me for
justice lies. He understands everything, knows everything. Who can be
for my civilian clothes? Surely not! He would understand on whose side
the letter direct to him and tell him all... could they really arrest me
"I may see him at any moment," thought Rostov. "If only I were to hand

assembling, evidently preparing for the Emperor to come out.
Saddled horses were standing before the house and the suite were

lodged.
Rostov, who had unconsciously returned to the house where Alexander
getting his letter to the Emperor. The Emperor!... He is here!" thought
here without having done all I can for Denisov and certainly not without
settled," thought Nicholas. "All is over between us, but I won't leave
"Boris doesn't want to help me and I don't want to ask him. That's

the windows of the houses also flags and bunting were displayed.
draped from side to side of the streets, with huge monograms A and N. In
preparations made for the dinner; he saw the Russian and French colors
Emperors were staying. In a square he saw tables being set up and
uniforms and at the streets and houses where the Russian and French
round hat, he wandered about the town, staring at the French and their
morning went away, avoiding Boris. In his civilian clothes and a
latter looked in after supper, he pretended to be asleep, and early next
Rostov felt so ill at ease and uncomfortable with Boris that, when the

Emperors were to be present at that banquet.
a battalion of the French Guards to the Preobrazhensk battalion. The
First Degree, and a dinner had been arranged for the evening, given by
of the Legion of Honor and Napoleon the Order of St. Andrew of the
signed. The Emperors exchanged decorations: Alexander received the Cross
following day. On that day, June 27, the preliminaries of peace were
so, and Boris, even had he wished to, could not have done so on the
as he was in mufti and had come to Tilsit without permission to do
Denisov's behalf. He could not himself go to the general in attendance
Rostov had come to Tilsit the day least suitable for a petition on


CHAPTER XX





time, hearing the lighthearted French conversation from the next room.
remaining alone in the little room, he walked up and down for a long
"Well then, go, go, go..." said Rostov, and refusing supper and

At that moment Zhilinski's voice was heard calling Boris.

"On the contrary, I will do what I can. Only I thought..."

Boris smiled.

shouted, not looking Boris in the face.
"So you don't want to do anything? Well then, say so!" Rostov almost

I think..."
Emperor, but to apply to the commander of the corps.... But in general,
in such affairs. I think it would be best not to bring it before the
"I have heard of such cases and know that His Majesty is very severe

uncomfortable and cast down his eyes.
eyes with the same veiled look. Each time this happened Rostov felt
subordinate, now looking aside and now gazing straight into Rostov's
his right, listened to Rostov as a general listens to the report of a
over the other and stroking his left hand with the slender fingers of
in the face without a sense of awkwardness. Boris, with one leg crossed
were alone, Rostov felt for the first time that he could not look Boris
Denisov's behalf and get Denisov's petition handed in. When he and Boris
through his general, he could and would intercede with the Emperor on
in some way) telling him about Denisov's affair, asking him whether,
sitting down, began at once, irritably (as if Boris were to blame
They went into the little room where Boris slept. Rostov, without

"Yes, really..."

down in my room and have a rest."
"Oh, no, not at all," said Boris. "But if you are tired, come and lie

business and I'll go away."
"Anyhow, I'm in your way," he said in a low tone. "Come and talk over my

for?" He rose and went up to Boris.
the visitors cast on him seemed to say: "And what is he sitting here
took no part in the conversation which again became general. The looks
that he was in everybody's way. He really was in their way, for he alone
humor, it seemed to him that everyone regarded him with aversion and
dissatisfaction on Boris' face, and as always happens to those in a bad
Rostov had been out of humor from the moment he noticed the look of

"No, I came on business," replied Rostov, briefly.

Tilsit to see the Emperor.
obstinately taciturn Rostov, saying that the latter had probably come to
with the politeness characteristic of his countrymen, addressed the
had met Rostov, tried to enliven the conversation. One of the Frenchmen,
pleasant composure and the same veiled look in his eyes with which he
appear to notice the constraint the newcomer produced and, with the same
willingly into his circle and did not speak to Rostov. Boris did not
Zhilinski evidently did not receive this new Russian person very

reluctantly, and remained silent.
naming his guests. Rostov looked frowningly at the Frenchmen, bowed
"Count Zhilinski--le Comte N. N.--le Capitaine S. S.," said he,

officer, and an old friend of his.
him to his guests, explaining that he was not a civilian, but an hussar
led him into the room where the supper table was laid and introduced
"Oh, come now! As if you could come at a wrong time!" said Boris, and he

screened by blue spectacles of conventionality. So it seemed to Rostov.
serenely and steadily at Rostov, seemed to be veiled by something, as if
both Rostov's hands and led him into the next room. His eyes, looking
evidently reflected and decided how to act, he very quietly took
The look of annoyance had already disappeared from Boris' face: having

"I see I'm intruding," Rostov repeated.


    * "In a minute I shall be at your disposal."


un moment je suis a vous," * he said, answering someone who called him.
"No, I only wonder how you managed to get away from your regiment. Dans

business," he said coldly.
"I've come at a bad time I think. I should not have come, but I have

impulse.
coming toward him with a smile. But Rostov had noticed his first
"Ah, it's you? Very glad, very glad to see you," he said, however,

on first recognizing Rostov.
him. An expression of annoyance showed itself for a moment on his face
there. Boris, hearing a strange voice in the anteroom, came out to meet
stopped at the threshold and asked in Russian whether Drubetskoy lived
he always experienced at the sight of the enemy suddenly seized him. He
thrust his head out of the door, that warlike feeling of hostility which
the outposts of the flank. As soon as he noticed a French officer, who
had been accustomed to see from quite a different point of view from
presence of French officers in Boris' lodging, dressed in uniforms he
criminal Bonaparte. Rostov was therefore unpleasantly struck by the
heat that peace was impossible between a legitimate sovereign and the
to meet a wounded French colonel on the road, Rostov had maintained with
treated not as a sovereign, but as a criminal. Quite lately, happening
Rostov had argued that if Napoleon were taken prisoner he would be
and fear. Only recently, talking with one of Platov's Cossack officers,
French were still regarded with mingled feelings of anger, contempt,
place at headquarters and in Boris. In the army, Bonaparte and the
French--who from being foes had suddenly become friends--that had taken
from having experienced the change of feeling toward Napoleon and the
Rostov, in common with the whole army from which he came, was far

occupied by Boris and Zhilinski.
recognized in civilian dress, came to Tilsit and went to the lodging
family. That same day, Rostov, profiting by the darkness to avoid being
a page of Napoleon's, a young lad of an old aristocratic French
Napoleon's, there were also several French officers of the Guard, and
supper for his French friends. The guest of honor was an aide-de-camp of
On the evening of the twenty-fourth of June, Count Zhilinski arranged a

lunching with him and Boris.
officers of the Guard and from French headquarters were dining and
fond of the French, and almost every day of the stay at Tilsit, French
Zhilinski, a Pole brought up in Paris, was rich, and passionately
Boris lodged with another adjutant, the Polish Count Zhilinski.

would now have been surprised had he been absent.
cold-shouldering him as at first when they considered him a newcomer,
that the latter knew his face, and all those at court, far from
him. Twice he had executed commissions to the Emperor himself, so
only become known, but people had grown accustomed to him and accepted
Boris felt that henceforth his position was fully assured. He had not
this interview between the two Emperors, and having succeeded in this,
valued his success in the service, to be at Tilsit on the occasion of
a very small one, it was a matter of great importance, for a man who
facts he felt to be of historic importance. As the Emperor's suite was
fifty-three minutes. He noted this down that same evening, among other
again when Alexander came out. The interview had lasted an hour and
pavilion he looked at his watch, and did not forget to look at it
by important personages. At the moment the Emperors went into the
about the uniforms they wore, and listened attentively to words spoken
at Tilsit he asked the names of those who had come with Napoleon and
that went on around him and to note it down. At the time of the meeting
highest circles Boris had made it his habit to watch attentively all
they both retired into the pavilion. Since he had begun to move in the
quickly forward to meet Alexander and held out his hand to him, and how
get into boats, and saw how Napoleon--reaching the raft first--stepped
on the bank of the Niemen awaiting Napoleon's arrival, saw both Emperors
pensive face of the Emperor Alexander as he sat in silence in a tavern
pass before the French Guards on the farther bank of the river, saw the
Emperors met. He saw the raft, decorated with monograms, saw Napoleon
Boris was among the few present at the Niemen on the day the two

"You will go far," he said, and took him to Tilsit with him.

general patted him on the shoulder, with a smile.
"I am speaking, Prince, of the Emperor Napoleon," he replied. The

being tested.
Boris looked at his general inquiringly and immediately saw that he was

"You are speaking of Buonaparte?" asked the general, smiling.

whom hitherto he, like everyone else, had always called Buonaparte.
"I should like to see the great man," he said, alluding to Napoleon,

Tilsit.
was in attendance, to include him in the suite appointed for the stay at
Tilsit. Boris Drubetskoy had asked the important personage on whom he
On the thirteenth of June the French and Russian Emperors arrived in

Denisov's affairs, Rostov rode to Tilsit with the letter to the Emperor.
Having returned to the regiment and told the commander the state of


CHAPTER XIX





He did not finish, but gave a painfully unnatural smile.

"Hand it in. It seems..."

asked for pardon.
without alluding to the offenses of the commissariat officials, simply
the petition to the Emperor drawn up by the auditor, in which Denisov,
coming from the window and giving Rostov a large envelope. In it was
"It seems it's no use knocking one's head against a wall!" he said,

had an inkpot, and sat down to write.
taking his papers from under his pillow he went to the window, where he
"Yes, wait a bit," said Denisov, glancing round at the officers, and

whether he had no commission for him.
Late in the evening, when Rostov was about to leave, he asked Denisov

stories. Denisov was moodily silent all the evening.
gathered round him, telling them what he knew and listening to their
a most dejected state of mind amid Denisov's hospital comrades, who had
hour, was over, Rostov said nothing, and he spent the rest of the day in
When the reading of Denisov's virulent reply, which took more than an

He knew his stubborn will and straightforward hasty temper.
safest, and though he would have been glad to be of service to Denisov.
felt that the way advised by Tushin and the other officers was the
Rostov had not the courage to persuade Denisov, though he instinctively

on reading his paper.
"Haven't I said I'm not going to gwovel?" Denisov interrupted him, went

better opportunity."
(indicating Rostov) "has connections on the staff. You won't find a
you ought to sign it and ask this gentleman to take it. No doubt he"
"The auditor wrote out a petition for you," continued Tushin, "and

"Well, let it be bad," said Denisov.

bad business."
Vasili Dmitrich doesn't want to. You know the auditor told you it was a
Vasili Dmitrich," and he also turned to Rostov. "One has to submit, and
"It's certainly well written," said Tushin, "but that's not the point,

wobbed the Tweasuwy...'"
Listen, I'm w'iting to them stwaight. This is what I say: 'If I had
my countwy honowably and have not stolen! And am I to be degwaded?...
Let them twy me, I'm not afwaid of anyone. I've served the Tsar and
ask mercy, but I'm being court-martialed for bwinging wobbers to book.
expression of irritable impotence. "What for? If I were a wobber I would
tried hard to give the old energy and fire, but which sounded like an
"Me petition the Empewo'!" exclaimed Denisov, in a voice to which he

now be distributed, and surely a pardon would be granted...."
simply to petition the Emperor for pardon. They say great rewards will
"But what I say is," he said, turning to Rostov, "it would be best

Denisov.
head disapprovingly. In the middle of the reading, the Uhlan interrupted
smoking a pipe, and little one-armed Tushin still listened, shaking his
bed, a stout Uhlan, continued to sit on his bed, gloomily frowning and
story more than once and were tired of it. Only the man who had the next
noticed by their faces that all those gentlemen had already heard that
began to disperse as soon as Denisov began reading his answer. Rostov
gathered round Rostov--a fresh arrival from the world outside--gradually
rejoinders he made to his enemies. His hospital companions, who had
reading his paper and specially drew Rostov's attention to the stinging
rough draft of his answer to it. He became animated when he began
under his pillow a paper he had received from the commission and the
Rostov's inquiry as to how the matter stood, he at once produced from
was only interested in the affair with the commissariat officers. On
outside the hospital. He seemed to try to forget that old life and
regiment, or in general of that other free life which was going on
Rostov even noticed that Denisov did not like to be reminded of the

not listen.
the general state of affairs, and when Rostov spoke of these matters did
smiled at him unnaturally. He did not ask about the regiment, nor about
What struck him was that Denisov did not seem glad to see him, and
of the other hospital patients, but it was not this that struck Rostov.
after he had been hit. His face had the same swollen pallor as the faces
His wound, though a slight one, had not yet healed even now, six weeks

voice.
itself in the expression of Denisov's face and the intonations of his
habitual ease and animation some new, sinister, hidden feeling showed
same voice as in the regiment, but Rostov noticed sadly that under this
"Ah, Wostov? How are you, how are you?" he called out, still in the

was nearly noon.
Denisov lay asleep on his bed with his head under the blanket, though it

young soldier with eyes rolled back.
looks which had followed him out from both sides, and the face of that
the soldiers' ward, and still seeming to see fixed on him those envious
aware of that smell of decomposing flesh that had been so strong in
"How can they laugh, or even live at all here?" thought Rostov, still

laughing voices.
Tushin led him into the next room, from whence came sounds of several
neighbor," he added, when he heard who Rostov wanted. "Here, here," and
sleeve of his dressing gown. "Looking for Vasili Dmitrich Denisov? My
cut off, you see..." he went on with a smile, pointing to the empty
you remember, who gave you a lift at Schon Grabern? And I've had a bit
"See where we've met again!" said the little man. "Tushin, Tushin, don't

Rostov looked at him, trying to remember where he had seen him before.
nightcap and hospital dressing gown, with a pipe between his teeth.
little man with one arm, who was walking about the first room in a
gowns. The first person Rostov met in the officers' ward was a thin
sitting on them. Some were walking about the rooms in hospital dressing
were beds in these rooms and the sick and wounded officers were lying or
wards, consisting of three rooms, the doors of which stood open. There
Going along the corridor, the assistant led Rostov to the officers'


CHAPTER XVIII





envious eyes that were fixed upon him, and went out of the room.
shrinking, he tried to pass unnoticed between the rows of reproachful
"Yes, yes, let us go," said Rostov hastily, and lowering his eyes and

said the assistant hurriedly. "Let us go, your honor."
"I'll send someone at once. He shall be taken away--taken away at once,"

dogs."
jaw quivering. "He's been dead since morning. After all we're men, not
"And how we've been begging, your honor," said the old soldier, his

"Why, this one seems..." he began, turning to the assistant.

down his back.
rolled back. Rostov looked at the young soldier and a cold chill ran
a snub nose. His pale waxen face was still freckled and his eyes were
distance from him with his head thrown back, was a young soldier with
above the knee. His neighbor on the other side, who lay motionless some
old man had only one leg bent under him, the other had been amputated
that the old man wanted to speak to him. He drew nearer and saw that the
on one side whispered something to him, pointing at Rostov, who noticed
stern sallow face and eyes intently fixed on Rostov. The man's neighbor
sat an old, unshaven, gray-bearded soldier as thin as a skeleton, with a
on him on his right, and he turned. Close to the corner, on an overcoat,
eyes, and he was going out, but became aware of an intense look fixed
"No, it's impossible to do anything here," thought Rostov, lowering his

move.
eyes more than ever he drew himself up still straighter, but did not
"Yes, your honor," the soldier replied complacently, and rolling his

the Cossack.
"Get him to his place and give him some water," said Rostov, pointing to

evidently mistaking him for one of the hospital authorities.
"Good day, your honor!" he shouted, rolling his eyes at Rostov and

next room, marching stiffly, and drew up in front of Rostov.
Just then a commissariat soldier, a hospital orderly, came in from the

"Who looks after the sick here?" he asked the assistant.

man back in his place and bring him water.
a drink!" Rostov glanced round, looking for someone who would put this
repeating. Rostov listened and made out the word. It was "drink, drink,
his head against the floor, hoarsely uttering some word which he kept
still red, the veins stood out like cords. He was knocking the back of
only the whites were seen, and on his bare legs and arms which were
outstretched. His face was purple, his eyes were rolled back so that
by the cut of his hair. The man lay on his back, his huge arms and legs
passage on the bare floor, lay a sick man, probably a Cossack to judge
expected such a sight. Just before him, almost across the middle of the
there. He stood still, looking silently around. He had not at all
through the open doors into the two adjoining rooms saw the same thing
of another's health. Rostov went to the middle of the room and looking
Rostov with the same expression of hope, of relief, reproach, and envy
themselves or lifted their thin yellow faces, and all looked intently at
paid no attention to the newcomers. Those who were conscious raised
leaving a passage in the middle. Most of them were unconscious and
the sick and wounded lay in two rows with their heads to the walls, and
In the long room, brightly lit up by the sun through the large windows,

originated.
little different, more pungent, and one felt that this was where it
begun to get used in the corridor, was still stronger here. It was a
Rostov entered the soldiers' ward. The foul air, to which he had already
But, just because the assistant evidently did not want him to go in,

"What is there to see?" said the assistant.

"May I go in and look?"

the sick and wounded were lying on the floor on straw and overcoats.
eyes at those who were passing. Glancing in at the door, Rostov saw that
out and, leaning against the doorpost, looked with glittering envious
emaciated sallow man on crutches, barefoot and in underclothing, limped
his strength before he could go on. A door opened to the right, and an
strong there that Rostov held his nose and had to pause and collect
Rostov and the assistant went into the dark corridor. The smell was so

"Only don't blame me!" the doctor shouted up after him.

show him the way.
But Rostov bowed himself away from the doctor and asked the assistant to

stay here yourself."
"Ah, you'd better not go, sir," said the doctor, "or you may have to

turning to Rostov.
step into the officers' wards you'll see for yourself," he added,
"Makar Alexeevich has the list," answered the assistant. "But if you'll

got it, Makeev?"
dead, I fancy. However, I'll look up our list. We had a list. Have you
"There was one like that," said the doctor, as if pleased. "That one is

Rostov described Denisov's appearance.

"Is he tall and with reddish hair?" asked the doctor.

The assistant, however, did not confirm the doctor's words.

indifference.
"Dead, I fancy. Eh, Makeev?" queried the doctor, in a tone of

"Major Denisov," Rostov said again. "He was wounded at Molliten."

for the talkative doctor to go.
The assistant looked fagged out. He was evidently vexed and impatient

he asked, turning to the assistant.
and they're always sending me fresh ones. There are four hundred? Eh?"
lint each month or we should be lost!" he laughed. "Four hundred, sir,
the charitable Prussian ladies send us two pounds of coffee and some
of three hospitals with more than four hundred patients! It's well that
"I don't know. I can't tell you, sir. Only think! I am alone in charge

was wounded.
Rostov explained that he wanted to see Major Denisov of the hussars, who

invited here, but our allies don't like it at all."
said the doctor with evident satisfaction. "Prussian doctors have been
died in this place.... When a new one comes he is done for in a week,"
pointed to the assistant), "keep on here. Some five of us doctors have
"Typhus, sir. It's death to go in. Only we two, Makeev and I" (he

"How so?" asked Rostov.

having spared you, do you want to try typhus? This is a pesthouse, sir."
"What do you want, sir?" said the doctor. "What do you want? The bullets

Rostov coming upstairs.
"Oh, do the best you can! Isn't it all the same?" The doctor noticed

The assistant asked some further questions.

Alexeevich in the evening. I shall be there."
"I can't tear myself to pieces," the doctor was saying. "Come to Makar

doctor smoking a cigar. The doctor was followed by a Russian assistant.
putrefaction and hospital air. On the stairs he met a Russian army
Directly Rostov entered the door he was enveloped by a smell of

yard.
swollen faces, were sitting or walking about in the sunshine in the
that had been pulled to pieces. Several bandaged soldiers, with pale
panes broken and a courtyard surrounded by the remains of a wooden fence
The hospital was in a brick building with some of the window frames and

tattered inhabitants, and the sick and drunken soldiers wandering about.
dismal appearance with its broken roofs and fences, its foul streets,
beautiful out in the fields, the little town presented a particularly
by Russian and French troops. Because it was summer, when it is so
The hospital was in a small Prussian town that had been twice devastated

in hospital.
affairs, took advantage of the armistice to get leave to visit Denisov
left and feeling very anxious about his wound and the progress of his
felt his friend's absence very much, having no news of him since he
not take part, and after that an armistice was proclaimed. Rostov, who
In June the battle of Friedland was fought, in which the Pavlograds did


CHAPTER XVII





at the staff and went into hospital.
wound, but now he took advantage of it to excuse himself from appearing
another time Denisov would not have left the regiment for so slight a
a French sharpshooter hit him in the fleshy part of his leg. Perhaps at
out in front of the outposts, parading his courage. A bullet fired by
regiments and two squadrons of hussars. Denisov, as was his wont, rode
office. On the previous day Platov reconnoitered with two Cossack
the staff of his division to explain his violence at the commissariat
hand the squadron over to the next in seniority and appear before
from the court arrived, and on the first of May, Denisov was ordered to
evidently taking a bad turn. Every day, letters of inquiry and notices
he feared a court-martial and was worried over the affair, which was
too well not to detect that (while hiding it from others) at heart
Denisov spoke contemptuously of the whole matter, but Rostov knew him

would give them an answer that they would not easily forget.
any kind of trial, and that if those scoundrels dared attack him he
that it was all nonsense and rubbish, and he did not in the least fear
thought he remembered that some other fellow had got mixed up in it, but
In answer to Rostov's renewed questions, Denisov said, laughing, that he

two officials a thrashing, and dislocated the arm of one of them.
to strike him, and on being led out had rushed into the office and given
quartermaster and without any provocation called him a thief, threatened
seizing the transports, Major Denisov, being drunk, went to the chief
The case, as represented by the offended parties, was that, after

the ranks would be the best that could be hoped for.
which marauding and insubordination were now regarded, degradation to
court-martial had been appointed, and that in view of the severity with
told them that the affair was likely to take a very bad turn: that a
in which inquiries were made about yesterday's occurrence. The adjutant
them a paper addressed to Major Denisov from the regimental commander
Denisov's dugout with a grave and serious face and regretfully showed
But at noon the adjutant of the regiment came into Rostov's and

cheerful.
Denisov was bandaged up again and put to bed. Next day he woke calm and

your arm bleeding afresh. Wait, we must tie it up again."
"But what are you shouting for? Calm yourself," said Rostov. "You've set

mustache. "I'd have killed him if they hadn't taken him away!"
Denisov, gleeful and yet angry, his white teeth showing under his black
fwashing him... Well, I've had a bit of fun I can tell you!" cried
pat, stwaight on his snout... 'Ah, what a... what a...!' and I sta'ted
starving us to death! Is it? Take this and this!' and I hit him so
the tumblers on it jumped about. "Telyanin! 'What? So it's you who's
newly bled arm so violently that the table nearly broke down and
starving us?" shouted Denisov, hitting the table with the fist of his
the table... who do you think? No, but wait a bit!... Who is it that's
be passed on to headquarters.' I go to the commissioner. I enter, and at
says: 'Go and give a weceipt to the commissioner, but your affair will
fill his own pockets!' 'Will you please be silent?' 'Vewy good!' Then he
seizes pwovisions to feed his soldiers, but by him who takes them to
lecture me: 'It's wobbewy!'--'Wobbewy,' I say, 'is not done by man who
Vewy well, so out comes their head chief--also took it into his head to
miles and have duties to attend to and no time to wait. Announce me.'
quarters?' They were pointed out. 'Please to wait.' 'I've widden twenty
"I get there," began Denisov. "'Now then, where's your chief's

and only then was he able to relate what had happened to him.
bleed Denisov. A deep saucer of black blood was taken from his hairy arm
The regimental doctor, when he came, said it was absolutely necessary to

muttered.
always thwash scoundwels... and I'll tell the Empewo'... Ice..." he
"Twy me for wobbewy... oh! Some more water... Let them twy me, but I'll

drink some water, and send for the doctor.
Alarmed at Denisov's condition, Rostov suggested that he should undress,

feeble voice.
matter, he only uttered some incoherent oaths and threats in a hoarse,
could not speak and gasped for breath. When Rostov asked what was the
his dugout in a state such as Rostov had never yet seen him in. Denisov
a sincere desire to act on this advice. In the evening he came back to
From the regimental commander's, Denisov rode straight to the staff with

may end badly."
booked against an infantry regiment, there will be a row and the affair
a receipt for such and such stores received. If not, as the demand was
the business there in the commissariat department and if possible sign
begin proceedings, but I advise you to ride over to the staff and settle
"This is how I look at this affair: I know nothing about it and won't

fingers spread out before his eyes said:
The next day the regimental commander sent for Denisov, and holding his

them with the other squadrons.
soldiers had biscuits dealt out to them freely, and they even shared
was unescorted, Denisov with his hussars had seized it by force. The
infantry regiment, but learning from Lavrushka that the transport
The wagons that had reached the hussars had been consigned to an

can't let our men starve."
"I've taken twansports from the infantwy by force!" he said. "After all,

mounted infantryman) and riding up to Rostov, he burst out laughing.
after him (the most insulting expression a cavalryman can address to a
"A dog astwide a fence! A weal dog astwide a fence!" shouted Denisov

his horse he trotted away, jolting in his saddle.
"Very well, very well!" muttered the officer, threateningly, and turning

turned his horse on the officer.
"Go to the devil! quick ma'ch, while you're safe and sound!" and Denisov

away. "If you are determined to rob, I'll..."
"Very well, then!" shouted the little officer, undaunted and not riding

about here till you get hurt. Be off! Go!" he shouted at the officers.
temper. "I shall answer for it and not you, and you'd better not buzz
"Now, what are you pestewing me for?" cried Denisov, suddenly losing his

raising his voice.
"It is robbery! You'll answer for it, sir!" said the infantry officer,

"And mine have had nothing for two weeks," said Denisov.

one's own army. Our men have had nothing to eat for two days."
"You will answer for it, Captain. It is mutiny--seizing the transport of

"Haven't I told you I won't give them up?" replied Denisov.

very angry, was saying.
"I warn you, Captain," one of the officers, a short thin man, evidently

Rostov went to meet them.

officers with whom he was talking.
A little behind the hussars came Denisov, accompanied by two infantry

"So they are!" said the officers. "Won't the soldiers be glad!"

provisions."
"There now, Denisov has been worrying," said Rostov, "and here are the

ropes and a crowd of hussars surrounded them.
behind them. The wagons escorted by the hussars drew up to the picket
saw some wagons approaching with fifteen hussars on their skinny horses
soft mud. Rostov joined them. In the middle of the game, the officers
laughing as they threw their missiles which buried themselves in the
up, and near the next hut two officers and a cadet were playing svayka,
toward evening. Denisov had not yet returned. The weather had cleared
got warm in his corner, he fell asleep and did not leave the hut till
mud. He did not even trouble to find out where Denisov had gone. Having
out, and Rostov heard the hoofs of several horses splashing through the
"Let God and our gweat monarch judge me afterwards!" said Denisov going

that he had some business.
to Rostov's inquiry where he was going, he answered vaguely and crossly
his leaded whip, buckled on his saber, and went out again. In answer
on the bed, lit his pipe, furiously scattered his things about, took
Five minutes later, Denisov came into the hut, climbed with muddy boots

"Where are they off to now?" thought Rostov.

"Saddle! Second platoon!"
Then Denisov's voice was heard shouting farther and farther away.

provisions.
loaded wagons, biscuits, and oxen he had seen when he had gone out for
as well as the quartermaster. Lavrushka was saying something about
hear that Lavrushka--that sly, bold orderly of Denisov's--was talking,
and bustle now, my job's done and I'm lying down--capitally!" He could
Rostov lay down again on his bed and thought complacently: "Let him fuss

obey," answered the quartermaster.
"I have given the order again and again, your honor, but they don't

the fields."
shouting. "And I saw with my own eyes how Lazarchuk bwought some fwom
"I ordered you not to let them eat that Mashka woot stuff!" Denisov was

speaking to, and saw the quartermaster, Topcheenko.
evidently much excited. Rostov moved to the window to see whom he was
Suddenly he heard Denisov shouting in a vibrating voice behind the hut,

had gone out somewhere and with whom he wanted a talk.
for his last reconnoitering expedition, and was awaiting Denisov, who
pleasantly considering the probability of being promoted in a few days
shirt, lay down on his back, putting his arms under his head. He was
his face glowing from exposure to the wind and with nothing on but his
then tidied up the things on the table and in his own corner, and,
his rain-soaked underclothes, said his prayers, drank tea, got warm,
eight, returning after a sleepless night, he sent for embers, changed
In April, Rostov was on orderly duty. One morning, between seven and

always some with Denisov and Rostov, sat in their shirt sleeves.
the hut--and it was then so warm that the officers, of whom there were
on the steps in the "reception room"--as Denisov called that part of
embers from the soldiers' campfire were placed on a bent sheet of iron
of (broken but mended) glass in it for a window. When it was very cold,
liked him, had also a board in the roof at the farther end, with a piece
Denisov, who was living luxuriously because the soldiers of his squadron
and could even sit up on the beds if one drew close to the table.
was so constructed that one could stand up in the middle of the trench
and a half feet, and this did duty for bedsteads and couches. The roof
each side of the trench, the earth was cut out to a breadth of about two
lying on piles at the end opposite the entrance, to serve as a table. On
in which the lucky ones, such as the squadron commander, had a board,
these formed the entrance and vestibule. The trench itself was the room,
and eight feet long. At one end of the trench, steps were cut out and
trench was dug three and a half feet wide, four feet eight inches deep,
hut was made in the following manner, which had then come into vogue. A
dug out for them by the soldiers and roofed with branches and turf. The
They were bivouacking. Denisov and Rostov were living in an earth hut,

place.
Bartenstein, as the Pavlograds were at the outposts far beyond that
but Rostov had no chance of being present at the review he held at
In April the troops were enlivened by news of the Emperor's arrival,


CHAPTER XVI





tears in his eyes.
"Ah, what a mad bweed you Wostovs are!" he muttered, and Rostov noticed

without looking at Rostov, as was his way at moments of deep feeling.
Denisov patted him on the shoulder and began rapidly pacing the room

how it offended me... because... well, for that reason...."
"Say what you like.... She is like a sister to me, and I can't tell you

quickness of temper, and Rostov replied:
relations with the Polish girl might be, began to upbraid him for his
officer had gone away, Denisov, who did not himself know what Rostov's
officer that it was all Denisov could do to prevent a duel. When the
joke as an insult, flared up, and said such unpleasant things to the
introduced to them the pretty Polish girl he had saved. Rostov took the
more wily than any of them and that it would not be a bad thing if he
comrades, talking of women, began chaffing Rostov, saying that he was
kept them for some weeks while the old man was recovering. One of his
brought them to his quarters, placed them in his own lodging, and
to get away on foot and had no means of obtaining a conveyance. Rostov
daughter with an infant in arms. They were half clad, hungry, too weak
provisions, Rostov found a family consisting of an old Pole and his
a deserted and ruined village to which he had come in search of
return with evident joy. On one of his foraging expeditions, in
to danger as seldom as possible, and after an action greeted his safe
strengthening their friendship. Denisov evidently tried to expose Rostov
that the elder hussar's luckless love for Natasha played a part in
but by the tender friendship his commander showed him, Rostov felt
become more friendly than ever. Denisov never spoke of Rostov's family,
Rostov lived, as before, with Denisov, and since their furlough they had

feeling that in the main it was going badly.
nothing certain was known about it, partly because there was a vague
The general trend of the campaign was rarely spoken of, partly because
no food), some with more innocent games, such as quoits and skittles.
before, some playing cards (there was plenty of money, though there was
in general, food for the men. The younger ones occupied themselves as
half-ruined houses. The seniors tried to collect straw and potatoes and,
The officers, as usual, lived in twos and threes in the roofless,

legends of Alesha the Sly, or the priest's laborer Mikolka.
and listened to stories of Potemkin's and Suvorov's campaigns, or to
them naked; smoked, picked out and baked sprouting rotten potatoes, told
usual, in their spare time, they lit bonfires, steamed themselves before
they rose up hungry, joking about their nasty food and their hunger. As
place of fodder, and sat down to dine round the caldrons from which
horses, polished their arms, brought in straw from the thatched roofs in
hussars formed line for roll call, kept things in order, groomed their
as usual. Despite their pale swollen faces and tattered uniforms, the
Despite this destitution, the soldiers and officers went on living just

felty winter hair.
roofs and had become terribly thin, though still covered with tufts of
The horses also had been fed for a fortnight on straw from the thatched

last potatoes received had sprouted and frozen.
biscuits were being doled out at the rate of half a pound a man and the
sweet root," because it was the second week that the last of the
of all this, the soldiers of Denisov's squadron fed chiefly on "Mashka's
and face, which the doctors attributed to eating this root. But in spite
new disease broke out among the soldiers, a swelling of the arms, legs,
they were ordered not to do so, as it was a noxious plant. That spring a
fields seeking it and dug it out with their sabers and ate it, though
"Mashka's sweet root." It was very bitter, but they wandered about the
ground that looked like asparagus, which, for some reason, they called
When spring came on, the soldiers found a plant just showing out of the
to drag their legs went to the front rather than to the hospitals.
that came from bad food, preferred to remain on duty, and hardly able
death was so certain that soldiers suffering from fever, or the swelling
lost nearly half its men from hunger and sickness. In the hospitals,
The Pavlograd regiment had had only two men wounded in action, but had

anything from them, often gave them the last of their rations.
from them; even the soldiers, usually pitiless enough, instead of taking
remained, they were worse than beggars and nothing more could be taken
Everything had been eaten up and the inhabitants had all fled--if any

searching for potatoes, but found few even of these.
arrive, the men dispersed about the abandoned and deserted villages,
men nor fodder for the horses had been issued. As no transports could
and the roads became impassable. For days neither provisions for the
A thaw had set in, it was muddy and cold, the ice on the river broke,

weeks near a totally ruined and deserted German village.
carriages. In April the Pavlograds were stationed immovably for some
enemy, had taken prisoners, and once had even captured Marshal Oudinot's
times parts of the Pavlograd regiment had exchanged shots with the
Platov's division was acting independently of the main army. Several

was attached to Platov's division.
when it joined the army in the field in the second half of the campaign,
campaign. It had been neither at Pultusk nor at Preussisch-Eylau and,
Russia, and arrived too late to take part in the first actions of the
served in the 1805 campaign, had been recruiting up to strength in
The Pavlograd regiment, belonging to that part of the army which had

the Emperor's arrival and the beginning of a new campaign.
and Preussisch-Eylau, was concentrated near Bartenstein. It was awaiting
Our army, after repeated retreats and advances and battles at Pultusk

parents.
to take only two thousand and leave the rest to repay the debt to his
in five years. He received ten thousand rubles a year, but now resolved
After his losses, he had determined to pay back his debt to his parents

seemed so difficult out in the world, but so possible in the regiment.
comrade and officer--in a word, a splendid man altogether, a thing which
had done before, but really well, and by being a perfectly first-rate
had made up his mind to atone for his fault by serving, not as he
his family's efforts to console him, he could not forgive himself), he
for him, because, after his loss to Dolokhov (for which, in spite of all
rest. Life in the regiment, during this campaign, was all the pleasanter
life, Rostov felt the joy and relief a tired man feels on lying down to
Having once more entered into the definite conditions of this regimental

ordered--and all would be well.
given an order, to do what was clearly, distinctly, and definitely
nothing that was considered bad in the Pavlograd regiment and, when
months, there was nothing to think out or decide, you had only to do
a comrade. The canteenkeeper gave one credit, one's pay came every four
captain, who was a good fellow, who a bad one, and most of all, who was
his. In the regiment, everything was definite: who was lieutenant, who
regiment; the other, all the rest. And the rest was no concern of
The whole world was divided into two unequal parts: one, our Pavlograd
loss to Dolokhov. Here, in the regiment, all was clear and simple.
money relations with his father, and nothing to recall that terrible
from him than another; there were none of those uncertain and undefined
innumerable crowd of people of whom not one was nearer to him or farther
day which could be spent in such a variety of ways; there was not that
there or not going there; here there were not twenty-four hours in the
or ought not, to have an explanation; here was no possibility of going
place and took mistaken decisions; here was no Sonya with whom he ought,
all that turmoil of the world at large, where he did not know his right
place, as he had felt under the parental roof. But here was none of
moral support, and the same sense of being at home here in his own
narrow, unchanging frame, he experienced the same sense of peace, of
of the regiment and felt himself deprived of liberty and bound in one
out foraging, when he had again entered into all the little interests
been reassigned to his former squadron, had been on duty and had gone
When he had reported himself to the commander of the regiment and had

his parents' house.
The regiment was also a home, and as unalterably dear and precious as
embraced him, and tears of joy choked him so that he could not speak.
the same feeling as when his mother, his father, and his sister had
officers collected round to greet the new arrival, Rostov experienced
bed, ran all disheveled out of the mud hut to embrace him, and the
master, "The count has come!" and Denisov, who had been asleep on his
picket ropes of the roan horses, when Lavrushka gleefully shouted to his
his regiment, when he recognized red-haired Dementyev and saw the
in Moscow. When he saw the first hussar with the unbuttoned uniform of
On approaching it, Rostov felt as he had done when approaching his home

close was the bond that united him to Denisov and the whole regiment.
When returning from his leave, Rostov felt, for the first time, how


CHAPTER XV





what was good of him.
acquaintance has left, but as seldom happens, no one said anything but
began to express their opinions of him as people always do after a new
When Pierre had gone and the members of the household met together, they

extremely kind to him and told him to visit them again.
account. And during the two days of the young man's visit he was
The old prince came in to supper; this was evidently on Pierre's

with pleasant smiles when he talked to the old prince.
his arms, and Michael Ivanovich and Mademoiselle Bourienne looked at him
grandfather called him) smiled at Pierre and let himself be taken in
most radiant looks, but even the one-year-old "Prince Nicholas" (as his
Mary, who had been won by his gentleness with the pilgrims, gave him her
like an old friend. They were all fond of him already. Not only Princess
Princess Mary, though he had scarcely known them, Pierre at once felt
and with the household. With the stern old prince and the gentle, timid
not expressed so much in his relations with him as with all his family
strength and charm of his friendship with Prince Andrew. That charm was
Only now, on his visit to Bald Hills, did Pierre fully realize the

little fool, Princess Mary," he shouted after Pierre, through the door.
with you at supper. We'll have another dispute. Make friends with my
stirs an old fellow up. Well, go! Get along! Perhaps I'll come and sit
things and one doesn't care to listen, but this one talks rubbish yet
fellow--your friend--I like him! He stirs me up. Another says clever
went on, addressing his son and patting Pierre on the shoulder. "A fine
dinner!... And there, look at this.... Well, my boy," the old prince
came to town and wanted to invite me to dinner--I gave him a pretty
"The marshal, a Count Rostov, hasn't sent half his contingent. He

business.
had brought from town. The old prince went up to him and began to talk
to join in the conversation, was looking over the papers his father
then went up to the table where Prince Andrew, evidently not wishing
repeated, but still he patted Pierre affectionately on the shoulder, and
will be no more war! Old women's nonsense--old women's nonsense!" he
"Drain the blood from men's veins and put in water instead, then there

chaffingly, but without getting angry.
would come when there would be no more wars. The old prince disputed it
him disputing hotly with his visitor. Pierre was maintaining that a time
Before supper, Prince Andrew, coming back to his father's study, found

The old prince was in a good temper and very gracious to Pierre.

was.
"Ah! Very glad! Kiss me," he said, having learned who the young stranger

carriage.
"Who's that?" asked the old prince, noticing Pierre as he got out of the

Pierre also went out into the porch.
the bells of the old prince's carriage approaching. Prince Andrew and
Toward ten o'clock the men servants rushed to the front door, hearing

life is very bad for him. Others don't notice it, but I see it."
persuade him to go abroad. He needs activity, and this quiet regular
is the effect of your visit--he is not often like that. If you could
it all within him. Today he is cheerful and in good spirits, but that
like us women who, when we suffer, can weep away our sorrows. He keeps
I am also very much afraid for him spiritually. He has not a character
wound reopened and the doctor said he ought to go away for a cure. And
about him. His health was better in the winter, but last spring his
giving him time to reply to her affectionate words. "I am very anxious
brother," she said. "How do you find Andrew?" she added hurriedly, not
"I have known you a long time, you see, and am as fond of you as of a

Princess Mary looked at him silently and smiled affectionately.

well and have the greatest respect for them."
"Oh, I really did not mean to hurt her feelings. I understand them so

"You are very kind," she said to him.

Princess Mary took Pierre into the drawing room.
out of the room, and then, leaving "God's folk" to finish their tea,
Pierre listened to her attentively and seriously. Prince Andrew went

out, even into the light of heaven again."
such peace all around, such blessedness, that one don't want to come
I'd sleep a bit and then again go and kiss the relics, and there was
saints. "I'd pray awhile to one, ponder awhile, then go on to another.
some dried bread with her, had spent two days in the catacombs with the
she knew let her have the keys of the catacombs, and how she, taking
hands smelled of incense, and how on her last visit to Kiev some monks
long account of Father Amphilochus, who led so holy a life that his
The pilgrim woman was appeased and, being encouraged to talk, gave a


CHAPTER XIV





now at Pierre, that she was gradually reassured.
of sincere penitence, and Prince Andrew glanced so meekly now at her and
Pelageya stopped doubtfully, but in Pierre's face there was such a look


    * "Princess, on my word, I did not wish to offend her."


was all my fault, and Andrew was only joking."
joking," he said, smiling shyly and trying to efface his offense. "It
je n'ai pas voulu l'offenser. * I did not mean anything, I was only
"Come, Pelageya, I was joking," said Pierre. "Princesse, ma parole,

me?..."
"Now, why need you do it?" said Princess Mary. "Why did you come to

forgo the charity of this house.
things could be said, and was at the same time sorry to have now to
frightened and ashamed to have accepted charity in a house where such
and, almost crying, began to arrange her wallet. She evidently felt
does it mean?..." she asked, turning to Princess Mary. She got up
forgive you!" And she crossed herself. "Lord forgive him! My dear, what
pallor suddenly turning to a vivid red. "Master, what have you said? God
"Oh, master, master, what a sin! And you who have a son!" she began, her

Pelageya suddenly grew quite pale and clasped her hands.

Andrew, with a smile.
"And was the Holy Mother promoted to the rank of general?" said Prince

"How did the star get into the icon?" Pierre asked.

admonishingly, turning to Pierre.
his sight! It's a sin to speak so. God will punish you," she said
star is fixed into the icon. Well, and what do you think? He received
give thee what the Tsar bestowed on me.' I saw it myself, master, the
up to her and falls down and says, 'Make me whole,' says he, 'and I'll
it myself. So he was brought, quite blind, straight to her, and he goes
me to her, take me to her.' It's the real truth I'm telling you, I saw
and said, 'Believe in me and I will make you whole.' So he begged: 'Take
he dreamed that the Holy Virgin Mother of the Kiev catacombs came to him
said, 'The monks cheat,' and as soon as he'd said it he went blind. And
don't speak so, master! There was a general who did not believe, and
"Lord Jesus Christ!" exclaimed the pilgrim woman, crossing herself. "Oh,

"They impose on the people," he repeated.

turning to Princess Mary for support.
"Oh, master, what are you saying?" exclaimed the horrified Pelageya,

listened attentively to the pilgrim.
"But, dear me, that must be a fraud!" said Pierre, naively, who had

drops...."
the light of heaven, and from the blessed Mother's cheek it drops and
"Oh, yes, master, I was found worthy. Such a brightness on the face like

"Let me ask her," said Pierre. "Did you see it yourselves?" he inquired.

flushing.
"All right, all right, you can tell us afterwards," said Princess Mary,

Holy Virgin Mother of God'...."
revealed, holy oil trickles from the cheeks of our blessed Mother, the
"So I come, master, and the people say to me: 'A great blessing has been

drawing in her breath.
All were silent, only the pilgrim woman went on in measured tones,

good-by to the holy folk and went."
the Holy Mother of God has been revealed.' On hearing those words I said
going to the right place? Go to Kolyazin where a wonder-working icon of
own and goes barefoot summer and winter), he says, 'Why are you not
remember. When I was in Kiev, Crazy Cyril says to me (he's one of God's
one of God's chosen, he's a benefactor, he once gave me ten rubles, I
"No... why not, my dear, why shouldn't I? I like him. He is kind, he is

"Andrew, do leave off," said Princess Mary. "Don't tell him, Pelageya."

"What is it? Some new relics?" asked Prince Andrew.

"In Kolyazin, master, a wonderful blessing has been revealed."

she had seen.
Pelageya interrupted her companion; she evidently wished to tell what

voice. "I only came across Pelageya in Yukhnovo..."
"I go by myself, benefactor," said Ivanushka, trying to speak in a bass

"And was Ivanushka with you?"

and wonderful blessing has been revealed."
shrine of the saint. And now I'm from Kolyazin, master, where a great
was deemed worthy to partake of the holy and heavenly sacrament at the
"I have, good sir," she answered garrulously. "Just at Christmastime I

"Where have you been? To Kiev?" Prince Andrew asked the old woman.

under her brows at the young men.
Ivanushka, sipping out of her saucer, looked with sly womanish eyes from
quietly in her armchair, though hoping to be offered another cup of tea.
upside down and placed a nibbled bit of sugar beside it, and sat
her eyes but casting side glances at the newcomers, had turned her cup
unnecessary. They were not in the least abashed. The old woman, lowering
Princess Mary's embarrassment on her people's account was quite

round at them all with crafty eyes.
Ivanushka's face, who, seeing that she was being spoken about, looked
seriousness (for which Princess Mary was specially grateful to him) into
"Really?" said Pierre, gazing over his spectacles with curiosity and


     man."
     me for explaining to Pierre your intimacy with this young
     * "But, my dear, you ought on the contrary to be grateful to


ce jeune homme." *
m'etre reconnaissante de ce que j'explique a Pierre votre intimite avec
"Mais, ma bonne amie," said Prince Andrew, "vous devriez au contraire

customary long-established relations on the matter.
and Princess Mary's helpless attempts to protect them were their
It was evident that Prince Andrew's ironical tone toward the pilgrims


     * (2) "For heaven's sake."

     * "You must know that this is a woman."


"Andrew, au nom de Dieu!" *(2) Princess Mary repeated.

c'est une femme," * said Prince Andrew to Pierre.
"Andrew!" said Princess Mary, imploringly. "Il faut que vous sachiez que

smile at the young pilgrim.
"Ah, and Ivanushka is here too!" said Prince Andrew, glancing with a


    * "Delighted to see you. I am very glad to see you."


greetings, they sat down.
much, but please don't laugh at my people." After exchanging the first
him with her beautiful radiant eyes and seemed to say, "I like you very
his kindly, simple face disposed her favorably toward him. She looked at
his friendship with Andrew, his misfortune with his wife, and above all
to Pierre as he kissed her hand. She had known him as a child, and now
"Charmee de vous voir. Je suis tres contente de vous voir," * she said

as she stood before her pilgrims like a hen before her chickens.
"Andrew, why didn't you warn me?" said the princess, with mild reproach,

her childlike face.
armchair, sat a thin, shriveled, old woman, with a meek expression on
cassock, sat on the sofa beside her, behind a samovar. Near them, in an
stand, a young lad with a long nose and long hair, wearing a monk's
when they went in. In her snug room, with lamps burning before the icon
Princess Mary really was disconcerted and red patches came on her face

"Come, and you'll see for yourself."

"What are 'God's folk'?" asked Pierre.

her 'God's folk.' It's really very curious."
folk.' It will serve her right, she will be confused, but you will see
"I have not found her yet, she is hiding now, sitting with her 'God's
"Let us go and see my sister," he said to Pierre when he returned.

went to the nursery.
in perfect order and readiness for him in his father's house; he himself
Prince Andrew led Pierre to his own apartments, which were always kept

The old prince had gone to the town and was expected back any minute.

soon.
and he asked where the old prince was and whether he was expected back
Prince Andrew had no time to answer. The servants came out to meet them,

"But what are 'God's folk'?" asked Pierre.

orders these pilgrims to be driven away, but she receives them."
us for my father. This is the one matter in which she disobeys him. He
"Those are Mary's 'God's folk,'" said Prince Andrew. "They have mistaken

steps of the back porch.
them, and all four, looking round at the carriage, ran in dismay up the
to the gate on seeing the carriage driving up. Two women ran out after
and a short, long-haired, young man in a black garment had rushed back
on at the back porch. A woman, bent with age, with a wallet on her back,
Prince Andrew with a smile drew Pierre's attention to a commotion going
entrance of the house at Bald Hills. As they approached the house,
It was getting dusk when Prince Andrew and Pierre drove up to the front


CHAPTER XIII





way, inwardly he began a new life.
Andrew's life. Though outwardly he continued to live in the same old
existed within him. His meeting with Pierre formed an epoch in Prince
life, but he knew that this feeling which he did not know how to develop
vanished as soon as he returned to the customary conditions of his
within him, suddenly awoke, joyful and youthful, in his soul. It
and something that had long been slumbering, something that was best
that high, everlasting sky he had seen while lying on that battlefield;
to which Pierre had pointed, and for the first time since Austerlitz saw
get on," he added, and, stepping off the raft, he looked up at the sky
"Yes, if it only were so!" said Prince Andrew. "However, it is time to

friend.
Pierre's face, flushed and rapturous, but yet shy before his superior
He sighed, and glanced with a radiant, childlike, tender look at

"It is true, believe it."

of the waves kept up a refrain to Pierre's words, whispering:
current beat softly against it below. Prince Andrew felt as if the sound
became silent. The raft had long since stopped and only the waves of the
sun gleaming on the blue waters. There was perfect stillness. Pierre
Pierre, and he gazed with his eyes fixed on the red reflection of the
Prince Andrew stood leaning on the railing of the raft listening to

said Pierre, and he pointed to the sky.
of earth, but have lived and shall live forever, there, in the Whole,"
must love, and we must believe that we live not only today on this scrap
highest happiness consists in striving to attain them. We must live, we
"If there is a God and future life, there is truth and good, and man's

coachmen, and ferrymen, still stood on the raft and talked.
the ferry, but Pierre and Andrew, to the astonishment of the footmen,
below the horizon and an evening frost was starring the puddles near
taken off, onto the farther bank, and reharnessed. The sun had sunk half
Prince Andrew did not reply. The carriage and horses had long since been

Someone? There is the future life. The Someone is--God."
"Well, that's it then! You know that there is a there and there is a

in...."
you yourself are left facing that abyss, and look in. And I have looked
someone and all at once that person vanishes there, into nowhere, and
necessity of a future life, but this: when you go hand in hand with
"No. All I say is that it is not argument that convinces me of the

"Yes, yes, of course," said Pierre, "isn't that what I'm saying?"

what convinces, that is what has convinced me," said Prince Andrew.
cannot be that there is no answer. And I believe there is.... That's
being is seized with pain, suffers, and ceases to exist.... Why? It
(Prince Andrew's voice trembled and he turned away), "and suddenly that
own life, before whom one was to blame and had hoped to make it right"
What convinces is when one sees a being dear to one, bound up with one's
which can convince me, dear friend--life and death are what convince.
"Yes, that is Herder's theory," said Prince Andrew, "but it is not that

there are spirits, and that in this world there is truth."
always exist and always have existed. I feel that beyond me and above me
cannot vanish, since nothing vanishes in this world, but that I shall
it breaks off at me and does not go farther and farther? I feel that I
clearly see, that ladder leading from plant to man, why should I suppose
Deity--the Supreme Power if you prefer the term--is manifest? If I see,
higher beings, in this vast harmonious multitude of beings in whom the
Don't I feel that I form one link, one step, between the lower and
Don't I feel in my soul that I am part of this vast harmonious whole?
the children of earth are--eternally--children of the whole universe.
in the whole universe there is a kingdom of truth, and we who are now
fields), "there is no truth, all is false and evil; but in the universe,
of everything. On earth, here on this earth" (Pierre pointed to the
I, and it cannot be seen if one looks on our life here as the end
"You say you can't see a reign of goodness and truth on earth. Nor could

Prince Andrew's former atheistic convictions.
to reply, took the repetition for a denial, the more readily as he knew
"A future life?" Prince Andrew repeated, but Pierre, giving him no time

"Do you believe in a future life?" he asked.

Pierre interrupted him.

You see a reign of goodness and truth on earth, but I don't see it."
Men. How is it you know everything? Why do I alone not see what you see?
destiny of man, and the laws which govern the world. But who are we?
You say: join our brotherhood and we will show you the aim of life, the
"What do I think about it? I am listening to you. It's all very well....

"Well, what do you think about it?" Pierre asked. "Why are you silent?"

the flooding waters glittering in the setting sun.
Prince Andrew, leaning his arms on the raft railing, gazed silently at

they also stepped on the raft.
cross by ferry. While the carriage and horses were being placed on it,
They reached a river that had overflowed its banks and which they had to

not interrupt him or laugh at what he said.
Pierre saw that his words were not in vain and that Prince Andrew would
peculiar glow that came into Prince Andrew's eyes and by his silence,
his catching what Pierre said, he asked him to repeat it, and by the
Pierre's words. More than once, when the noise of the wheels prevented
Prince Andrew, looking straight in front of him, listened in silence to

which is hidden in heaven," said Pierre.
have felt myself, a part of that vast invisible chain the beginning of
to us, let yourself be guided, and you will at once feel yourself, as I
fundamental convictions your own, join our brotherhood, give yourself up
his life, like you, merely trying not to harm others. But make our
nothing is left for an intelligent and good man but to live out
union all is filled with deceit and falsehood and I agree with you that
is a dream," said Pierre. "Understand, my dear fellow, that outside this
"Only our holy brotherhood has the real meaning of life, all the rest

and love.
from the bonds of State and Church, a teaching of equality, brotherhood,
Andrew. He said that Freemasonry is the teaching of Christianity freed
And he began to explain Freemasonry as he understood it to Prince

humanity."
Freemasonry is the best expression of the best, the eternal, aspects of
Freemasonry is not a religious ceremonial sect, as I thought it was:
like that, and do you know what saved me? Freemasonry! No, don't smile.
"About life, about man's destiny. It can't be so. I myself thought

"Think? What about?" asked Prince Andrew with surprise.

should not think so."
head and looking like a bull about to charge, "why do you think so? You
"No, but why do you think so?" Pierre suddenly began, lowering his

what to him was precious and sacred.
and he shrank from beginning, afraid of exposing to possible ridicule
Prince Andrew with one word, one argument, would upset all his teaching,
raise him. But as soon as he thought of what he should say, he felt that
see the true light, and that he, Pierre, ought to aid, enlighten, and
He was thinking that Prince Andrew was unhappy, had gone astray, did not

apparently immersed in his own thoughts.
Pierre remained gloomily silent, answering in monosyllables and

his husbandry.
Pointing to the fields, he spoke of the improvements he was making in

then with remarks which showed that he was in a good temper.
Bald Hills. Prince Andrew, glancing at Pierre, broke the silence now and
In the evening Andrew and Pierre got into the open carriage and drove to


CHAPTER XII





Pierre.
"No, no! A thousand times no! I shall never agree with you," said

always remain the same backs and foreheads."
not the serfs' backs and foreheads, which, beat and shave as you may,
"So that's what I'm sorry for--human dignity, peace of mind, purity, and

He did not reply.

case.
that these thoughts had been suggested to Prince Andrew by his father's
Prince Andrew spoke so earnestly that Pierre could not help thinking

and more miserable."
harsh, are conscious of it, but cannot restrain themselves and grow more
unlimited power, in time when they grow more irritable, become cruel and
seen, but I have seen, how good men brought up in those traditions of
for their sake I should like to liberate the serfs. You may not have
inflict punishments justly and unjustly. It is those people I pity, and
stifle this remorse and grow callous, as a result of being able to
for proprietors who perish morally, bring remorse upon themselves,
their bodies heal, and they are happy as before. But it is a good thing
worse off. In Siberia they lead the same animal life, and the stripes on
beaten, flogged, or sent to Siberia, I don't suppose they are any the
flogged or sent to Siberia--and still less for your serfs. If they are
very good thing, but not for you--I don't suppose you ever had anyone
"There now, you wish to liberate your serfs," he continued; "that is a

desire to do good to his neighbor.
while he tried to prove to Pierre that in his actions there was no
Prince Andrew grew more and more animated. His eyes glittered feverishly

myself."
glad to see him hanged, but I was sorry for my father--that again is for
had stolen some boots from the recruits; I should even have been very
not, and do not, in the least care about that scoundrel of a clerk who
"Yes, but it is not as you imagine," Prince Andrew continued. "I did

"Well, there you see!"

from actions which would torment him afterwards."
alone have any influence with my father, and now and then can save him
hanged," said Prince Andrew with a smile. "So I am serving because I
a fortnight ago he would have had a paymaster's clerk at Yukhnovna
the recruiting, granted by the Emperor. If I had been two hours late
terrible, and now he has this authority of a commander in chief of
energetic a character. He is so accustomed to unlimited power that he is
his time. But he is growing old, and though not exactly cruel he has too
"Why, for this reason! My father is one of the most remarkable men of

"And why do you serve?"

He paused a little while.

"I am."

"Then you are serving?"

him."
District, and my only way of avoiding active service is to serve under
there's this recruiting. My father is chief in command of the Third
Well, as I was saying," he continued, recovering his composure, "now
threatening Bald Hills--even then I wouldn't serve in the Russian army!
army. And I won't--not even if Bonaparte were here at Smolensk
much! I have promised myself not to serve again in the active Russian
"After Austerlitz!" said Prince Andrew gloomily. "No, thank you very

"Why aren't you serving in the army?"

recruiting."
have a nook of one's own in which to be quiet. And now there's this
position. Then there's this house, which must be built in order to
for it--the kind of good-natured, fussy shallowness necessary for the
They could not understand that I have not the necessary qualifications
choose me to be their marshal; it was all I could do to get out of it.
but here on the one hand the local nobility have done me the honor to
"Life as it is leaves one no peace. I should be thankful to do nothing,

without moving, undertaking nothing...."
"But with such ideas what motive have you for living? One would sit

without hurting others."
alive, that is not my fault, so I must live out my life as best I can
contrary one must try to make one's life as pleasant as possible. I'm
"Why not wash? That is not cleanly," said Prince Andrew; "on the

I don't eat, don't wash... and how is it with you?..."
live at all--everything seems hateful to me... myself most of all. Then
Moscow and when traveling, but at such times I collapsed so that I don't
one can live with such ideas. I had such moments myself not long ago, in
"Oh, that is dreadful, dreadful!" said Pierre. "I don't understand how

glance became more animated as his conclusions became more hopeless.
readily and rapidly like a man who has not talked for a long time. His
evident he had reflected on this subject more than once, and he spoke
Prince Andrew expressed his ideas so clearly and distinctly that it was

frowning angrily and turning away from Pierre.
notion that medicine ever cured anyone! Killed them, yes!" said he,
him from love of him. And he does not want that. And besides, what a
grudged losing a laborer--that's how I regard him--but you want to cure
and there are plenty of them as it is. It would be different if you
would be far easier and simpler for him to die. Others are being born
about as a cripple, a burden to everybody, for another ten years. It
he is dying, and you come and bleed him and patch him up. He will drag
crooked a third finger. "Ah, yes, hospitals, medicine. He has a fit,
The third thing--what else was it you talked about?" and Prince Andrew
he could not stand my physical idleness, but would grow fat and die.
not stand his terrible physical labor but should die of it in a week, so
if he didn't, he would go to the drink shop or fall ill. Just as I could
think and can't help thinking, just as he can't help plowing and mowing;
thoughts come and I can't sleep but toss about till dawn, because I
or me. You can't help thinking. I go to bed after two in the morning,
him, as much a condition of his existence, as mental activity is to you
'lighten his toil.' But as I see it, physical labor is as essential to
want to make him what I am, without giving him my means. Then you say,
that is just what you want to deprive him of. I envy him, but you
it seems to me that animal happiness is the only happiness possible, and
cap) "from his animal condition and awaken in him spiritual needs, while
to raise him" (pointing to a peasant who passed by them taking off his
went on, crooking a finger, "education and so forth; that is, you want
"Come, let's argue then," said Prince Andrew, "You talk of schools," he

as a veranda.
They rose from the table and sat down in the entrance porch which served

us. Well, you want an argument," he added, "come on then."
right and what's good must be judged by one who knows all, but not by
hospitals. The one and the other may serve as a pastime. But what's
Prince Andrew. "I build a house and lay out a garden, and you build
"Yes, if you put it like that it's quite a different matter," said

happiness in life."
for certain, that the enjoyment of doing this good is the only sure
yourself. And the main thing is," he continued, "that I know, and know
and more than that, you can't make me believe that you do not think so
toward it and you cannot persuade me that it was not a good action,
done that though badly and to a small extent; but I have done something
them rest and leisure?" said Pierre, hurrying and lisping. "And I have
peasant, or a woman with a baby, has no rest day or night and I give
for the aged? And is it not a palpable, unquestionable good if a
rendered, and I supplied them with a doctor, a hospital, and an asylum
of disease without help while material assistance could so easily be
consolation? What evil and error are there in it, if people were dying
comforting belief in future life, retribution, recompense, and
ceremonies and meaningless prayers and are now instructed in a
were growing up and dying with no idea of God and truth beyond
there be in it if unfortunate people, our serfs, people like ourselves,
little--though I did very little and did it very badly? What evil can
error or evil can there be in my wishing to do good, and even doing a
"You are joking," replied Pierre, growing more and more excited. "What

evidently wished to draw him on.
And he looked at Pierre with a mocking, challenging expression. He

prochain--your Kiev peasants to whom you want to do good."
Princess Mary call it, are the chief source of all error and evil. Le
Prince Andrew. "The others, one's neighbors, le prochain, as you and
"But that's just the same as myself--they are not others," explained

growing excited. "What about your son, your sister, and your father?"
"But what do you mean by living only for yourself?" asked Pierre,

calmer since I began to live only for myself."
others, and not almost, but quite, ruined my life. And I have become
to do something for them, a desire for their approval.--So I lived for
glory.--And after all what is glory? The same love of others, a desire
began living for others. I experienced just the reverse. I lived for
say you nearly ruined your life and only found happiness when you
pause, "but everyone lives in his own way. You lived for yourself and
said. "Perhaps you are right for yourself," he added after a short
"When you see my sister, Princess Mary, you'll get on with her," he

Andrew looked silently at Pierre with an ironic smile.
with you, and you do not really believe what you are saying." Prince
now have I understood all the happiness of life. No, I shall not agree
(Pierre's modesty made him correct himself) "to live for others, only
and ruined my life. And only now when I am living, or at least trying"
have to repent is not enough. I lived like that, I lived for myself
can't agree with you! To live only so as not to do evil and not to
"And love of one's neighbor, and self-sacrifice?" began Pierre. "No, I

live for myself avoiding those two evils is my whole philosophy now."
remorse and illness. The only good is the absence of those evils. To
Pierre. He spoke in French. "I only know two very real evils in life:
and more animated and evidently wishing to express his new outlook to
something I cannot inflict on others," said Prince Andrew, growing more
"Yes, we know that, but the harm I am conscious of in myself is

"Bad! Bad!" exclaimed Pierre. "We all know what is bad for ourselves."

"And who has told you what is bad for another man?" he asked.

state.
begun to talk, and wanted to express what had brought him to his present
that for the first time since his arrival Prince Andrew was roused, had
"What does harm to another is wrong," said Pierre, feeling with pleasure

in nothing more than in what they consider right and wrong."
what is right and what is wrong. Men always did and always will err, and
"Why is it wrong?" urged Prince Andrew. "It is not given to man to know

"No, to kill a man is bad--wrong."

thing really."
"Why so?" asked Prince Andrew. "To kill a vicious dog is a very good

Pierre.
"One thing I thank God for is that I did not kill that man," said

"And so you had to go through that too!"

"But you know how it all ended, don't you? You heard of the duel?"

"Forever?" said Prince Andrew. "Nothing's forever."

it is all over, and forever."
hurriedly: "I will tell you some time how it all happened. But you know
Pierre blushed, as he always did when it was mentioned, and said

"I was very much surprised when I heard of it," said Prince Andrew.

At dinner, conversation turned on Pierre's marriage.

we'll set off."
"However, this is not at all interesting. Let us have dinner, and then

arrangements of the house, he interrupted himself:
while on the scaffolding, in the midst of a talk explaining the future
the new homestead he was constructing and its buildings, but even here,
intimately. Prince Andrew spoke with some animation and interest only of
news and common acquaintances like people who do not know each other
They went out and walked about till dinnertime, talking of the political

like to look round my place?"
now found nothing in common. "We will go after dinner. And would you now
already," he said, evidently trying to entertain a visitor with whom he
my sister today. I will introduce you to her. But of course you know her
bivouacking here and have just come to look round. I am going back to
also felt depressed and constrained with his visitor, "I am only
"I'll tell you what, my dear fellow," said Prince Andrew, who evidently

at last became silent.
Pierre felt uncomfortable and even depressed in his friend's company and

him.
only without interest but even as if ashamed of what Pierre was telling
been doing, as though it were all an old-time story, and he listened not
made. Prince Andrew several times prompted Pierre's story of what he had
as possible to conceal his own part in the improvements that had been
Pierre began describing what he had done on his estates, trying as far

all you have been doing on your estates."
"But why talk of me?... Talk to me, yes, tell me about your travels and

"No, I meant to ask..." Pierre began, but Prince Andrew interrupted him.

had grown much older.
Pierre looked silently and searchingly into Prince Andrew's face, which

here altogether next year...."
astonished at the word. "Well, you see, I'm building. I mean to settle
"Plans!" repeated Prince Andrew ironically. "My plans?" he said, as if

"Well, and you? What are your plans?"

"Yes, we have altered much, very much, since then," said Prince Andrew.

know myself again."
"I can't tell you how much I have lived through since then. I hardly

different, and better, Pierre than he had been in Petersburg.
desire to show his friend as soon as possible that he was now a quite
He checked himself, fearing to seem naive, yet he felt an irresistible
which had been particularly revived and strengthened by his late tour.
Andrew's presence. He was ashamed to express his new Masonic views,
enthusiasms, dreams, and hopes of happiness or goodness, in Prince
The latter began to feel that it was in bad taste to speak of his
have liked to sympathize with what Pierre was saying, but could not.
animation of the past or the future. It was as if Prince Andrew would
which he listened to Pierre, especially when he spoke with joyful
friend's look was now still more clearly expressed in the smile with
on. The preoccupation and despondency which Pierre had noticed in his
for the future, Pierre's journeys and occupations, the war, and so
some of the topics at first lightly touched on: their past life, plans
be talked over at length. At last the conversation gradually settled on
put questions and gave brief replies about things they knew ought to
it was long before their conversation could settle on anything. They
As is usually the case with people meeting after a prolonged separation,

concentration on some one thought.
to it were his inertia and a wrinkle on his brow indicating prolonged
manly-looking, but what amazed and estranged Pierre till he got used
and glad sparkle. Prince Andrew had grown thinner, paler, and more
spite of his evident wish to do so he could not give them a joyous
smile on his lips and face, but his eyes were dull and lifeless and in
was struck by the change in him. His words were kindly and there was a
Pierre said nothing; he looked fixedly at his friend with surprise. He

"Well, I did not expect you, I am very glad," said Prince Andrew.

and looked at him closely.
embraced him and lifting his spectacles kissed his friend on the cheek
face with Prince Andrew, who came out frowning and looking old. Pierre
Pierre went with rapid steps to the door and suddenly came face to

"Ask him to wait," and the sound was heard of a chair being pushed back.

"A visitor," answered Anton.

"Well, what is it?" came a sharp, unpleasant voice.

ran ahead on tiptoe and knocked at a door.
wooden walls redolent of pine, and would have gone farther, but Anton
He quickly entered the small reception room with its still-unplastered

Petersburg.
the brilliant surroundings in which he had last met his friend in
Pierre was struck by the modesty of the small though clean house after

prince was at home, and showed him into a clean little anteroom.
Andrew in his boyhood, helped Pierre out of his carriage, said that the
built lodge close to the pond. Anton, a man who had looked after Prince
to inquiries as to where the prince lived, pointed out a small newly
tidiness and good management. Some domestic serfs Pierre met, in reply
the bridges were strong and had handrails. Everything bore an impress of
water cart, painted green, stood in a shed; the paths were straight,
out. The fences and gates were new and solid; two fire pumps and a
still in course of construction. Round the house was a garden newly laid
bathhouse, a lodge, and a large brick house with semicircular facade
The homestead consisted of a threshing floor, outhouses, stables, a

trees.
along the highroad in the midst of a young copse in which were a few fir
still bare of grass. It was at the end of a village that stretched
behind a newly dug pond filled with water to the brink and with banks
and forests of fir and birch, which were partly cut down. The house lay
Bogucharovo lay in a flat uninteresting part of the country among fields

friend Bolkonski, whom he had not seen for two years.
of mind, Pierre carried out an intention he had long had of visiting his
Returning from his journey through South Russia in the happiest state


CHAPTER XI





say, all that could be got out of them.
to give in money and work all that other people's serfs gave--that is to
newly erected buildings were standing empty and that the serfs continued
but would probably never even inquire and would never know that the
the sale of the land and forests and to release them from the Land Bank,
count never be able to find out whether all measures had been taken for
to carry out the count's wishes, seeing clearly that not only would the
on what he thought right. The steward promised to do all in his power
happen to them when they were free, but he insisted, though reluctantly,
difficult to imagine happier people, and that God only knew what would
Pierre in his secret soul agreed with the steward that it would be

the uselessness of freeing the serfs, who were quite happy as it was.
pressed him still harder with proofs of the impossibility and above all
a toy, seeing the effect these prearranged receptions had on Pierre,
through the naive and intelligent count and played with him as with
The chief steward, a very stupid but cunning man who saw perfectly

for these simple, kindly people.
receiving it. This gratitude reminded him of how much more he might do
He was pleased at the gratitude he received, but felt abashed at

thought Pierre, "and how little attention we pay to it!"
"How easy it is, how little effort it needs, to do so much good,"

as he called the Grand Master.
Petersburg, and wrote enthusiastic letters to his "brother-instructor"
estates and quite recovered the philanthropic mood in which he had left
increased by a half. And so Pierre was delighted with his visit to his
had been diminished by a third, their obligatory manorial work had been
where the steward had shown him in the accounts that the serfs' payments
labor was thus increased, though lessened on paper. He did not know that
brick buildings, built to plan, were being built by serfs whose manorial
and secured their release by heavy payments. He did not know that the
that the pupils' parents wept at having to let him take their children
who met him with the cross oppressed the peasants by his exactions, and
did still harder work on their own land. He did not know that the priest
since the nursing mothers were no longer sent to work on his land, they
villages were in a state of the greatest poverty. He did not know that
the chantry long before, but that nine tenths of the peasants in that
and that the richest peasants (who formed the deputation) had begun
Paul was a market village where a fair was held on St. Peter's day,
with bread and salt and wished to build a chantry in honor of Peter and
What Pierre did not know was that the place where they presented him

coats.
touching thanks of deputations of serfs in their full-skirted blue
which the serfs' manorial labor had been diminished, and heard the
to be opened. Everywhere he saw the stewards' accounts, according to
all on one plan, for hospitals, schools, and almshouses, which were soon
saw with his own eyes brick buildings erected or in course of erection,
instructing in reading, writing, and religion. On all his estates Pierre
him surrounded by children whom, by the count's generosity, he was
work. On a third estate the priest, bearing a cross, came to meet
infants in arms met him to thank him for releasing them from hard
of Peter and Paul, his patron saints. In another place the women with
to build a new chantry to the church at their own expense in honor
as a mark of their gratitude for the benefits he had conferred on them,
and salt and an icon of Saint Peter and Saint Paul, asking permission,
depth of his heart. In one place the peasants presented him with bread
which though they embarrassed Pierre awakened a joyful feeling in the
grateful for the benefits conferred on them. Everywhere were receptions,
than the other; the serfs everywhere seemed thriving and touchingly
Pierre. The estates he had not before visited were each more picturesque
carriage, and the solitude of the road, all had a gladdening effect on
The southern spring, the comfortable rapid traveling in a Vienna

him.
as, according to his understanding of his master, would touch and delude
ones, with offerings of icons and the bread and salt of hospitality,
he knew Pierre would not like), but for just such gratefully religious
Everywhere preparations were made not for ceremonious welcomes (which
hospitals, and asylums--on all the estates before the master arrived.
impracticable, he arranged for the erection of large buildings--schools,
some concessions. Continuing to represent the liberation of the serfs as
insane--unprofitable to himself, to the count, and to the serfs--made
The chief steward, who considered the young count's attempts almost

entrusted to his care and whom he intended to benefit.
had been carried out and in what state were the serfs whom God had
intended to visit all his estates and see for himself how far his orders
In the spring of 1807 he decided to return to Petersburg. On the way he

virtues--love of his neighbor, and especially generosity.
another of the precepts--that of reforming the human race--and had other
of death. He consoled himself with the thought that he fulfilled
life, and that of the seven virtues he lacked two--morality and the love
fulfill the one which enjoined every Mason to set an example of moral
Of the three precepts of Freemasonry Pierre realized that he did not

hoped to lead he still lived the old life, only in new surroundings.
no time for reflection, as in Petersburg. Instead of the new life he had
occupied with evening parties, dinners, lunches, and balls, giving him
weeks, and months of his life passed in as great a rush and were as much
Lodge--were so strong that he could not resist them. Again whole days,
weakness--the one to which he had confessed when admitted to the
largest landowner of the province. Temptations to Pierre's greatest
his acquaintance and joyfully welcomed the rich newcomer, the
In Kiev Pierre found some people he knew, and strangers hastened to make

himself.
consultations very valuable for the proprietor and troublesome to
for his part tried to pretend to the count that he considered these
to pretend to the steward that he was attending to it. The steward
to attend to the business himself and so he disliked it and only tried
Pierre had none of the practical persistence that would have enabled him

"Yes, yes, do so."

on--that Pierre became quite bewildered and only replied:
measures--the removal of injunctions, petitions, permits, and so
operations according to him were connected with such complicated
and the Crimean estate, in order to make it possible: all of which
the forests in the province of Kostroma, the land lower down the river,
The steward did not say it was quite impossible, but suggested selling

and the consequent impossibility of a speedy emancipation.
showing the necessity of first paying off the loans from the Land Bank,
steps should be taken to liberate the serfs, which the steward met by
to which Pierre did not agree. On the other hand, Pierre demanded that
paying off the debts and undertaking new activities with serf labor,
of things to him in the very worst light, pointing out the necessity of
them or make them move. On the one hand, the chief steward put the state
consultations were detached from real affairs and did not link up with
he felt that this did not forward matters at all. He felt that these
He discussed estate affairs every day with his chief steward. But

inclination--practical business.
task Pierre had to face was one for which he had very little aptitude or
or of the necessity of rebuilding factories and workshops. So the first
chief steward wrote every year telling him of fires and bad harvests,
spent, and almost every year he was obliged to borrow. Besides this the
two years, and he did not know how the rest, about 100,000 rubles, was
new church, previously begun, had cost about 10,000 in each of the last
the countess; about 70,000 went for interest on debts. The building of a
pensions and the same amount for asylums; 150,000 alimony was sent to
and the allowance to the three princesses; about 15,000 was given in
30,000 went for the upkeep of the estate near Moscow, the town house,
About 80,000 went in payments on all the estates to the Land Bank, about

following budget:
an allowance of ten thousand rubles. He had a dim perception of the
Pierre felt himself far poorer than when his father had made him
income which was said to amount to five hundred thousand rubles a year,
Despite Count Bezukhov's enormous wealth, since he had come into an

general state of affairs which was far from satisfactory.
remarked that besides these changes it would be necessary to go into the
The chief steward expressed great sympathy with Pierre's intentions, but

speech how they could best handle the master for their own ends.
cleverest among them, including the chief steward, understood from this
before, others simply enjoyed hearing how the master talked, while the
fright were amused by Pierre's lisp and the new words they had not heard
with their management and embezzlement of money, some after their first
alarm, supposing these words to mean that the young count was displeased
the stewards (there were semiliterate foremen among them) listened with
asylums, and schools were to be established on all the estates. Some of
punishments were to be admonitory and not corporal, and hospitals,
were not to be sent to work, assistance was to be given to the serfs,
were not to be overburdened with labor, women while nursing their babies
would be taken immediately to free his serfs--and that till then they
and explained to them his intentions and wishes. He told them that steps
When he reached Kiev he sent for all his stewards to the head office

what he should do on his estates.
him full directions which he had written down for his own guidance as to
Kiev province, where he had the greatest number of serfs, taking with
Soon after his admission to the Masonic Brotherhood, Pierre went to the


CHAPTER X





"Yes, this is the one thing left me now," he said with a sigh.

against the muslin of the curtain.
world. Prince Andrew was the first to move away, ruffling his hair
to leave that seclusion where they three were shut off from all the
and stood still in the dim light beneath the curtain as if not wishing
catching the curtain of the cot. Each made the other a warning gesture
were in them. She leaned over to her brother and kissed him, slightly
luminous eyes shone more brightly than usual from the tears of joy that
Prince Andrew looked at his sister. In the dim shadow of the curtain her

against the pillow.
The child moved slightly in his sleep, smiled, and rubbed his forehead

"I was coming to tell you so."

"He has perspired," said Prince Andrew.

looking and held out his hand to her. She pressed it.
and dropped it again behind her. Prince Andrew recognized her without
who had come up to the cot with noiseless steps, lifted the curtain,
listened to his regular breathing. The dark shadow was Princess Mary,
the cot. He did not look round, but still gazing at the infant's face
heard a rustle behind him and a shadow appeared under the curtain of
head and at the little arms and legs which showed under the blanket. He
little creature, but dared not do so. He stood over him, gazing at his
longed to snatch up, to squeeze, to hold to his heart, this helpless
but evidently the crisis was over and he was convalescent. Prince Andrew
the hair was wet, so profusely had the child perspired. He was not dead,
forehead was moist. Prince Andrew touched the head with his hand; even
tried with his lips whether the child was still feverish. The soft
already lost him. He bent over him and, as his sister had taught him,
Prince Andrew was as glad to find the boy like that, as if he had

his sleep and breathing evenly.
bed with his head lower than the pillow, and was smacking his lips in
At last he saw him: the rosy boy had tossed about till he lay across the
and for some time his frightened, restless eyes could not find the baby.
that the nurse had been hiding the dead baby. He drew the curtain aside
He went to the cot in confusion, sure that he would find it empty and
"All is over," he thought, and a cold sweat broke out on his forehead.

dead. All that he saw and heard seemed to confirm this terror.
seized by an unreasoning panic--it occurred to him that the child was
As often happens after long sleeplessness and long anxiety, he was

him.
"My dear," he heard what seemed to him her despairing whisper behind

with a scared look and that Princess Mary was no longer by the cot.
Just as he went in he saw that the nurse was hiding something from him

reading the letter. He went on tiptoe to the nursery door and opened it.
alarm lest something should have happened to the child while he was
thought he heard a strange noise through the door. He was seized with
had read, and listened to what was passing in the nursery. Suddenly he
rubbed his forehead as if to rid himself of all interest in what he
there in which he had now no part could perturb him. He shut his eyes,
not what he had read that vexed him, but the fact that the life out
had read thus far, he crumpled the letter up and threw it away. It was
Bilibin), what he had read began to interest him more and more. When he
in spite of himself (although he knew how far it was safe to trust
At first Prince Andrew read with his eyes only, but after a while,

this will oblige one half the army to shoot the other."
commanders of divisions the right to shoot marauders, but I much fear
portmanteau and my dressing gown. The Emperor proposes to give all
disperse them. During one of these attacks they carried off my empty
headquarters, and the commander in chief has to ask for a battalion to
sick, and famine is everywhere. Twice the marauders even attack our
The inhabitants are totally ruined, the hospitals overflow with
bands and scour the countryside and put everything to fire and sword.
of which our last campaign can give you no idea. Half the regiments form
empty, the roads impassable. The Orthodox begin looting, and in a way
demanding bread, meat, biscuits, fodder, and whatnot! The stores are
enemy rises before us--namely the Orthodox Russian soldiers, loudly
second, Bonaparte. But as it turns out, just at that moment a third
foe, Buxhowden, is vanquished; we can now turn our thoughts to the
returns bringing our appointment as commander in chief, and our first
courier who carried the news of our victory at Pultusk to Petersburg
and an epileptic fit on Bennigsen's. But at the critical moment the
generals are angry, and the result is a challenge on Buxhowden's part
the other. At last our enemy. Buxhowden, catches us and attacks. Both
scuttle. He hardly crosses the river to our side before we recross to
these maneuvers that enabled us to escape him. Buxhowden pursues us--we
attacked and captured by a superior enemy force as a result of one of
the moment is not Bonaparte but Buxhowden. General Buxhowden was all but
river we burn the bridges to separate ourselves from our enemy, who at
energetically do we pursue this aim that after crossing an unfordable
General Buxhowden who by right of seniority should be our chief. So
it should be, to avoid or attack the enemy, but solely to avoid
original and interesting series of maneuvers. Our aim is no longer, as
the army to General Buxhowden. During this interregnum we begin a very
chief as a reward for his victory, does not give up the command of
Bennigsen, hoping to receive from Petersburg the post of commander in
but send a courier to Petersburg with news of a victory, and General
we who lost the battle of Pultusk. In short, we retreat after the battle
after a battle have lost it is what we say; and according to that it is
bad way of deciding whether a battle was won or lost. Those who retreat
opinion was nothing of the kind. We civilians, as you know, have a very
is the battle of Pultusk, which is considered a great victory but in my
fight a battle 'on his own hand' as the Germans say. He does so. This
within sight of the enemy and he wishes to profit by the opportunity to
not quite see it; more particularly as it is he and his corps who are
Buxhowden is commander in chief by seniority, but General Bennigsen does
appears that we are within sight of the enemy and must give battle.
interesting and entertaining. After the field marshal's departure it
"This is the first act. Those that follow are naturally increasingly

isn't it logical?
"The field marshal is angry with the Emperor and he punishes us all,

thousands such as I in Russia.'
does not produce the slightest stir--a blind man has left it. There are
secretary rather than commander in the army. My removal from the army
permission here in hospital, that I may not have to play the part of a
glorious task for which he was chosen. I shall await your most gracious
in any case dishonored by being unable to fulfill the great and
"'Grant leave to retire to his country seat to an old man who is already

in it by spring.
present bivouac another fortnight there will not be a healthy man left
submit my report, with the information that if the army remains in its
hospital at Ostrolenka till I recover. In regard to which I humbly
all that the peasants had has been eaten up. I myself will remain in
reported by the division commanders, Ostermann and Sedmoretzki, and
day's ration of bread remains, and in some regiments none at all, as
of bread, to move farther into the interior of Prussia, for only one
whole staff and all that belongs to it, advising him if there is a lack
to the general next in seniority, Count Buxhowden, having sent him my
riding and commanding so vast an army, so I have passed on the command
sore which, coming after all my previous journeys, quite prevents my
"'From all my riding,' he writes to the Emperor, 'I have got a saddle

retreating to our frontier--which do today.'
yourself reported to Count Buxhowden yesterday, you must think of
and without fuel or forage, so something must be done, and, as you
You have brought your army corps to Pultusk, routed: here it is exposed,
'I am wounded and cannot ride and consequently cannot command the army.

famous order of the day to General Bennigsen:
an eye on me! Very well then! Get along with you!' So he writes the
that's the way they treat me! No confidence in me! Ah, ordered to keep
them, and reads those from the Emperor addressed to others. 'Ah! So
furies and rages at everyone and everything, seizes the letters, opens
to Count T., Prince V., and others. Then he bursts into one of his wild
impatient and sets to work himself and finds letters from the Emperor
to him. We search, but none are to be found. The field marshal grows
for us. The field marshal looks on and waits for letters addressed
himself. I am called in to help sort the letters and take those meant
are taken to the field marshal's room, for he likes to do everything
"On the 4th, the first courier arrives from Petersburg. The mails

triumph.
Suvorov-like, in a kibitka, and is received with acclamations of joy and
and Kamenski the latter was preferred. The general comes to us,
young, all our octogenarians were reviewed, and of Prozorovski
might have been more decisive had the commander in chief not been so
a commander in chief. As it was considered that the Austerlitz success
everything in perfect order, only one little thing is lacking, namely,
war on our own frontiers, with and for the King of Prussia. We have
turns out that we have landed ourselves in war, and what is more, in
"In short, hoping to settle matters by taking up a warlike attitude, it

this is absolutely true.
King of Prussia what he is to do if he is summoned to surrender.... All
"The head of the garrison at Glogau, with ten thousand men, asks the

down their arms at the first demand.
Prussian generals pride themselves on being polite to the French and lay
have hastened to take all steps to that end. May I have succeeded!' The
manner agreeable to yourself, and in so far as circumstances allowed, I
'that Your Majesty should be received and treated in my palace in a
"'I most ardently desire,' writes the King of Prussia to Bonaparte,

palace at Potsdam.
of the hand he breaks them to smithereens and installs himself in the
giving them time to finish the parade they had begun, and in two twists
and in his rude and savage way throws himself on the Prussians without
that 'the enemy of the human race' pays no heed to our fine speeches
us three times in three years. We take up their cause, but it turns out
Prussians. The Prussians are our faithful allies who have only betrayed
"I begin ab ovo. 'The enemy of the human race,' as you know, attacks the

I have seen during these last three months is incredible.
certainly acquired a taste for war, and it is just as well for me; what
"as you know, my dear prince, I never leave headquarters. I have
"Since the day of our brilliant success at Austerlitz," wrote Bilibin,

Preussisch-Eylau.
The letter was old, having been written before the battle at
had accumulated at the sight of all that was being done in the army.
Andrew a reliable correspondent to whom he could pour out the bile he
diplomatic discretion tormented him, and he was happy to have in Prince
self-derision genuinely Russian. Bilibin wrote that the obligation of
he described the whole campaign with a fearless self-censure and
though he wrote in French and used French jests and French idioms,
Bilibin was now at army headquarters in a diplomatic capacity, and


CHAPTER IX





thinking of so painfully to the exclusion of all else.
read only to forget, if but for a moment, what he had too long been
which was written in French. He read without understanding half of it,
fun at me.... Ah, well! Let him!" And he began reading Bilibin's letter
over Bonaparte, just when I'm not serving. Yes, yes, he's always poking
Andrew, recalling his father's letter. "Yes, we have gained a victory
"Ah yes, and what else did he say that's unpleasant?" thought Prince

Princess Mary was still standing by the cot, gently rocking the baby.

going to the door and looking into the nursery.
"No, pardon me, I won't go now till the child is better," thought he,

words: "Gallop off to Korchevo and carry out instructions!"
without reading it and reread his father's letter, ending with the
a closely written letter of two sheets from Bilibin. He folded it up
Prince Andrew sighed and broke the seal of another envelope. It was


off to Korchevo without delay and carry out instructions!
Buonaparte. He is said to be fleeing in great disorder. Mind you gallop
it's all true. When mischief-makers don't meddle even a German beats
about the Preussisch-Eylau battle from Petenka--he took part in it--and
off if everything is not here in a week. Have received another letter
have not arrived. Gallop off to him at once and say I'll have his head
certain Khandrikov--is up to; till now the additional men and provisions
congratulate him! I can't make out what the commander at Korchevo--a
the rewards sent to the army are innumerable. Though he is a German--I
over Buonaparte at Eylau. In Petersburg everyone is rejoicing, and
it's not false. Bennigsen seems to have obtained a complete victory
Have just this moment received by special messenger very joyful news--if


in his large elongated hand on blue paper as follows:
began reading. The old prince, now and then using abbreviations, wrote
He still had all the letters in his hand. Opening them mechanically he

down on a sofa in the next room.
hoarsely. Prince Andrew winced and, clutching his head, went out and sat
and calling the nurse began giving the medicine. The child screamed
Princess Mary shrugged her shoulders but took the glass submissively

"But I wish it," he said. "I beg you--give it him!"

and stooped glass in hand over the infant.
But he scowled at her angrily though also with suffering in his eyes,

"Andrew, don't!" said Princess Mary.

and again went up to the cot.
"Confound you and your Karl Ivanich!" He took the glass with the drops

Prince Andrew went up to the child and felt him. He was burning hot.

sigh.
sleep is more important than anything," whispered Princess Mary with a
"Still the same. Wait, for heaven's sake. Karl Ivanich always says that

"Well?" he asked.

father's letter, he returned to the nursery.
instructions his father had sent and taking the correspondence and his
"Devil take them!" he muttered, and after listening to the verbal

Prince Andrew went out.

"Petrusha has come with papers from your father," whispered the maid.

reproached and disputed with each other.
and anxiety they threw their burden of sorrow on one another and
been trying first one remedy and then another. Worn out by sleeplessness
doctor and expecting another for whom they had sent to town, they had
who was in a high fever. These last days, mistrusting their household
It was the second night that neither of them had slept, watching the boy

him in a whisper.
prevailed. She drew her brother's attention to the maid who was calling
Princess Mary, evidently intimidated and confused that her opinion had
"As you please... really... I think so... but as you please," said

"Perhaps we'd really better not wake him," he said hesitating.

in hand.
Prince Andrew got up and went on tiptoe up to the little bed, wineglass

the princess in a tone of entreaty.
"My dear, really... it's better not to wake him... he's asleep," said

whisper, evidently meaning to wound his sister.
off--and this is what comes of it!" said Prince Andrew in an exasperated
"Oh, leave off, you always talk nonsense and keep putting things

cot where she was standing, "better wait a bit... later..."
"My dear," said Princess Mary, addressing her brother from beside the

the cot.
table, screened by a bound music book so that the light did not fall on
sitting. The curtains were drawn, and a single candle was burning on the
table, a child's table, and the little chair on which Prince Andrew was
There were in the room a child's cot, two boxes, two armchairs, a

floor and asked for some more water. The maid brought it.
he poured too many drops into the glass. He threw the mixture onto the
"What is it?" he said crossly, and, his hand shaking unintentionally,

from a medicine bottle into a wineglass half full of water.
little chair while, frowning and with trembling hands, he poured drops
said one of the nursemaids to Prince Andrew who was sitting on a child's
"If you please, your excellency, Petrusha has brought some papers,"

was told that the prince had gone to the nursery.
letters to Princess Mary's apartments, but did not find him there. He
Not finding the young prince in his study the valet went with the

for Prince Andrew.
had driven the old prince to town returned bringing papers and letters
absence. Little Nicholas had been unwell for four days. The coachman who
Prince Andrew remained at Bald Hills as usual during his father's
On February 26, 1807, the old prince set off on one of his circuits.

secretly regretting this, saw only the dark side.
while Prince Andrew on the contrary, taking no part in the war and
roused by activity, expected the best results from the new campaign,
seemed to have changed roles since the campaign of 1805. The old man,
recruitment so as to avoid active service. The old prince and his son
and everybody had to serve, he took a post under his father in the
to continue his military service, and when the war recommenced
After the Austerlitz campaign Prince Andrew had firmly resolved not

his time there.
Prince Andrew made use of Bogucharovo, began building and spent most of
his father's peculiarities, and partly because he needed solitude,
partly because Prince Andrew did not always feel equal to bearing with
Partly because of the depressing memories associated with Bald Hills,
large estate, Bogucharovo, about twenty-five miles from Bald Hills.
Soon after Prince Andrew's return the old prince made over to him a

wife: "Ah, why have you done this to me?"
Andrew read the same mild reproach he had read on the face of his dead
expression the sculptor had happened to give the angel's face, Prince
though of this Prince Andrew said nothing to his sister, was that in the
them strangely of the little princess. But what was still stranger,
Princess Mary admitted to one another that the angel's face reminded
about to smile, and once on coming out of the chapel Prince Andrew and
fly upwards. The angel's upper lip was slightly raised as though
brought from Italy, representing an angel with outspread wings ready to
tomb of the little princess, and in this chapel was a marble monument
Near the altar of the church at Bald Hills there was a chapel over the

called her nephew--and playing with him.
to give her friend the pleasure of dandling the little angel--as she
passionately fond of the boy, and Princess Mary often deprived herself
little nephew as best she could. Mademoiselle Bourienne, too, seemed
spent most of the day in the nursery, taking a mother's place to her
nurse and nurse Savishna in the late princess' rooms and Princess Mary
grandfather called him). The baby Prince Nicholas lived with his wet
to his study with the wet nurse and little Prince Nicholas (as his
mathematics from her father, and when the old prince was at home went
minutest details himself. Princess Mary had ceased taking lessons in
to cruelty with his subordinates, and went into everything down to the
entrusted to him, was pedantic in the fulfillment of his duties, severe
and strength. He was continually traveling through the three provinces
himself, and this fresh opportunity for action gave him new energy
it right to refuse a duty to which he had been appointed by the Emperor
since the time when he thought his son had been killed, he did not think
Despite the weakness of age, which had become particularly noticeable
then appointed to supervise the enrollment decreed throughout Russia.
In 1806 the old prince was made one of the eight commanders in chief

Princess Mary had greatly changed since 1805.
interpreted. The life of old Prince Bolkonski, Prince Andrew, and
war came contradictory news, false as usual and therefore variously
recruits were being enrolled in the villages, and from the seat of
one heard curses on Bonaparte, "the enemy of mankind." Militiamen and
The war was flaming up and nearing the Russian frontier. Everywhere


CHAPTER VIII





countess' house.
During that stay in Petersburg, Boris became an intimate in the

the evening. You must come.... Come!"
whisper, with a strangely unsmiling face: "Come to dinner tomorrow... in
only as he kissed her hand on taking leave said unexpectedly and in a
come. There were other guests and the countess talked little to him, and
received no clear explanation of why it had been necessary for him to
But on Tuesday evening, having come to Helene's splendid salon, Boris

Tuesday.
seemed to promise to explain that necessity to him when he came on
Prussian army, Helene had suddenly found it necessary to see him. She
It seemed as if from some words Boris had spoken that evening about the

spoke of her exalted patroness, supported Helene's wish.
Anna Pavlovna, and Anna Pavlovna, with the same sad smile with which she
"It is of great importance to me," she said, turning with a smile toward

significant command to come to her on Tuesday.
the evening again turned to Boris, asking him in a tone of caressing
When everybody rose to go, Helene who had spoken very little all

"Will you bet? The ribbon of the order is a different matter...."

"It's impossible," replied another.

"There are precedents, I may mention Schwarzenberg."

distinction," said the diplomatist--"a gift, rather."
"Pardon me! A snuffbox with the Emperor's portrait is a reward but not a

distinction?"
"the man of profound intellect." "Why shouldn't S-- S-- get the same
"You know N-- N-- received a snuffbox with the portrait last year?" said

evening when the rewards bestowed by the Emperor were mentioned.
political news. It became particularly animated toward the end of the
The conversation did not flag all evening and turned chiefly on the

Oh, that wicked Prince Hippolyte!" she said.
"We are not fighting pour le Roi de Prusse, but for right principles.

shaking her little shriveled finger at him.
"Your joke is too bad, it's witty but unjust," said Anna Pavlovna,

laughed.
appreciative according to the way the joke was received. Everybody
Boris smiled circumspectly, so that it might be taken as ironical or

Prusse!"
get in) "I only wished to say that we are wrong to fight pour le Roi de
he had heard in Vienna and which he had been trying all that evening to
"Oh, it's nothing. I only wished to say..." (he wanted to repeat a joke

Hippolyte laughed as if ashamed of laughing.

"Come now, what about your Roi de Prusse?"

firmly.
Anna Pavlovna frowned. Mortemart, Hippolyte's friend, addressed him

more.
again, as soon as all turned toward him, excused himself and said no
Hippolyte interrupted her with the words: "Le Roi de Prusse..." and
"It is the sword of Frederick the Great which I..." she began, but

sword of Frederick the Great.
began to tell of how at Potsdam the impious Bonaparte had stolen the
for him to go on, but as he seemed quite decided to say no more she
then calmly and seriously sat back in his chair. Anna Pavlovna waited
"Le Roi de Prusse?" Hippolyte said interrogatively, again laughing, and

said this laughed. Everyone turned toward him.
Bending forward in his armchair he said: "Le Roi de Prusse!" and having

the ear of the company.
When Boris and Anna Pavlovna returned to the others Prince Hippolyte had


CHAPTER VII





don't! It is too painful for her!"
unfortunate and charming woman! Don't mention him before her--please
and indicating Helene with a sorrowful gesture. "Ah, she is such an
"You know her husband, of course?" said Anna Pavlovna, closing her eyes

aunt wished to hear him.
with her, when Anna Pavlovna called him away on the pretext that her
Boris promised to fulfill her wish and was about to begin a conversation

"On Tuesday between eight and nine. It will give me great pleasure."

absolutely necessary.
that, for certain considerations he could not know of, this was
"You absolutely must come and see me," she said in a tone that implied

her usual smile.
of the Prussian army. As soon as he had finished she turned to him with
questions about his journey and seemed greatly interested in the state
of all to Boris' narrative was shown by Helene. She asked him several
received with pleasure by all her visitors. The greatest attention
attention, and Anna Pavlovna felt that the novelty she had served up was
the facts he was recounting. For some time he engrossed the general
court, carefully abstaining from expressing an opinion of his own about
pure, correct French many interesting details about the armies and the
found the Prussian army. Boris, speaking with deliberation, told them in
Boris to tell them about his journey to Glogau and in what state he
Speaking of the position of Prussia, Anna Pavlovna very naturally asked

young aide-de-camp with a smile.
beautiful Helene, whose eyes several times met those of the handsome
but managed meanwhile to look round repeatedly at his neighbor, the
Boris listened attentively to each of the speakers, awaiting his turn,

of Prussia, in order to draw Boris into the conversation.
After that Anna Pavlovna led up to the courage and firmness of the King


    * "Europe will never be our sincere ally."


Frenchman), "L'Urope ne sera jamais notre alliee sincere." *
pronunciation which she could allow herself when conversing with a
reason she called it Urope as if that were a specially refined French
"Ah, my dear vicomte," put in Anna Pavlovna, "L'Urope" (for some

of such a thing, it is only the cabinet that says it."
Austria," said Mortemart. "The Emperor of Austria can never have thought
"We must distinguish between the Vienna cabinet and the Emperor of

subtle smile.
"The doubt is flattering," said "the man of profound intellect," with a

used by the Vienna cabinet," said the Danish charge d'affaires.
she doubts the means we have of gaining them. That is the actual phrase
not even a continuity of most brilliant successes would secure them, and
"Vienna considers the bases of the proposed treaty so unattainable that

conversation.
seat indicated to him beside the fair Helene and listened to the general
each of those present, and the advantages that might accrue. He took the
each face, appraising the possibilities of establishing intimacy with
use of whatever interest he had to offer. He himself carefully scanned
service, and he at once understood his role, letting his hostess make
Pavlovna's drawing room he considered an important step up in the
Rostovs since the day of his departure for the army. To be in Anna
for Natasha was unpleasant to him and he had not once been to see the
Moscow. The remembrance of the Rostovs' house and of his childish love
who could therefore be of use to him. He liked Petersburg and despised
and sought the acquaintance of only those above him in position and
in the streets of Petersburg in an old uniform. He made friends with
pleasures than allow himself to be seen in a shabby equipage or appear
be better dressed than others, and would rather deprive himself of many
completely altered. He was not rich, but would spend his last groat to
his relations with old friends, all his plans for his future, were
In consequence of this discovery his whole manner of life, all
success and at the inability of others to understand these things.
grant rewards, and he was himself often surprised at the rapidity of his
perseverance, but only the knowledge of how to get on with those who can
needed for success in the service was not effort or work, or courage, or
incomparably higher than a general, and according to which what was
been so pleased at Olmutz and according to which an ensign might rank
become thoroughly conversant with that unwritten code with which he had
Prussia, and had just returned from there as a special messenger. He had
very important personage, had been sent on a very important mission to
service to place himself very advantageously. He was aide-de-camp to a
peculiarities of his reserved nature, Boris had managed during his
Thanks to Anna Mikhaylovna's efforts, his own tastes, and the

great merit"--this of the man usually so described.
Copenhagen--a profound intellect," and simply, "Mr. Shitov--a man of
"Prince Hippolyte Kuragin, M. Krug, the charge d'affaires from

of each.
several persons whom he did not know, giving him a whispered description
Anna Pavlovna gave him her shriveled hand to kiss and introduced him to

then brought back to the general circle.
aide-de-camp and was duly conducted to pay his respects to the aunt and
entered the drawing room elegantly dressed in the uniform of an
Boris, grown more manly and looking fresh, rosy and self-possessed,

the hope of an alliance with her.
by Anna Pavlovna, was about our diplomatic relations with Austria and
room, almost all the company had assembled, and the conversation, guided
When Boris, who was to be served up to the guests, entered the drawing

George Dandin,' that's all we have to say about it!"
King of Prussia and others: 'So much the worse for you. Tu l'as voulu,
to express our sincere views on that subject, and can only say to the
mortification, our opinion of Bonaparte cannot alter. We shall not cease
Bonaparte, and to cause me, and us in general, annoyance and
"Whatever the European sovereigns and commanders may do to countenance

evening was this:
The temperature shown by the political thermometer to the company that

Prussian army and was aide-de-camp to a very important personage.
Boris Drubetskoy, who had just arrived as a special messenger from the
The novelty Anna Pavlovna was setting before her guests that evening was

several other less noteworthy persons.
beaucoup de merite), a newly appointed maid of honor and her mother, and
referred to in that drawing room as "a man of great merit" (un homme de
returned from Vienna, two diplomatists, the old aunt, a young man
husband, Mortemart, the delightful Prince Hippolyte who had just
good society" consisted of the fascinating Helene, forsaken by her
beginning, Anna Pavlovna gave one of her soirees. The "cream of really
had already entered Prussia and our second war with Napoleon was
of most of the Prussian fortresses had been received, when our troops
destruction of the Prussian army at Jena and Auerstadt and the surrender
Toward the end of 1806, when all the sad details of Napoleon's

dearly and distinctly indicated.
of the political thermometer of legitimate Petersburg court society so
interesting person to the visitors and that nowhere else was the state
also distinguished by the fact that she always presented some new and
this refined selection of society Anna Pavlovna's receptions were
intellectual essence of Petersburg," as she herself put it. Besides
was to be found "the cream of really good society, the bloom of the
soirees as before--such as she alone had the gift of arranging--at which
Anna Pavlovna continued to give on free evenings the same kind of

has happened."
it ended? I was against this marriage even then and foretold all that
remember, he posed as a sort of Marat at one of my soirees. And how has
about him, when he had just returned from abroad, and when, if you
these days. I said so even at the time when everybody was in raptures
"that that senseless young man was spoiled by the depraved ideas of
said at the time and before anyone else" (she insisted on her priority)
"I said from the first," declared Anna Pavlovna referring to Pierre, "I

"A bit touched--I always said so."

pointing to his forehead, remarked:
more openly. He shrugged his shoulders when Pierre was mentioned and,
was a cross laid upon her by God. Prince Vasili expressed his opinion
had resolved to endure her troubles uncomplainingly and that her husband
did not understand its significance. This expression suggested that she
expression, which with characteristic tact she had acquired though she
When conversation turned on her husband Helene assumed a dignified
cordially, but even with a shade of deference due to her misfortune.
to Petersburg, she was received by all her acquaintances not only
of bloodthirsty rage. And when after Pierre's departure Helene returned
he was said to be insanely jealous and subject like his father to fits
to court society's favor. Now he alone was blamed for what had happened,
to hope from him--especially as he did not know how, and did not wish,
marriage--when the marriageable daughters and their mothers had nothing
in Russia, had sunk greatly in the esteem of society after his
illegitimate son, and petted and extolled when he was the best match
who had been regarded with patronizing condescension when he was an
by Pierre's rupture with his wife, was the talk of society. Pierre
nor their seconds suffered for it. But the story of the duel, confirmed
Emperor's severity regarding duels at that time, neither the principals
The duel between Pierre and Dolokhov was hushed up and, in spite of the


CHAPTER VI





and promised to write to him and guide him in his new activity.
estates. His new brethren gave him letters to the Kiev and Odessa Masons
and leaving large sums of money with them for alms, went away to his
A week later, Pierre, having taken leave of his new friends, the Masons,

receiving any explanation.
"Go!" the quivering voice repeated. And Prince Vasili had to go without

"What's the matter with you? Are you ill?"

confusion and fear that showed itself on Prince Vasili's face.
"Go!" he repeated, amazed at himself and glad to see the look of

opened the door for him.
"Prince, I did not ask you here. Go, please go!" And he jumped up and

father, muttered in a whisper:
without looking at him, and with a kind of fury that made him like his
But before Prince Vasili had finished his playful speech, Pierre,

write to her myself, and we will kill the fatted calf."
"Now, dear boy," said Prince Vasili playfully, "say 'yes,' and I'll

new life.
him by the Masons, on which he firmly believed he would be reborn to a
would follow the same old road, or that new path so attractively shown
he also felt that on what he said now his future depended--whether he
self-assurance that he felt he would be unable to withstand it now, but
expect. He was so used to submitting to Prince Vasili's tone of careless
to a man's face, to say what the other, whoever he might be, did not
for him the most difficult thing in life--to say an unpleasant thing
red, got up and sat down again, struggling with himself to do what was
statutes, "be kindly and courteous," recurred to him. He blinked, went
resolved to answer his father-in-law. Moreover, the words of the Masonic
in the tone of decided refusal and disagreement in which he had firmly
not let him and, on the other, Pierre himself feared to begin to speak
Pierre tried several times to speak, but, on one hand, Prince Vasili did

interest in the whole affair. You know she is very gracious to Helene."
"I know from reliable sources that the Dowager Empress is taking a keen

Prince Vasili gave Pierre a significant look.

tell you it's quite likely you'll have to suffer for it."
she'll come here and all will be explained, or else, my dear boy, let me
expect you feel it so yourself. Let us write her a letter at once, and
and he drew Pierre's arm downwards, "it is simply a misunderstanding. I
voice. "She is living in Moscow and you are here. Remember, dear boy,"
in the eyes of society, and even of the court," he added, lowering his
that. But consider the position in which you are placing her and me
a man who values his honor, perhaps too hastily, but we won't go into
all about it and understand it all," he said. "You behaved as becomes
"And why didn't you simply come straight to me as to a friend? I know

Pierre was about to reply, but Prince Vasili interrupted him.

the Jews."
positively that Helene is as innocent before you as Christ was before
Prince Vasili, as he entered. "I know all about it, and I can tell you
quarreled with Helene, mon cher? You are under a delusion," said
"My dear fellow, what have you been up to in Moscow? Why have you

the room.
was joyfully planning this new life, when Prince Vasili suddenly entered
estates in the south and there attending to the welfare of his serfs. He
would be wiser for him to leave Petersburg. Pierre proposed going to his
had heard that a rumor of his duel had reached the Emperor and that it
imagination a new plan of life. On the previous evening at the Lodge, he
his attention wandered from the book and the Square and he formed in
physical things, and the fourth a combination of these. Now and then
one side of which symbolized God, another moral things, a third
home reading a book and trying to fathom the significance of the Square,
The day after he had been received into the Lodge, Pierre was sitting at


CHAPTER V





and way of life.
become completely changed, and had quite left behind his former habits
returned from a long journey on which he had spent dozens of years, had
The meeting was at an end, and on reaching home Pierre felt as if he had

amount as the others.
he had, but fearing that it might look like pride subscribed the same
went round to all the brothers. Pierre would have liked to subscribe all
the distinguished dignitary who bore the title of "Collector of Alms"
The Grand Master proposed that the last duty should be performed, and

humility.
their places, and one of them read an exhortation on the necessity of
The Grand Master rapped with his mallet. All the Masons sat down in

brothers, and burned with impatience to set to work with them.
sides. He acknowledged no acquaintances but saw in all these men only
congratulations and greetings from acquaintances that met him on all
of joy in his eyes, looked round him, not knowing how to answer the
He finished and, getting up, embraced and kissed Pierre, who, with tears

thou hast lost."
the highest law thou shalt regain traces of the ancient dignity which
enemy, do not avenge thyself except by doing him good. Thus fulfilling
neighbor, and may envy never dim the purity of that bliss. Forgive thy
Kindle in all hearts the flame of virtue. Share thy happiness with thy
bear malice or enmity toward thy brother. Be kindly and courteous.
he may be, exhort him who goeth astray, raise him that falleth, never
distinctions which may infringe equality. Fly to a brother's aid whoever
Master, "but those between virtue and vice. Beware of making any
"In our temples we recognize no other distinctions," read the Grand

of the statutes and these remained in his mind.
understand what was being read. He managed to follow only the last words
Pierre, from joy, agitation, and embarrassment, was not in a state to
The Grand Master began reading the statutes. They were very long, and
the Lodge, told the password, and at last was permitted to sit down.
so on. Then a place was assigned to Pierre, he was shown the signs of
trowel, a rough stone and a squared stone, a pillar, three windows, and
all the figures on it: the sun, the moon, a hammer, a plumb line, a
rug and began reading to him from a manuscript book an explanation of
This silence was broken by one of the brethren, who led Pierre up to the

looking about him uneasily, and an awkward pause followed.
confused, blushed like a child till tears came to his eyes, began
to Pierre that he grew embarrassed. Pierre himself grew still more
unclean." While the Grand Master said these last words it seemed
beware, dear brother, that these gloves do not deck hands that are
be your worthy helpmeet in Masonry." And after a pause, he added: "But
gift will be a pledge of your purity of heart to her whom you select to
you too. Give them to the woman whom you shall honor most of all. This
gloves, he said: "Dear brother, these woman's gloves are intended for
to wear at the meetings, and finally of the third, a pair of women's
meaning but must keep them. The second pair of man's gloves he was
first pair of gloves, a man's, he said that Pierre could not know their
and indulgently to smooth with it the heart of his neighbor. As to the
trowel, he told him to toil with it to cleanse his own heart from vice,
apron, which symbolized strength and purity; then of the unexplained
told him that he should try to do nothing to stain the whiteness of that
and three pairs of gloves, and then the Grand Master addressed him. He
apron, such as the others wore, was put on him: he was given a trowel
he had lain there some time, he was told to get up, and a white leather
feeling of devotion returned to him even more strongly than before. When
prostrated himself before the Gates of the Temple. And really, the
at his hesitation and, trying to arouse his former devotional feeling,
through, and realized that he could not stop halfway. He was aghast
serious faces of those around, remembered all he had already gone
this?" But these doubts only lasted a moment. Pierre glanced at the
I doing? Aren't they laughing at me? Shan't I be ashamed to remember
obeying, and suddenly doubts arose in his mind. "Where am I? What am
Pierre, perplexed, looked round with his shortsighted eyes without

"Oh, hush, please!" said another.

"He must first receive the trowel," whispered one of the brothers.

must prostrate himself at the Gates of the Temple.
placed his feet at right angles, and bade him lie down, saying that he
those used in churches. Two of the brothers led Pierre up to the altar,
Testament and a skull. Round it stood seven large candlesticks like
it, at the other was something resembling an altar on which lay a
side of the table was a small carpet with various figures worked upon
mallet in his hand. Let into the wall was a star-shaped light. At one
a solemn silence, listening to the words of the President, who held a
and a Swiss who had formerly been tutor at the Kuragins'. All maintained
two years before. There were also present a very distinguished dignitary
On his right sat the Italian abbe whom Pierre had met at Anna Pavlovna's
young man he did not know, with a peculiar cross hanging from his neck.
Pierre had met in Petersburg society. In the President's chair sat a
twelve men in garments like those he had already seen. Some of them
and at the people in it. Round a long table covered with black sat some
Pierre gradually began to recover himself and looked about at the room

gloria mundi."
was again removed and more than ten voices said together: "Sic transit
were relit and he was told that he would see the full light; the bandage
"Now thou hast seen the lesser light," uttered a voice. Then the candles

again.
But the swords were drawn back from him and he was at once blindfolded
forward with his breast toward the swords, meaning them to pierce it.
whose white shirt was stained with blood. On seeing this, Pierre moved
swords in their hands pointed at his breast. Among them stood a man
men standing before him, wearing aprons like the Rhetor's and holding
faint light of the burning spirit, Pierre, as in a dream, saw several
see the lesser light. The bandage was taken off his eyes and, by the
lighted, as Pierre knew by the smell, and he was told that he would now
laws of the Order. The candles were then extinguished and some spirit
and to repeat after someone who read aloud an oath of fidelity to the
him to hold a pair of compasses to his left breast with the other hand
After that they took his right hand, placed it on something, and told
and one of them insisting that he should be led along a certain carpet.
among his conductors. He heard those around him disputing in whispers
was being led up to some object he noticed a hesitation and uncertainty
to the accompaniment of various knockings with mallets and swords. As he
now as the "Seeker," now as the "Sufferer," and now as the "Postulant,"
dangers. During these wanderings, Pierre noticed that he was spoken of
universe, and of the courage with which he should endure toils and
pilgrimage, of holy friendship, of the Eternal Architect of the
and as they went along he was told allegories of the toils of his
born, and so on. Then he was again led somewhere still blindfolded,
blindfolded) questioned him as to who he was, when and where he was
mallets, the doors opened before them. A bass voice (Pierre was still
Lodge. Willarski coughed, he was answered by the Masonic knock with
backwards and forwards and was at last brought to the doors of the
bare chest. He was conducted from that room along passages that turned
one booted foot, he advanced, while Willarski held a sword to his
fat chest uncovered, stepping unevenly and timidly in one slippered and
replied: "Yes, yes, I agree," and with a beaming, childlike smile, his
voice. To fresh questions as to the firmness of his resolution Pierre
the Rhetor but Pierre's sponsor, Willarski, whom he recognized by his
Soon after this there came into the dark chamber to fetch Pierre, not


CHAPTER IV





of blessedness which now flooded his heart with glad emotion.
Pierre had already long been feeling in himself that refreshing source

within...."
in your own heart. The source of blessedness is not without us but
put a bridle on your senses, and seek blessedness, not in passion but
"For the last time I say to you--turn all your attention upon yourself,

on the table, again bound his eyes.
answer. At last he moved up to Pierre and, taking the kerchief that lay
The Mason did not move and for a long time said nothing after this

"Women," he said in a low, scarcely audible voice.

the pre-eminence.
went over his vices in his mind, not knowing to which of them to give
"Wine? Gluttony? Idleness? Laziness? Irritability? Anger? Women?" He

Pierre paused, seeking a reply.

of virtue," said the Mason.
"That passion which more than all others caused you to waver on the path

"My passion! I have had so many," replied Pierre.

passion," said the latter.
"And now, in token of candor, I ask you to reveal to me your chief

brother Rhetor, and awaited his further commands.
Pierre stood with his arms hanging down and legs apart, before his
doubt, and self-derision, which appeared on his face against his will,
a slipper for his left foot. With a childlike smile of embarrassment,
trouble, but the Mason told him that was not necessary and gave him
and was going to tuck up the other trouser leg to save this stranger the
above the knee. Pierre hurriedly began taking off his right boot also
breast, and stooping down pulled up the left leg of his trousers to
Rhetor's instructions. The Mason drew the shirt back from Pierre's left
Pierre took off his coat, waistcoat, and left boot according to the

"In token of obedience, I ask you to undress."

done, the Rhetor said:
some time to get the wedding ring off his fat finger. When that had been
Pierre quickly took out his purse and watch, but could not manage for

"What you have with you: watch, money, rings...."

to give up all he possessed.
"But I have nothing here," replied Pierre, supposing that he was asked

all your valuables."
coming closer to Pierre. "In token of generosity I ask you to give me
"If you are resolved, I must begin your initiation," said the Rhetor

ordeal was about to begin.
listened to the Rhetor in silence, feeling from all he said that his
Pierre knew very well what a hieroglyph was, but dared not speak. He

which possesses qualities resembling those of the symbol."
Rhetor, "is an emblem of something not cognizable by the senses but
explained their teaching by hieroglyphics. A hieroglyph," said the
method of enlightenment. Our Order imitates the ancient societies that
do. You will perhaps also see in your further initiation a like
have suggested to your heart, if it is sincere, more than words could
than mere words. This chamber with what you see therein should already
have a stronger effect on the sincere seeker after wisdom and virtue
teaching not in words only but also by other means, which may perhaps
"I must also inform you," said the Rhetor, "that our Order delivers its

"I am ready for everything," said Pierre.

all that would be required of him.
whether he was still firm in his intention and determined to submit to
The third time the Rhetor came back more quickly and asked Pierre

virtue was and could not recall it.
to those who knew the indubitable truth.) He forgot what the seventh
felt so glad to be free from his own lawlessness and to submit his will
obedience--which did not even seem to him a virtue, but a joy. (He now
soul: courage, generosity, morality, love of mankind, and especially
Pierre recalled, counting them on his fingers, he felt already in his
now gradually opening before me." But five of the other virtues which
but I am still so weak that I love my life, the meaning of which is only
Rhetor went away, leaving him to solitary meditation. "It must be so,
"Yes, that must be so," thought Pierre, when after these words the

peace."
from this distressful life, and leads it to its place of recompense and
as a friend that frees the soul grown weary in the labors of virtue
Rhetor said, "to bring yourself to regard it not as a dreaded foe, but
"In the seventh place, try, by the frequent thought of death," the

5. Courage. 6. Generosity. 7. The love of death.
those of higher ranks in the Order.  3. Morality.  4. Love of mankind.
1. Discretion, the keeping of the secrets of the Order. 2. Obedience to
which every Freemason should cultivate in himself. These virtues were:
seven virtues, corresponding to the seven steps of Solomon's temple,
Half an hour later, the Rhetor returned to inform the seeker of the

that was good.
was already perfectly cured of his former faults and was ready for all
much interest him because at that moment he felt with delight that he
and the second aim, that of purifying and regenerating himself, did not
Rhetor, though it aroused his curiosity, did not seem to him essential,
especially appealed to Pierre. The important mystery mentioned by the
objects mentioned by the Rhetor, this last, that of improving mankind,
imagined oppressors whose victims he would rescue. Of the three
vicious and unfortunate people whom he would assist by word and deed,
addressed an edifying exhortation to them. He imagined to himself
He imagined men such as he had himself been a fortnight ago, and he
mental image of his future activity in this direction rose in his mind.
"To combat the evil which sways the world..." Pierre repeated, and a

sways the world. Think this over and I will come to you again."
and virtue, and thereby try with all our might to combat the evil which
the whole human race, offering it in our members an example of piety
"By purifying and regenerating our members we try, thirdly, to improve

it.
to attain this mystery, and thereby to render them capable of receiving
minds, by means handed on to us by tradition from those who have striven
much as possible to reform their hearts, to purify and enlighten their
quickly. Hence we have a secondary aim, that of preparing our members as
long and diligent self-purification, not everyone can hope to attain it
such a nature that nobody can know or use it unless he be prepared by
which perhaps the fate of mankind depends. But since this mystery is of
down to us from the remotest ages, even from the first man--a mystery on
handing on to posterity of a certain important mystery... which has come
it rests and which no human power can destroy, is the preservation and
profit. The first and chief object of our Order, the foundation on which
if this aim coincides with yours, you may enter our Brotherhood with
"Now I must disclose to you the chief aim of our Order," he said, "and

and began to speak.
The Rhetor cleared his throat, crossed his gloved hands on his breast,

"Yes, yes," assented Pierre.

after a moment's pause.
therefore you seek wisdom and virtue. Is that not so?" said the Rhetor,
"You are seeking for truth in order to follow its laws in your life,

saying. "I have been an atheist," answered Pierre.
so softly that the Rhetor did not hear him and asked him what he was
"No, I considered it erroneous and did not follow it," said Pierre,

"Have you sought for means of attaining your aim in religion?"
"Good!" said the Rhetor quickly, apparently satisfied with this answer.

his words for the solemnity of the moment, as he spoke. "I imagine..."
have virtuous aims," said Pierre, feeling ashamed of the inadequacy of
"I imagine that Freemasonry is the fraternity and equality of men who

"What is your conception of Freemasonry?"

Russian.
excitement and to being unaccustomed to speak of abstract matters in
with a trembling voice and some difficulty in utterance due to his
"I... hope... for guidance... help... in regeneration," said Pierre,

said he quietly and quickly.
of the means by which our holy Order will help you to reach your aim?"
"Very well," said Smolyaninov, and went on at once: "Have you any idea

"Yes... I... I... desire regeneration," Pierre uttered with difficulty.

repeat his question.
For a long time he could not utter a word, so that the Rhetor had to
acquaintance--he wished him simply a brother and a virtuous instructor.
Smolyaninov, and it mortified him to think that the newcomer was an
known). Drawing nearer, he recognized in the Rhetor a man he knew,
brother who prepared a seeker for entrance into the Brotherhood was
breath and beating heart he moved toward the Rhetor (by which name the
stranger, yet nearer to him through the brotherhood of man. With bated
confession; he felt himself in the presence of one socially a complete
sense of awe and veneration such as he had experienced in his boyhood at
At the moment the door opened and the stranger came in, Pierre felt a

come here? What do you seek from us? Wisdom, virtue, enlightenment?"
not believe in the truth of the light and who have not seen the light,
direction at a slight rustle made by the latter. "Why have you, who do
"For what have you come hither?" asked the newcomer, turning in Pierre's

below.
white ruffle, outlining his rather long face which was lit up from
part of his legs; he had on a kind of necklace above which rose a high
This short man had on a white leather apron which covered his chest and

table and placed on it his small leather-gloved hands.
darkness, the man paused, then moved with cautious steps toward the
saw rather short man. Having evidently come from the light into the
By the dim light, to which Pierre had already become accustomed, he

someone came in.
associating these words with vague yet joyful ideas. The door opened and
death, love, the brotherhood of man," he kept saying to himself,
even more. Trying to stimulate his emotions he looked around. "God,
coffin, the Gospel--it seemed to him that he had expected all this and
to be unusual, even more unusual than what he was seeing. A skull, a
an entirely new life quite unlike the old one, he expected everything
inside. He was not at all surprised by what he saw. Hoping to enter on
saw a large open box filled with something. It was a coffin with bones
was the Word and the Word was with God," Pierre went round the table and
teeth. After reading the first words of the Gospel: "In the beginning
white thing with the lamp inside was a human skull with its cavities and
black table on which lay an open book. The book was the Gospel, and the
something white. Pierre went nearer and saw that the lamp stood on a
The room was in black darkness, only a small lamp was burning inside
the door. Pierre took the bandage off his eyes and glanced around him.
been dreaming since he met Joseph Alexeevich. Loud knocks were heard at
path of regeneration and on the actively virtuous life of which he had
felt joyful that the moment had come when he would at last start on that
going to happen and what would be revealed to him; but most of all, he
still more afraid of showing his fear. He felt curious to know what was
most complex sensations. He felt afraid of what would happen to him and
way, it seemed to him that he was tired out. He experienced a variety of
bandaged seemed to him an hour. His arms felt numb, his legs almost gave
it off, but let it drop again. The five minutes spent with his eyes
shrugged his and raised his hand to the kerchief, as if wishing to take
Left alone, Pierre went on smiling in the same way. Once or twice he

pressing Pierre's hand, he went out.
your eyes," added Willarski. "I wish you courage and success," and,
affirmatively.) "When you hear a knock at the door, you will uncover
if you have firmly resolved to join our Brotherhood." (Pierre nodded
"Whatever happens to you," he said, "you must bear it all manfully

Having led him about ten paces, Willarski stopped.

smiling face, moved after Willarski with uncertain, timid steps.
His huge figure, with arms hanging down and with a puckered, though
Pierre and there were lines of pain on his face and a shamefaced smile.
taking him by the hand led him forward. The hairs tied in the knot hurt
painfully in the knot. Then he drew his face down, kissed him, and
Pierre's eyes with it and tied it in a knot behind, catching some hairs
before. Having taken a kerchief from the cupboard, Willarski bound
wardrobe in which Pierre noticed garments such as he had never seen
something to him in French in an undertone and then went up to a small
attire appeared at the door. Willarski, stepping toward him, said
a servant. From there they passed into another room. A man in strange
well-lit anteroom where they took off their cloaks without the aid of
headquarters, and having ascended a dark staircase, they entered a small
Having entered the courtyard of a large house where the Lodge had its

tell the truth.
brothers more worthy than he would test him and that Pierre had only to
what he must do and how he should answer, Willarski only replied that
Willarski was silent throughout the drive. To Pierre's inquiries as to

service."
"In that case we can go," said Willarski. "My carriage is at your

"Yes, I do believe in God," he repeated.

"In that case..." began Willarski, but Pierre interrupted him.

"Yes... yes, I believe in God," he said.

Pierre considered.

renounced your former convictions--do you believe in God?"
all sincerity--not as a future Mason but as an honest man: have you
"One more question, Count," he said, "which I beg you to answer in

Willarski bowed his head.

"Yes, I do wish it," said he.

surprised Pierre.
at balls, amiably smiling in the society of the most brilliant women,
The cold, austere tone of this man, whom he had almost always before met

Brotherhood of Freemasons under my sponsorship?"
sacred duty to fulfill that person's wishes. Do you wish to enter the
term and has proposed to me to be your sponsor. I consider it a
made application for you to be received into our Order before the usual
sitting down. "A person of very high standing in our Brotherhood has
"I have come to you with a message and an offer, Count," he said without

Pierre.
satisfied himself that there was nobody else in the room, addressed
second had called on him, and, having closed the door behind him and
one evening in the official and ceremonious manner in which Dolokhov's
Pierre had known slightly in Petersburg society, came into his room
him. A week after his arrival, the young Polish count, Willarski, whom
active brotherly love among men, which Joseph Alexeevich had revealed to
in the possibility of attaining perfection, and in the possibility of
as he read that book: the joy, hitherto unknown to him, of believing
had been sent him by someone unknown. One thing he continually realized
went nowhere and spent whole days in reading Thomas a Kempis, whose book
On reaching Petersburg Pierre did not let anyone know of his arrival, he


CHAPTER III





Freemasonry presented itself to him.
of supporting one another in the path of virtue, and that is how
in the possibility of the brotherhood of men united in the aim
a trace of his former doubts remained in his soul. He firmly believed
only because he had somehow forgotten how good it is to be virtuous. Not
that seemed to him so easy. It seemed to him that he had been vicious
anew pictured to himself the blissful, irreproachable, virtuous future
pondering over his vicious past, and with a rapturous sense of beginning
Pierre did not go to bed or order horses but paced up and down the room,
Martinists, even in Novikov's time. For a long while after he had gone,
postmaster's book. Bazdeev had been one of the best-known Freemasons and
The traveler was Joseph Alexeevich Bazdeev, as Pierre saw from the

added, seeing that his servant had entered... "and success."
former way of life. And now I wish you a good journey, my dear sir," he
devote some time to solitude and self-examination and do not resume your
to give you a piece of advice. When you reach the capital, first of all
wrote a few words on a large sheet of paper folded in four). "Allow me
Petersburg. Hand this to Count Willarski" (he took out his notebook and
our Order can bestow it will render you, my dear sir. You are going to
"Help comes from God alone," he said, "but such measure of help as

The Mason remained silent for a long time, evidently considering.

Pierre could not go on. He gulped and turned away.

perhaps I may..."
I, above all, who am to blame for everything. Help me, teach me, and
would have me be, but I have never had help from anyone.... But it is
not suppose me to be so bad. With my whole soul I wish to be what you
hesitating voice. "I thank you. I agree with all you have said. But do
"I?... I'm going to Petersburg," answered Pierre, in a childlike,

"Where are you going to now, my dear sir?"

said in a tone of indifferent politeness:
fastening his coat. When he had finished, he turned to Bezukhov, and
traveler, having packed his things with his practiced hands, began
Pierre wished to say this to the Mason, but did not dare to. The

could disclose it to me."
thought Pierre. "But this man knows the truth and, if he wished to,
and profligate life, though I did not like it and did not want to,"
the Mason. "Yes, I never thought of it, but I have led a contemptible
downcast head; and he began to pace the room, glancing occasionally at
all, and without promising to help me?" thought Pierre, rising with
"Can he really be going away leaving me alone without having told me

"No, tell them to harness."

not rest here?"
"The exchange horses have just come," answered the servant. "Will you

"How about the horses?" he asked, without looking at Pierre.

servant.
The Mason cleared his throat huskily, as old men do, and called his

vicious life!" but dared not break the silence.
his lips without uttering a sound. He wished to say, "Yes, a vile, idle,
looked at that aged, stern, motionless, almost lifeless face and moved
leaned his arms on the back of the sofa and closed his eyes. Pierre
After these words, the Mason, as if tired by his long discourse, again

God and hate your life. There is nothing strange in that, my dear sir!"
misery. A man offended you and you shot him, and you say you do not know
of truth, my dear sir, but have thrust her into an abyss of deceit and
woman; and what have you done? You have not helped her to find the way
my dear sir--took on yourself responsibility for the guidance of a young
neighbor? No! You have spent your life in idleness. Then you married,
done. Have you chosen a post in which you might be of service to your
profited by their toil to lead a profligate life. That is what you have
of slaves? Have you helped them physically and morally? No! You have
for your neighbor? Have you ever thought of your tens of thousands
the possessor of wealth. How have you used it? What have you done
everything from society and giving nothing in return. You have become
How have you spent it? In riotous orgies and debauchery, receiving
purified, thou wilt gain wisdom. Look at your life, my dear sir.
"Thou hatest it. Then change it, purify thyself; and as thou art

"No, I hate my life," Pierre muttered, wincing.

good gifts? Are you content with yourself and with your life?"
are clever, you are well educated. And what have you done with all these
relying on reason only? What art thou? You are young, you are rich, you
thyself whether thou art content with thyself. What hast thou attained
"Look then at thy inner self with the eyes of the spirit, and ask

"Yes, yes," assented Pierre.

God has implanted in our souls."
self. And to attain this end, we have the light called conscience that
so before one can know, it is necessary to believe and to perfect one's
that science it is necessary to purify and renew one's inner self, and
science explaining the whole creation and man's place in it. To receive
highest wisdom has but one science--the science of the whole--the
intellectual knowledge is divided. The highest wisdom is one. The
sciences of physics, history, chemistry, and the like, into which
"The highest wisdom is not founded on reason alone, not on those worldly

"Yes, yes, that is so," said Pierre joyfully.

retain in some degree of purity the liquid I receive."
and judge of its purity? Only by the inner purification of myself can I
imbibe," he said. "Can I receive that pure liquid into an impure vessel
"The highest wisdom and truth are like the purest liquid we may wish to

The Mason smiled with his gentle fatherly smile.

attain the knowledge of which you speak."
"I don't understand," he said, "how it is that the mind of man cannot
the Mason's arguments; he dreaded not to be able to believe in him.
reawakening. He was afraid of any want of clearness, any weakness, in
"I do not understand," said Pierre, feeling with dismay doubts

"He is not to be apprehended by reason, but by life," said the Mason.

and return to life.
and he did believe, and felt a joyful sense of comfort, regeneration,
hopelessness)--at any rate, Pierre longed with his whole soul to believe
which struck Pierre especially by contrast with his own dejection and
and certainty of his vocation, which radiated from his whole being (and
brilliant aged eyes grown old in this conviction, or the calm firmness
tremor of the speaker's voice--which sometimes almost broke--or those
believes, in the speaker's tone of conviction and earnestness, or the
reasoning contained in the Mason's words, or believed as a child
his whole soul what the stranger said. Whether he accepted the wise
shining eyes, not interrupting or questioning him, but believing with
Pierre listened with swelling heart, gazing into the Mason's face with

greatness...."
in our lack of understanding we see only our weakness and His
attain that knowledge and are still infinitely far from our aim; but
hard.... For ages, from our forefather Adam to our own day, we labor to
its use, he does not believe in the master who made it. To know Him is
skillfully made watch, dares to say that, as he does not understand
unreasonable than a little child, who, playing with the parts of a
on, with a somber and scornful smile. "And thou art more foolish and
wise because thou couldst utter those blasphemous words," he went
sinfulness?" He paused again. "Who art thou? Thou dreamest that thou art
see or understand Him and may not see or understand his own vileness and
all His mercy to one who is blind, or who shuts his eyes that he may not
can I, an insignificant mortal, show His omnipotence, His infinity, and
him to thee, could take him by the hand and show him to thee. But how
still. "If it were a man whose existence thou didst doubt I could bring
of his book with his old hands which from excitement he could not keep
looking not at Pierre but straight before him, and turning the leaves
"He exists, but to understand Him is hard," the Mason began again,

Pierre could not and did not wish to break this silence.

He stopped and remained silent for a long time.

infinite in all His attributes?..."
of such an incomprehensible Being, a Being all-powerful, eternal, and
thou, and why did the whole world, conceive the idea of the existence
conception of the existence of such an incomprehensible Being? didst
his voice. "Who invented Him, if He did not exist? Whence came thy
denied?" he suddenly asked with exulting austerity and authority in
of Him, my dear sir. Of what, of whom, are we speaking? Whom hast thou
"If He were not," he said quietly, "you and I would not be speaking

He paused and sighed, evidently trying to calm himself.

the Mason in a stern and tremulous voice.
and even in those blasphemous words thou hast just uttered!" pronounced
know Him, but He is here, He is in me, He is in my words, He is in thee,
"You know Him not, my dear sir, and so you are very unhappy. You do not

"Yes, yes, I am unhappy," assented Pierre. "But what am I to do?"

know Him. You do not know Him and that is why you are unhappy."
"Yes, you do not know Him, my dear sir," said the Mason. "You cannot

man, had not the five rubles that would make him happy.
millions in hand might smile at a poor fellow who told him that he, poor
The Mason looked intently at Pierre and smiled as a rich man with

speak the whole truth.
said Pierre, regretfully and with an effort, feeling it essential to
"I ought to tell you that I do not believe... do not believe in God,"

worthy dwelling place of the Great God," he added, and closed his eyes.
forefather Adam to our own times, is that temple reared which is to be a
with the cooperation of all, by the millions of generations from our
"No one can attain to truth by himself. Only by laying stone on stone
whose words struck Pierre more and more by their precision and firmness.
"I should never dare to say that I know the truth," said the Mason,

smile.
"Just as I may suppose you to be deluded," said Pierre, with a faint

regrettable delusion."
had not known it I should not have addressed you. Your view of life is a
of pride, indolence, and ignorance. Forgive me, my dear sir, but if I
is the one held by the majority of people, and is the invariable fruit
mention, and which you think is the result of your own mental efforts,
"I know your outlook," said the Mason, "and the view of life you

world is so opposed to yours that we shall not understand one another."
understanding--how am I to put it?--I am afraid my way of looking at the
of ridiculing the Masonic beliefs--"I am afraid I am very far from
the personality of the Freemason inspired in him and his own habit
"I am afraid," said Pierre, smiling, and wavering between the confidence

own I hold out a brotherly hand to you."
looking deeper and deeper into Pierre's eyes. "And in their name and my
"Yes, I belong to the Brotherhood of the Freemasons," said the stranger,

"Allow me to ask," he said, "are you a Mason?"

he looked more closely at the ring, with its skull--a Masonic sign.
acquaintance," said Pierre. And again, glancing at the stranger's hands,
"Oh no, not at all! On the contrary, I am very glad to make your

tenderly paternal way.
man, "say so, my dear sir." And he suddenly smiled, in an unexpected and
"But if for reason you don't feel inclined to talk to me," said the old

irresistibly attractive to Pierre.
in spite of this, both the face and words of his new acquaintance were
The stranger's face was not genial, it was even cold and severe, but

Where are you traveling from?"
"Oh, yes!" said Pierre, with a forced smile. "I am very grateful to you.

and I am old. I should like to help you as far as lies in my power."
"You are unhappy, my dear sir," the stranger continued. "You are young

involuntarily, came up and sat down beside him.
to enter into conversation with this old man, but, submitting to him
of inviting the other to take a seat beside him. Pierre felt reluctant
He paused, his gaze still on Pierre, and moved aside on the sofa by way

greater reasons."
"I have not referred to this out of curiosity, my dear sir, but for

forward toward the old man with a forced and timid smile.
Pierre flushed and, hurriedly putting his legs down from the bed, bent

Moscow was a misfortune."--"I regret it very much, my dear sir."
misfortune! Call it what you please, I know that what happened to you in
misfortune." He seemed to emphasize the last word, as if to say--"Yes,
"I have heard of you, my dear sir," continued the stranger, "and of your

Pierre looked silently and inquiringly at him over his spectacles.

mistaken," said the stranger in a deliberate and loud voice.
"I have the pleasure of addressing Count Bezukhov, if I am not


CHAPTER II





eyes attracted him irresistibly.
Pierre felt confused and wished to avoid that look, but the bright old

severe gaze straight on Pierre's face.
to turn away when the old man, opening his eyes, fixed his steady and
position with his eyes shut. Pierre looked at him and had not time
leaning with his arms on the back of the sofa, sat in his former
once the stranger closed the book, putting in a marker, and again,
and the traveler became absorbed in it. Pierre looked at him. All at
The servant handed him a book which Pierre took to be a devotional work,

"No. Give me the book," said the stranger.


    * To indicate he did not want more tea.


wanted.
unfinished bit of nibbled sugar, and asked if anything more would be
The servant brought back his tumbler turned upside down, * with an

stranger.
need, even the inevitability, of entering into conversation with this
he passed it. Pierre began to feel a sense of uneasiness, and the
tumbler with tea for himself and one for the beardless old man to whom
ready, the stranger opened his eyes, moved to the table, filled a
preparing tea. He brought in a boiling samovar. When everything was
This active old servant was unpacking the traveler's canteen and
evidently not because he was shaven but because they had never grown.
was also a yellow, wrinkled old man, without beard or mustache,
it seemed to Pierre, sunk in profound and calm meditation. His servant
death's head. The stranger sat without stirring, either resting or, as
them Pierre noticed a large cast iron ring with a seal representing a
eyes. His shriveled old hands were folded and on the finger of one of
mind to ask him a question about the roads, the traveler had closed his
felt a wish to speak to the stranger, but by the time he had made up his
stern, shrewd, and penetrating expression of that look struck Pierre. He
its broad temples and close-cropped hair, and looked at Bezukhov. The
coat, the traveler sat down on the sofa, leaned back his big head with
on his thin bony legs, and keeping on a worn, nankeen-covered, sheepskin
aid of his servant, and not looking at Pierre. With a pair of felt boots
with a gloomy and tired face, was wearily taking off his wraps with the
had been got ready for him, glancing now and then at the newcomer, who,
Pierre took his feet off the table, stood up, and lay down on a bed that

grayish color.
man, with gray bushy eyebrows overhanging bright eyes of an indefinite
The newcomer was a short, large-boned, yellow-faced, wrinkled old

traveler, also detained for lack of horses.
gentleman," said the postmaster, entering the room followed by another
"I make bold to ask your excellency to move a little for this

found a kind of tantalizing satisfaction.
repellent. Yet in this very repugnance to all his circumstances Pierre
Everything within and around him seemed confused, senseless, and

is that we know nothing. And that's the height of human wisdom."
out, nothing discovered," Pierre again said to himself. "All we can know
was--did not struggle, and perhaps she was right. Nothing has been found
her heart an impulse that was against His will. My wife--as she once
seducer when she loved him?" he thought. "God could not have put into
struggles of a certain Emilie de Mansfeld. "And why did she resist her
Madame de Souza. He began reading about the sufferings and virtuous
His servant handed him a half-cut novel, in the form of letters, by

uselessly in the same place.
again he twisted the screw with the stripped thread, and again it turned
tomorrow--at any rate, in an instant as compared with eternity." And
to evil and death?--death which ends all and must come today or
peace of mind. Can anything in the world make her or me less a prey
money for? As if that money could add a hair's breadth to happiness or
cloak looking timidly at me," he thought. "And what does she want the
rubles I don't know what to do with, and she stands in her tattered
wares, especially a pair of goatskin slippers. "I have hundreds of
The Torzhok peddler woman, in a whining voice, went on offering her

dying was also dreadful.
die and all will end. You'll die and know all, or cease asking." But
a logical answer and not at all a reply to them. The answer was: "You'll
There was no answer to any of these questions, except one, and that not

governs all?"
one live for? And what am I? What is life, and what is death? What power
What is bad? What is good? What should one love and what hate? What does
a year later they executed those who executed him--also for some reason.
and Louis XVI was executed because they considered him a criminal, and
continued Pierre, "shot Dolokhov because I considered myself injured,
thrashed him because he had to get on as quickly as possible. And I,"
for letting a private traveler have the courier horses. But the officer
money for food; the man said an officer had once given him a thrashing
for another traveler, and for himself it's unavoidable, because he needs
"Is this good or bad?" Pierre asked himself. "It is good for me, bad

to get more money from the traveler.
have the courier horses. It was plain that he was lying and only wanted
wait only two hours, when, come what might, he would let his excellency
The postmaster came in and began obsequiously to beg his excellency to

uselessly in the same place.
stripped, so that the screw could not get in or out, but went on turning
as if the thread of the chief screw which held his life together were
which he could not solve and yet could not cease to ask himself. It was
matter what he thought about, he always returned to these same questions
in the solitude of the journey, they seized him with special force. No
the duel and had spent that first agonizing, sleepless night. But now,
by the same thoughts ever since the day he returned from Sokolniki after
having solved the problems that so absorbed him. He had been engrossed
to understand what they wanted or how they could go on living without
his careless attitude, Pierre looked at them over his spectacles unable
embroidery came into the room offering their services. Without changing
The postmaster, his wife, the valet, and a peasant woman selling Torzhok

of his life.
indifference whether he remained there for a few hours or for the rest
but compared to the thoughts that now occupied him it was a matter of
earlier or later, or whether he secured accommodation at this station,
him. Not only was he indifferent as to whether he got to Petersburg
question--one so important that he took no notice of what went on around
begun to think of the last station and was still pondering on the same
Pierre gave no answer, for he neither heard nor saw anything. He had

tea?" asked his valet.
"Will you have the portmanteaus brought in? And a bed got ready, and

feet in their overboots on the table, and began to reflect.
he lay down on the leather sofa in front of a round table, put his big
would not supply them. Pierre was obliged to wait. Without undressing,
Torzhok post station, either there were no horses or the postmaster
After his interview with his wife Pierre left for Petersburg. At the


CHAPTER I





BOOK FIVE: 1806 - 07





his acquaintances, to overtake his regiment which was already in Poland.
receipt, he left at the end of November, without taking leave of any of
sent Dolokhov the whole forty-three thousand rubles and received his
He filled the girls' albums with verses and music, and having at last

her.
love him all the more, but Nicholas now considered himself unworthy of
wanted to show him that his losses were an achievement that made her
Sonya was more tender and devoted to him than ever. It was as if she

not at once raise, and he spent most of his time in the girls' room.
without going out of the house, waiting for the money his father could
After Denisov's departure, Rostov spent another fortnight in Moscow,

was put in the sleigh or of the first three stages of his journey.
at the gypsies', with the result that he had no recollection of how he
Moscow. All Denisov's Moscow friends gave him a farewell entertainment
Next day Rostov saw Denisov off. He did not wish to stay another day in


Natasha.
hand, he left the room with quick resolute strides, without looking at
her severe face said: "Well, good-by, Countess," and kissing her
would give my life twice over..." He looked at the countess, and seeing
"but believe me, I so adore your daughter and all your family that I
"Countess, I have done w'ong," Denisov went on in an unsteady voice,

sob aloud.
Natasha could not remain calm, seeing him in such a plight. She began to

tried to say more, but faltered.
"Countess..." said Denisov, with downcast eyes and a guilty face. He

me to give this refusal."
addressed yourself first to me. In that case you would not have obliged
is so young, and I thought that, as my son's friend, you would have
embarrassed voice, though it sounded severe to Denisov--"but my daughter
"Vasili Dmitrich, I thank you for the honor," she said, with an

heard the quick rustle of the countess' dress. She came up to them.
understand. She kissed his rough curly black head. At this instant, they
Denisov bent over her hand and she heard strange sounds she did not

but it won't do...not that... but as a friend, I shall always love you."
"Vasili Dmitrich, I'm so sorry for you!... No, but you are so nice...

It is in your hands."
"Nataly," he said, moving with rapid steps toward her, "decide my fate.

He jumped up at the sound of her light step.

face in his hands.
where Denisov was sitting on the same chair by the clavichord with his
the door," and Natasha ran across the drawing room to the dancing hall,
"No, not on any account! I will tell him myself, and you'll listen at

Natasha as grown up.
the countess, indignant that they should have dared to treat this little
"And there's nothing for you to say. I shall speak to him myself," said

"No, Mamma, but I'm so sorry for him. I don't know how I'm to say it."

answered the countess sharply and sarcastically.
"Well then, accept his offer. It's high time for you to be married,"

"No, I mustn't. I am so sorry for him! He's so nice."

"Well, all the same, you must refuse him."

accidently."
seen how he said it! I know he did not mean to say it, but it came out
for you," said Natasha, with a responsive smile. "You should have
"No, I will do it myself, only tell me what to say. It's all very well

the countess smiling.
"No, but what is it, my dear? Do you want me to go and tell him?" said

"Mamma, are you cross? Don't be cross, dear! Is it my fault?"

"Well then, tell him so."

him."
"No, Mamma, I'm not in love with him, I suppose I'm not in love with

"Good luck to you!"
are in love, marry him!" said the countess, with a laugh of annoyance.
"Well then, what do you want? You're all in love nowadays. Well, if you

"No, he's not a fool!" replied Natasha indignantly and seriously.

he is a fool, that's all!"
"If it is true that Monsieur Denisov has made you a proposal, tell him

The countess shrugged her shoulders.

"I come to ask you what to do, and you call it 'nonsense!'"
"Nonsense, indeed! I am telling you the fact," said Natasha indignantly.

"Don't, Natasha! What nonsense!" she said, hoping it was a joke.

and who was still having lessons.
this chit of a girl, Natasha, who not so long ago was playing with dolls
The countess did not believe her ears. Denisov had proposed. To whom? To

"Made, made me an offer, Mamma! Mamma!" she exclaimed.

"Made what?"

"Mamma!... Mamma!... He has made me..."

mother, quite excited.
daughter were having one not less important. Natasha came running to her
While father and son were having their explanation, the mother and

his father's hand, he pressed it to his lips and burst into tears.
"Papa! Pa-pa!" he called after him, sobbing, "forgive me!" And seizing

expected this.
room.... Nicholas had been prepared for resistance, but had not at all
And with a furtive glance at his son's face, the count went out of the

raise... happens to everybody! Yes, who has not done it?"
"Yes, yes," he muttered, "it will be difficult, I fear, difficult to

bustlingly searching for something.
The old count cast down his eyes on hearing his son's words and began

said, in a careless and even rude voice, that it happens to everyone!
longed to kiss his father's hands and kneel to beg his forgiveness, but
worthless scoundrel whose whole life could not atone for his crime. He
bold, free, and easy tone, while in his soul he regarded himself as a
"It can't be helped It happens to everyone!" said the son, with a

helplessly on the sofa.
"Well!..." said the old count, spreading out his arms and sinking

"I promised to pay tomorrow," said Nicholas.

an apoplectic flush over neck and nape as old people do.
"What! To whom?... Nonsense!" cried the count, suddenly reddening with

I mean a good deal, a great deal--forty three thousand."
for which he was long unable to forgive himself, "I have lost a little,
"Very much," said Nicholas flushing, and with a stupid careless smile,

you it would not be enough. How much?"
"Dear me!" said his father, who was in a specially good humor. "I told

need some money."
"Papa, I have come on a matter of business. I was nearly forgetting. I

carriage to drive to town:
of himself, he said, as if merely asking his father to let him have the
time. And suddenly, in the most casual tone, which made him feel ashamed
"Ah, it can't be avoided!" thought Nicholas, for the first and last

condition.
sobs. The count was lighting his pipe and did not notice his son's
Nicholas tried to say "Yes," but could not: and he nearly burst into

at his son.
"Well--had a good time?" said the old count, smiling gaily and proudly

drive up, went to meet him.
came in from his Club, cheerful and contented. Nicholas, hearing him
downstairs to his own room. A quarter of an hour later the old count
reality again presented itself. He got up without saying a word and went
that day. But no sooner had Natasha finished her barcarolle than
It was long since Rostov had felt such enjoyment from music as he did


CHAPTER XVI





and yet be happy..."
Dolokhov, and words of honor?... All nonsense! One might kill and rob
in the world and above everything in the world. "What were losses, and
in Rostov's soul! And this something was apart from everything else
Oh, how that chord vibrated, and how moved was something that was finest

fortunate!" he thought.
below the high note. "Ah, God! How fine! Did I really take it? How
that he was singing, to strengthen the si he sung a second, a third
will she take that si? She's taken it! Thank God!" And without noticing
real.... Now then, Natasha, now then, dearest! Now then, darling! How
and Dolokhov, and anger, and honor--it's all nonsense... but this is
senseless life of ours!" thought Nicholas. "All this misery, and money,
One... "Oh mio crudele affetto."... One, two, three... One. "Oh, this
"Oh mio crudele affetto."... One, two, three... one, two, three...
next phrase, and everything in the world was divided into three beats:
the whole world centered for him on anticipation of the next note, the
eyes. "What has happened to her? How she is singing today!" And suddenly
"What is this?" thought Nicholas, listening to her with widely opened

it.
it seemed as if nothing in that voice could be altered without spoiling
velvety softness, which so mingled with her lack of art in singing that
freshness, an unconsciousness of her own powers, and an as yet untrained
it and wished to hear it again. In her voice there was a virginal
sounding, even the connoisseurs said nothing, but only delighted in
voice, with its incorrect breathing and labored transitions, was
said this some time after she had finished singing. While that untrained
but it is a beautiful voice that must be trained." Only they generally
well, as all the connoisseurs who heard her said: "It is not trained,
painstaking effect that had been in it before; but she did not yet sing
as a child, there was no longer in her singing that comical, childish,
mainly because Denisov so delighted in her singing. She no longer sang
Natasha, that winter, had for the first time begun to sing seriously,

you and make you weep.
leave you cold a thousand times and the thousand and first time thrill
produce at the same intervals and hold for the same time, but which
surroundings, and from her smiling lips flowed sounds which anyone may
her eyes became serious. At that moment she was oblivious of her
Natasha took the first note, her throat swelled, her chest rose,

sister. "Why isn't she dull and ashamed?"
"And what is she so pleased about?" thought Nicholas, looking at his

Denisov followed her.
"Yes, that's me!" she seemed to say, answering the rapt gaze with which

stepped to the middle of the room and stood still.
dancers do, Natasha, rising energetically from her heels to her toes,
Having lifted her head and let her arms droop lifelessly, as ballet

considered the resonance was best.
"Now, Sonya!" she said, going to the very middle of the room, where she

I must be mistaken, he must be feeling happy, just as I am."
sympathy with anyone's sorrow," she felt, and she said to herself: "No,
young people often do. "No, I am too happy now to spoil my enjoyment by
sadness, or self-reproach, that she purposely deceived herself as
she was herself in such high spirits at that moment, so far from sorrow,
instantly noticed her brother's condition. But, though she noticed it,
Nicholas turned away from her. Natasha too, with her quick instinct, had

ask. She noticed at once that something had happened to him.
"Nikolenka, what is the matter?" Sonya's eyes fixed on him seemed to

and avoiding their eyes.
He continued to pace the room, looking gloomily at Denisov and the girls

where to? It's one--let them sing!"
the only thing left me--not singing!" his thoughts ran on. "Go away? But
"My God, I'm a ruined and dishonored man! A bullet through my brain is

Sonya struck the first chord of the prelude.

be happy about!" thought he.
"Why do they want to make her sing? How can she sing? There's nothing to

Nicholas began pacing up and down the room.

at her with enraptured eyes.
favorite barcarolle. Natasha was preparing to sing. Denisov was looking
Sonya was sitting at the clavichord, playing the prelude to Denisov's

clavichord stood.
to go?" thought Nicholas, and went again into the dancing room where the
"Everything's the same with them. They know nothing about it! Where am I

"I expect so."

question. "Will Papa be back soon?"
"Oh, nothing," said he, as if weary of being continually asked the same

"What is the matter?" she asked.

The countess glanced at her silent son.

now! It's your turn to sing the ba'cawolla--I entweat you!"
"All wight! All wight!" shouted Denisov. "It's no good making excuses

Natasha to sing.
room, they still heard the laughter and merry voices trying to persuade
table began to watch her hands arranging the cards. From the dancing
Nicholas went to her, kissed her hand, and sitting down silently at her

the drawing room.
"Nicholas, have you come? Come here, dear!" called the old countess from

"No, Papa is not back yet," said Sonya.

Did you know?"
enjoying ourselves! Vasili Dmitrich is staying a day longer for my sake!
"I am so glad you've come!" said Natasha, without answering him. "We are

"Is Papa at home?" he asked.

"Ah, and here's Nicholas!" cried Natasha, running up to him.

the drawing room, where he saw Vera and his mother with the old lady.
"Everything's still the same with them," thought Nicholas, glancing into

without noticing Nicholas.
"Splendid! Excellent!" exclaimed Natasha. "Another verse," she said,

black-agate eyes at the frightened and happy Natasha.
He was singing in passionate tones, gazing with his sparkling

   What is this bliss that makes my fingers thrill?
   What spark has set my inmost soul on fire,
   What magic power is this recalls me still?
   Enchantress, say, to my forsaken lyre

music:
"Enchantress," which he had composed, and to which he was trying to fit
as he sang, with his small, husky, but true voice, some verses called
chords with his short fingers, his legs thrown back and his eyes rolling
with sparkling eyes and ruffled hair, sat at the clavichord striking
patience with the old gentlewoman who lived in their house. Denisov,
old countess, waiting for the return of her husband and son, sat playing
smiling. Vera was playing chess with Shinshin in the drawing room. The
pretty and conscious of it, were standing by the clavichord, happy and
Natasha, in the light-blue dresses they had worn at the theater, looking
round Sonya and Natasha as the air does before a thunderstorm. Sonya and
Dolokhov's proposal and Iogel's ball, seemed to have grown thicker
of love which pervaded the Rostov household that winter and, now after
As soon as Nicholas entered, he was enfolded in that poetic atmosphere
from the theater, had had supper and were grouped round the clavichord.
At home, they had not yet gone to bed. The young people, after returning

terrible.
and ask for money he had no right to after giving his word of honor, was
go home alone, see his sisters, brother, mother, and father, confess
To say "tomorrow" and keep up a dignified tone was not difficult, but to


CHAPTER XV





"Tomorrow," replied Rostov and left the room.

"Then when am I to have it?"

her!" he exclaimed fiercely.
"My cousin has nothing to do with this and it's not necessary to mention

"Your cousin..." Dolokhov started to say, but Nicholas interrupted him.

mouse.
shame and sorrow, but wanted now to play with him as a cat does with a
it all, and felt that Dolokhov knew that he could save him from all this
by the news of this loss, he knew what a relief it would be to escape
Rostov. He knew what a shock he would inflict on his father and mother
"Oh, it's terrible to feel oneself so in this man's power," thought

cards.' Your cousin is in love with you, I know."
straight in the eyes, "you know the saying, 'Lucky in love, unlucky at
"I say, Rostov," said Dolokhov clearly, smiling and looking Nicholas

"I cannot pay it all immediately. Will you take an I.O.U.?" he said.

Rostov, flushing, drew Dolokhov into the next room.

"When am I to receive the money, Count?"

jest.
Dolokhov cut him short, as if to remind him that it was not for him to

"Yes, I'm tired too," said Rostov.

added.
himself he rose from the table. "One does get tired sitting so long," he
"You owe forty-three thousand, Count," said Dolokhov, and stretching

held him in their power.... The ten fell to him.
those hands with their short reddish fingers and hairy wrists, which
Dolokhov began to deal seriously. Oh, how Rostov detested at that moment

let me win this ten, or beat it."
"It's all the same to me," he said. "I only want to see whether you will

twenty-one.
card and, instead of the six thousand he had intended, carefully wrote
a pack he prepared to deal. Rostov submissively unbent the corner of his
the total exceeded the round sum of forty-three thousand; and taking up
Twenty-one rubles," he said, pointing to the figure twenty-one by which
"All right!" said Dolokhov, having finished the addition. "All right!

"Come now, just this one more little card!"

cheerful voice:
brain--that's all that's left me!" And at the same time he said in a
"It's all up! I'm lost!" thought he. "Now a bullet through my

the fun of the game which interested him most.
"Well, won't you go on? I had a splendid card all ready," as if it were

was all over; but he said in an indifferent tone:
and saying something in their gypsy accents. Nicholas understood that it
Some swarthy men and women were really entering from the cold outside

"Supper, it's time for supper! And here are the gypsies!"

figures in his clear, bold hand.
up the total of Rostov's debt, breaking the chalk as he marked the
slamming down the pack of cards, put it aside and began rapidly adding
to double the three thousand just put down to his score, when Dolokhov,
Rostov had just prepared a card, by bending the corner of which he meant
The score against him reached the fateful sum of forty-three thousand.

efforts to seem calm.
His face was terrible and piteous to see, especially from its helpless
He was flushed and bathed in perspiration, though the room was not hot.

nothing!"
and in the same place. No, it can't be! Surely it will all end in
happen and what has happened? I am well and strong and still the same
and watched those broad-boned agile hands in the same way. When did it
all the time in this same place at this table, chose and placed cards,
this new, terrible state of things begin? What marked the change? I sat
And I did not realize how happy I was! When did that end and when did
name day and then going home. I was so happy, so free, so lighthearted!
the thought of winning a hundred rubles to buy that casket for Mamma's
And when did it begin? Such a little while ago I came to this table with
or insulted or wished harm to anyone? Why such a terrible misfortune?
he thought to himself, "I have done nothing wrong. Have I killed anyone,
What's he to do if he has such luck?... And it's not my fault either,"
Wasn't he my friend? Wasn't I fond of him? But it's not his fault.
"He knows of course what this loss means to me. He can't want my ruin.

what was passing in his mind.
players, or peered at the now cold face of Dolokhov and tried to read
total of his losses on it, then he looked round for aid from the other
cords on his coat and took a card with that number and tried staking the
from the crumpled heap under the table would save him, now counted the
over the Enns, and then guessed that the card that came first to hand
one moment prayed to God as he had done on the battlefield at the bridge
accept it and fixed the stake himself. Nicholas submitted to him, and at
pondered. Sometimes he staked a large sum, but Dolokhov refused to
or quits... it can't be!... And why is he doing this to me?" Rostov
impossible... Oh, how pleasant it was at home!... The knave, double
"Six hundred rubles, ace, a corner, a nine... winning it back's

sleeves, those hands which he loved and hated, held him in their power.
broad-boned reddish hands with hairy wrists visible from under the shirt
with cards. One tormenting impression did not leave him: that those
was scrawled over with figures, wet with spilled wine, and littered
ages. Rostov, leaning his head on both hands, sat at the table which
that number because forty-three was the sum of his and Sonya's joint
to play until that score reached forty-three thousand. He had fixed on
and occasionally ran his eyes over the score against him. He had decided
stories or telling them, but followed every movement of Rostov's hands
exceeded twenty thousand rubles. Dolokhov was no longer listening to
supposed, must have risen to fifteen thousand. In reality it already
which he had reckoned up to ten thousand, but that now, as he vaguely
hundred rubles he had a long column of figures scored against him,
The whole interest was concentrated on Rostov. Instead of sixteen

in their own play.
An hour and a half later most of the players were but little interested


CHAPTER XIV





as he continued to deal.
"Still, don't ruin yourself!" said Dolokhov with a side glance at Rostov

more than he could pay.
he needed was lying uppermost, the first card in the pack. He had lost
"Aah!" Rostov almost screamed lifting both hands to his head. The seven

a smile.
"Oh, those Moscow gossips!" said Dolokhov, and he took up the cards with

"Come now, deal!" exclaimed Rostov.

I'm a sharper, so I advise you to be careful."
"Yes, gentlemen, I've been told there's a rumor going about Moscow that

chair, and began deliberately with a smile:
about to tell a good story he put down the cards, leaned back in his
"So you are not afraid to play with me?" repeated Dolokhov, and as if

the pack and took up a glass and a pipe that were handed him.
hands, with hairy wrists visible from under the shirt cuffs, laid down
a sinking heart the movement of Dolokhov's hands. Those broad, reddish
unknown and undefined misery. That could not be, yet he awaited with
appreciated and newly illumined, and plunge him into the depths of
rather than to the left, might deprive him of all this happiness, newly
conceive that a stupid chance, letting the seven be dealt to the right
if it were all a lost and unappreciated bliss, long past. He could not
before him with such vividness, clearness, and charm that it seemed as
father, and even his comfortable bed in the house on the Povarskaya rose
jokes with Petya, talks with Sonya, duets with Natasha, piquet with his
certainly never touch a card again." At that moment his home life,
and drive home to supper with Denisov, Natasha, and Sonya, and will
"Now then, make haste and let me have this card and I'll take my cap
word. With a sinking heart he watched Dolokhov's hands and thought,
loss of sixteen hundred rubles, but the necessity of going back on his
of that money, so that this seven of hearts meant for him not only the
anything more till the spring. Now only twelve hundred rubles was left
more than enough for him and that he gave his word of honor not to take
to be more economical this time. Nicholas had replied that it would be
Nicholas that this was all he could let him have till May, and asked him
and though he always disliked speaking of money difficulties had told
previous Sunday the old count had given his son two thousand rubles,
depended on Rostov's winning or losing on that seven of hearts. On the
a seven to turn up, gazed at Dolokhov's hands which held the pack. Much
him, smiled at Dolokhov's words, and with a sinking heart, waiting for
upright figures; he emptied the glass of warm champagne that was handed
on which with a broken bit of chalk he had written "800 rubles" in clear
well remembered that seven afterwards. He laid down the seven of hearts,
of hearts with a torn corner, which he had picked up from the floor. He
Rostov submitted. He let the eight hundred remain and laid down a seven

from you. Or are you afraid of me?" he asked again.
Rostov, "you'll win it back all the sooner. I lose to the others but win
"Leave it," said Dolokhov, though he did not seem to be even looking at

of twenty rubles.
filled his glass he changed his mind and altered it to his usual stake
up against him. He wrote "800 rubles" on a card, but while the waiter
All Rostov's cards were beaten and he had eight hundred rubles scored

The game continued; a waiter kept handing round champagne.

yourself, we'll settle afterwards," he added, turning to Rostov.
ask you to put the money on your cards," replied Dolokhov. "Don't stint
"Yes, you might, but I am afraid of getting the accounts mixed. So I

One of the players said he hoped he might be trusted.

place your money on the cards or I may get muddled in the reckoning."
"Gentlemen," said Dolokhov after he had dealt for some time. "Please

lost. Dolokhov "killed," that is, beat, ten cards of Rostov's running.
Rostov staked five rubles on a card and lost, staked again, and again

"I'll trust you."

"I have no money with me," he said.

card, putting a small stake on it, and beginning to play.
And strange to say Nicholas felt that he could not help taking up a

"Why don't you play?" he asked.

side and at first did not play. Dolokhov kept glancing at him.
Moving the money forward he prepared to deal. Rostov sat down by his

of cards said: "Bank, gentlemen!"
"Well, you'd better not play," Dolokhov added, and springing a new pack

"To try his luck or the certainty?" Rostov asked himself.

luck, one should make certain,' and I want to try."
"Do you remember we had a talk about cards... 'He's a fool who trusts to

deliberately so that everyone could hear:
of anything, Dolokhov, looking straight in his face, said slowly and
with which to reply to Dolokhov's words. But before he had thought
Rostov felt ill at ease. He tried, but failed, to find some joke

a need to escape from it by some strange, and usually cruel, action.
dinner and at other times, when as if tired of everyday life he had felt
Beneath his smile Rostov saw in him the mood he had shown at the Club

Rostov's thought.
"Or are you afraid to play with me?" Dolokhov now asked as if guessing

said.
with Dolokhov. "None but fools trust to luck in play," Dolokhov had then
Rostov recalled at that moment a strange conversation he had once had

"You may punt," he said.

Dolokhov made no reply.

"I called once or twice at your house," said Rostov, reddening.

finish dealing, and then Ilyushka will come with his chorus."
"It's a long time since we met," he said. "Thanks for coming. I'll just

as though he had long expected him.
Dolokhov's clear, cold glance met Rostov as soon as he entered the door,

refusal and felt uncomfortable at the thought of how they would meet.
keeping the bank. Rostov had not seen him since his proposal and Sonya's
two candles. On the table was a pile of gold and paper money, and he was
twenty men were gathered round a table at which Dolokhov sat between
shown to the best room, which Dolokhov had taken for that evening. Some
theater, where he had been with his family and Denisov. He was at once
About ten o'clock Rostov went to the English Hotel straight from the


tonight to my friends--come to the English Hotel.
of, and am going to rejoin my regiment, I am giving a farewell supper
As I do not intend to be at your house again for reasons you know


Dolokhov's home: on the third day he received a note from him:
For two days after that Rostov did not see Dolokhov at his own or at


CHAPTER XIII





rest of the evening.
with his handkerchief, sat down by Natasha and did not leave her for the
good old days. Denisov, flushed after the mazurka and mopping himself
partner, and the old men began smilingly to talk about Poland and the
was delighted with Denisov's skill, he was asked again and again as a
Although Iogel did not acknowledge this to be the real mazurka, everyone

"What does this mean?" she brought out.

did not recognize him.
him a curtsy. She fixed her eyes on him in amazement, smiling as if she
up with a click of his spurs and bowed to her, Natasha did not even make
last, smartly whirling his partner round in front of her chair, he drew
he suddenly stopped and performed some new and unexpected steps. When at
rush through the whole suite of rooms without drawing breath, and then
jumping up, dashed so impetuously forward that it seemed as if he would
right hand, then falling on one knee he twirled her round him, and again
First he spun her round, holding her now with his left, now with his
do, and abandoning herself to him followed his lead hardly knowing how.
right, flew round again in a circle. Natasha guessed what he meant to
spurs, whirled rapidly round, and, striking his left heel against his
short on his heels, stood so a second, stamped on the spot clanking his
when suddenly, clinking his spurs and spreading out his legs, he stopped
room, and seeming not to notice the chairs was dashing straight at them,
his partner with him. He glided silently on one foot half across the
foot, bounded from the floor like a ball, and flew round the room taking
his partner with a merry and triumphant air, suddenly stamped with one
felt himself to be. At the right beat of the music he looked sideways at
Denisov's short stature not noticeable and he looked the fine fellow he
waiting for the beat. Only on horse back and in the mazurka was
partner's hand firmly, threw back his head, and advanced his foot,
unhooked his saber. He came out from behind the chairs, clasped his
"Oh, the faiwy! She can do anything with me!" said Denisov, and he

"I'll sing for you a whole evening," said Natasha.

"They coax me as if I were Vaska the cat!" said Denisov jokingly.

"Now then, Vaska," said Nicholas.

"Oh no, let me off, Countess," Denisov replied.

"Please, Vasili Dmitrich," Natasha was saying, "do come!"

though he smiled delightedly. He ran up to them.
looking at her and waiting. Nicholas saw that Denisov was refusing
timidly to the corner where Denisov sat. She saw that everybody was
tripping rapidly across in her little shoes trimmed with bows, ran
When it came to Natasha's turn to choose a partner, she rose and,

"Go and choose Denisov. He is a real dancer, a wonder!" he said.

way in which he danced the mazurka, Nicholas ran up to Natasha:
Knowing that Denisov had a reputation even in Poland for the masterly

this? But she does dance splendidly."
"This is not at all the thing," he said. "What sort of Polish mazuwka is

who was passing:
because he could not. In the middle of a figure he beckoned to Rostov
indicated that if he was not dancing it was because he would not and not
his eyes off her and beat time with his saber in a way that clearly
shy, went on carefully executing her steps. Denisov did not take
in low shoes, Iogel flew first across the hall with Natasha, who, though
the first couple. Noiselessly, skillfully stepping with his little feet
people dancing, Iogel with Natasha, his pride and his best pupil, were
them something funny and kept them amused, while he watched the young
ladies and, leaning on his saber and beating time with his foot, told
refuse Iogel and asked Sonya to dance. Denisov sat down by the old
 The band struck up the newly introduced mazurka. Nicholas could not

inattentive, but you had talent--oh yes, you had talent!"
"Oh no!" said Iogel, hastening to reassure him. "You were only

wecollect what bad use I made of your lessons?"
"No, my dear fellow, I'll be a wallflower," said Denisov. "Don't you

former pupil of his.
ladies-" He turned with the same request to Denisov who was also a
little Iogel coming up to Nicholas. "Look how many charming young
"My dear count, you were one of my best pupils--you must dance," said

Rostov smiled.

"About your sister," ejaculated Denisov testily.

"Who are you talking about?"

"And how she dances! What gwace!" he said again after a pause.

"Countess Natasha," answered Denisov.

"Who?"

"How sweet she is--she will be a weal beauty!" said Denisov.

patronage at the dancers.
Nicholas and Denisov were walking up and down, looking with kindly

"Oh, how delightful it is!" she kept saying, running up to Sonya.

person she happened to look at she was in love with for that moment.
was not in love with anyone in particular, but with everyone. Whatever
Natasha fell in love the very moment she entered the ballroom. She

ribbons.
ball was even happier. They were both dressed in white muslin with pink
Natasha no less proud of her first long dress and of being at a real

plaited, and she was transparently radiant with impulsive joy.
about before she left home so that the maid could hardly get her hair
proposal, her refusal, and her explanation with Nicholas, Sonya twirled
were both particularly happy and gay. That evening, proud of Dolokhov's
many pretty girls and the Rostov girls were among the prettiest. They
house, and the ball, as everyone said, was a great success. There were
into fashion, were danced. Iogel had taken a ballroom in Bezukhov's
only the ecossaise, the anglaise, and the mazurka, which was just coming
graceful, was first, even danced the pas de chale, but at this last ball
Sometimes the best of the pupils, of whom Natasha, who was exceptionally
be, pretty--so rapturous were their smiles and so sparkling their eyes.
the first time. With scarcely any exceptions they all were, or seemed to
as girls of thirteen and fourteen do who are wearing long dresses for
the fact that only those came who wished to dance and amuse themselves
his art, as he collected the tickets from all his visitors. There was
Iogel, flying about like a feather and bowing according to the rules of
was the absence of host or hostess and the presence of the good-natured
increased the fame of these dances. What distinguished them from others
Princesses Gorchakov met suitors there and were married and so further
That year two marriages had come of these balls. The two pretty young
these balls with an air of condescension and found them most enjoyable.
ready to drop, and so said the grown-up young men and women who came to
so said the youths and maidens themselves as they danced till they were
they watched their young people executing their newly learned steps, and
Iogel's were the most enjoyable balls in Moscow. So said the mothers as


CHAPTER XII





And Nicholas again kissed her hand.

you."
"You are an angel: I am not worthy of you, but I am afraid of misleading

always shall, and I want nothing more."
"Don't say that to me! I want nothing. I love you as a brother and

difficulty.
Dolokhov's offer," he said, articulating his friend's name with
not wish it. In a word, I make no promise. And I beg you to consider
confidence, and love as I have for you. Then I am young. Mamma does
love again, though for no one have I such a feeling of friendship,
"No, but I have been in love a thousand times and shall fall in

"That is enough for me," said Sonya, blushing.

love you, and I think I love you more than anyone else...."
it. If you refuse him on my account, I must tell you the whole truth. I
"No, but I must. It may be arrogant of me, but still it is best to say

"Nicholas, don't tell me that!" she said.

Sonya again interrupted. She gave him an imploring, frightened look.

"If you are refusing for my sake, I am afraid that I..."

"I have already refused," she said hurriedly.

Sonya interrupted him.

match but a splendid, noble fellow... he is my friend..."
"if you wish to refuse one who is not only a brilliant and advantageous
"Sophie," he began, timidly at first and then more and more boldly,

since his return that they had talked alone and about their love.
Nicholas went up to her and kissed her hand. This was the first time
A minute later Sonya came in with a frightened, guilty, and scared look.

And Natasha kissed her brother and ran away.

"Ah, she is indeed a darling! I'll send her to you."

her. What a darling Sonya is!" he added with a smile.
"Now you don't know that at all!" said Nicholas. "But I must talk to

that you won't marry her."
you will not marry her. I know, heaven knows how, but I know for certain
"Yes," said Natasha. "Do you know, Nicholas--don't be angry--but I know

"And Mamma pressed her!" said Nicholas reproachfully.

once she has said..."
"Much as Mamma pressed her, she refused, and I know she won't change

"Yes, my Sonya could not have done otherwise!" thought Nicholas.

"she told him she loved another."
"And fancy! she refused him quite definitely!" adding, after a pause,

accept the offer," but before he had time to say it Natasha began again.
"That's capital; of course she'll forget her childish promises and
on hearing the news was one of anger with Sonya.... He tried to say,
question for her to refuse him. And therefore Nicholas' first feeling
the point of view of the old countess and of society it was out of the
in some respects a brilliant match for the dowerless, orphan girl. From
seemed to give way within him at this news. Dolokhov was a suitable and
Little as Nicholas had occupied himself with Sonya of late, something

proposed to Sonya!"
you, but you would not believe it," she said triumphantly. "He has
"And I was looking for you," said Natasha running out to him. "I told

dinner. He called Natasha and asked her what was the matter.
in this conclusion by the fact that Dolokhov left immediately after
"There is something up," thought Nicholas, and he was further confirmed

the Club dinner.
scowling, he gave Nicholas just such a look as he had given Pierre at
"Perhaps," coldly and angrily replied Dolokhov, glancing at Sonya, and,

he noticed that it should not have been put.
"And you?" he asked Dolokhov, but as soon as he had asked the question

have a party."
"If I have time," answered Nicholas. "But I promised the Arkharovs; they

even weady to dance the pas de chale."
the Rostovs' had jocularly assumed the role of Natasha's knight. "I'm
"Where would I not go at the countess' command!" said Denisov, who at


    * Denisov.


you, and Vasili Dmitrich * is also going."
"Nicholas, will you come to Iogel's? Please do!" said Natasha. "He asked

dancing master) gave for his pupils during the holidays.
that same evening there was to be one of the balls that Iogel (the
natural to him was very gentle and wary with them both at dinner. On
Sonya and Dolokhov before dinner, and with the kindly sensitiveness
Natasha. Nicholas understood that something must have happened between
and the old countess were especially disturbed, and to a lesser degree
curious embarrassment among some of those present. Sonya, Dolokhov,
felt the tension of the amorous air in the house, and also noticed a
returned home just before dinner. As soon as he entered he noticed and
visiting all the places he meant to go to and where he had been invited,
Nicholas, having as usual exhausted two pairs of horses, without

we are interested in here," said the spirit of the place.
is the only reality in the world, all else is folly. It is the one thing
holiday time. "Seize the moments of happiness, love and be loved! That
atmosphere made itself so strongly felt in the Rostovs' house as at this
Never had love been so much in the air, and never had the amorous

were present, including Dolokhov and Denisov.
were leaving to join their regiment after Epiphany. About twenty people
rarely done of late. It was a grand farewell dinner, as he and Denisov
On the third day after Christmas Nicholas dined at home, a thing he had


CHAPTER XI





from home, at dinners, parties, and balls.
gave zest to his pleasures. He spent the greater part of his time away
approaching departure did not prevent his amusing himself, but rather
furlough after Christmas to return with him to their regiment. His
remaining in Moscow, and only awaited the termination of Denisov's
preparations for war lay in the fact that Nicholas would not hear of
was talked of. For the Rostov family the whole interest of these
Bonaparte was anathematized and in Moscow nothing but the coming war
and besides this, nine men in every thousand for the militia. Everywhere
given to raise recruits, ten men in every thousand for the regular army,
Napoleon with even greater warmth than the year before. Orders were
In the autumn of 1806 everybody had again begun talking of the war with

frequently at home.
was not as much at ease with Sonya and Dolokhov as before and was less
always in love with someone," he thought of Sonya and Natasha. But he
he did not explain to himself what these new relations were. "They're
Rostov noticed something new in Dolokhov's relations with Sonya, but

influence of the dark, graceful girl who loved another.
It was evident that this strange, strong man was under the irresistible

when they saw his looks.
glances without coloring, but even the old countess and Natasha blushed
and looked at her in such a way that not only could she not bear his
which the Rostovs always attended. He was pointedly attentive to Sonya
which they were present, and went to Iogel's balls for young people
Dolokhov often dined at the Rostovs', never missed a performance at

appeared.
have dared to say so, knew it and blushed scarlet every time Dolokhov
settled. He came because of Sonya. And Sonya, though she would never
question for whose sake he came (though no one spoke of it) was soon
for the society of ladies, began to come often to the house, and the
Natasha's prediction proved true. Dolokhov, who did not usually care

"I'm certain of it; you'll see."

"What nonsense..."

you know he has fallen in love with Sonya?"
"Well, I don't know about that, but I am uncomfortable with him. And do

heart!"
soul there is in Dolokhov, you should see him with his mother. What a
Denisov was nothing compared to Dolokhov--"you must understand what a
"Oh, Denisov is quite different," replied Nicholas, implying that even

calculated, and I don't like that. But Denisov..."
understand. I don't know how to put it... with this one everything is
though he is a rake and all that, still I like him; so you see I do
self-will, "he is wicked and heartless. There now, I like your Denisov
"There's nothing for me to understand," she cried out with resolute

further that he was disagreeable and unnatural.
that in the duel with Bezukhov, Pierre was right and Dolokhov wrong, and
with her brother about him. She insisted that he was a bad man, and
whom everyone in the house liked except Natasha. She almost quarreled
Among the young men introduced by Rostov one of the first was Dolokhov,

readiness to fall in love and an expectation of happiness.
same feeling; sharing with the young folk of the Rostovs' household a
young girls ready for anything and full of hope--experienced the
bursts of song and music and the inconsequent but friendly prattle of
happiness), feeling the eager bustle around him, and hearing the fitful
impressionable, smiling young faces (smiling probably at their own
charming girls. Every young man who came to the house--seeing those
characteristic of homes where there are very young and very
At that time in the Rostovs' house there prevailed an amorous atmosphere

girlishly enchanting.
Natasha, half grown up and half child, was now childishly amusing, now
twenty; Sonya a girl of sixteen with all the charm of an opening flower;
many young men to his parents' house. Vera was a handsome girl of
happiest, merriest times for him and the whole family. Nicholas brought
winter of 1806, which Nicholas Rostov spent in Moscow, was one of the
Denisov also came back and stayed with them. The first half of the
In the autumn the Rostovs returned to Moscow. Early in the winter

friend's influence.
"Oh, yes, I quite understand," answered Rostov, who was under his new

don't understand it."
a divine creature, who will regenerate, purify, and elevate me. But you
if I still value my life it is only because I still hope to meet such
her! But those!..." and he made a gesture of contempt. "And believe me,
devotion I look for in women. If I found such a one I'd give my life for
or cooks--who were not venal. I have not yet met that divine purity and
noble, high-minded men, but I have not yet met any women--countesses
especially the women. Yes, dear boy," he continued, "I have met loving,
in so far as they are harmful or useful. And most of them are harmful,
friends--you among them--and as for the rest I only care about them
stood in my way. I have an adored, a priceless mother, and two or three
I would give my life for them, and the others I'd throttle if they
a straw about anyone but those I love; but those I love, I love so that
"I know people consider me a bad man!" he said. "Let them! I don't care

one would have expected of him.
Dolokhov himself during his convalescence spoke to Rostov in a way no

him. He is such a lofty, heavenly soul!"
that, believe me, is why I am so fond of you. Few people do understand
baseness! What meanness! I know you understand Fedya, my dear count;
out, reckoning on Fedya not fighting because he owed him money! What
shown it sooner, but he lets it go on for months. And then to call him
nowadays? Why, if he was so jealous, as I see things he should have
God had mercy on us. And what was it for? Who doesn't have intrigues
be an only son, to challenge him and shoot so straight! It's well
now--this duel! Have these people no feeling, or honor? Knowing him to
were not many such gallant sons of the fatherland out there as he. And
has been reinstated, but how could they fail to do that? I think there
burden on his shoulders. Fancy what he had to go through! It's true he
And there! Bezukhov got off scotfree, while Fedya had to bear the whole
they played some tricks on a policeman, didn't they do it together?
even now never says a word against him. Those pranks in Petersburg when
honorable, of Bezukhov? And Fedya, with his noble spirit, loved him and
a reproach to everyone. Now tell me, Count, was it right, was it
our present, depraved world. No one now loves virtue; it seems like
"Yes, Count," she would say, "he is too noble and pure-souled for

son.
Rostov for his friendship to her Fedya, often talked to him about her
passionately and tenderly, and old Mary Ivanovna, who had grown fond of
convalescence. Dolokhov lay ill at his mother's who loved him
recovered, and Rostov became very friendly with him during his
family, but was kept all summer in Moscow by his new duties. Dolokhov
Moscow. As a result he could not go to the country with the rest of the
as he expected he was appointed an adjutant to the governor general of
efforts of the old count, and instead of being degraded to the ranks
Rostov's share in Dolokhov's duel with Bezukhov was hushed up by the


CHAPTER X





the wax with the baby's hair had not sunk in the font but had floated.
the nurse brought it to him and nodded approval when she told him that
the termination of the ceremony. He looked up joyfully at the baby when
faint with fear lest the baby should be drowned in the font, and awaited
to the godmother, Princess Mary. Prince Andrew sat in another room,
him, carried the infant round the battered tin font and handed him over
His grandfather, who was his godfather, trembling and afraid of dropping

wrinkled soles and palms.
while the priest with a goose feather anointed the boy's little red and
was baptized. The wet nurse supported the coverlet with her chin,
Another five days passed, and then the young Prince Nicholas Andreevich


turned angrily away.
"Ah, what have you done to me, and why?" And at the sight the old man
on the other on her breast, and to him, too, her face seemed to say:
came up and kissed the waxen little hands that lay quietly crossed one
he could neither remedy nor forget. He could not weep. The old man too
felt that something gave way in his soul and that he was guilty of a sin
what have you done to me?" it still seemed to say, and Prince Andrew
And there in the coffin was the same face, though with closed eyes. "Ah,
up the steps to where the coffin stood, to give her the farewell kiss.
Three days later the little princess was buried, and Prince Andrew went


round his son's neck, and without a word he began to sob like a child.
the door and as soon as it opened his rough old arms closed like a vise
room. The old man already knew everything. He was standing close to
Two hours later Prince Andrew, stepping softly, went into his father's


in Mary Bogdanovna's trembling white hands.
In a corner of the room something red and tiny gave a grunt and squealed

to me?"--said her charming, pathetic, dead face.
"I love you all, and have done no harm to anyone; and what have you done

its upper lip covered with tiny black hair.
the cheeks, the same expression was on her charming childlike face with
her in five minutes before and, despite the fixed eyes and the pallor of
his wife's room. She was lying dead, in the same position he had seen
seeing Prince Andrew stopped, hesitating on the threshold. He went into
bewildered look and passed by without a word. A woman rushed out and
of the room. Prince Andrew turned to him, but the doctor gave him a
tucked up, without a coat, pale and with a trembling jaw, came out
sobbing like a child. The door opened. The doctor with his shirt sleeves
choked him, and leaning his elbows on the window sill be began to cry,
Then suddenly he realized the joyful significance of that wail; tears

the baby born?"
first second. "A baby? What baby...? Why is there a baby there? Or is
"What have they taken a baby in there for?" thought Prince Andrew in the

the door; the scream ceased and he heard the wail of an infant.
could not scream like that--came from the bedroom. Prince Andrew ran to
went by. Then suddenly a terrible shriek--it could not be hers, she
He began pacing the room. The screaming ceased, and a few more seconds

"You can't come in! You can't!" said a terrified voice from within.

open it. Someone was holding it shut.
through the door. Prince Andrew got up, went to the door, and tried to
and remained so for some minutes. Piteous, helpless, animal moans came
confused when she saw Prince Andrew. He covered his face with his hands
to hers. A woman came from the bedroom with a frightened face and became
Prince Andrew went again to his wife and sat waiting in the room next

"Go, dear," said Princess Mary.

off at every moment. They waited and listened.
again joined her. They began talking in whispers, but their talk broke
The doctor entered. Prince Andrew went out and, meeting Princess Mary,

Prince Andrew to leave the room.
with their relief. The pangs began again and Mary Bogdanovna advised
that he had come. His coming had nothing to do with her sufferings or
her eyes. She was not surprised at his having come; she did not realize
"I expected help from you and I get none, none from you either!" said

She looked at him inquiringly and with childlike reproach.

merciful...."
"My darling!" he said--a word he had never used to her before. "God is

her forehead.
appearance before her now. Prince Andrew went round the sofa and kissed
say. She saw her husband, but did not realize the significance of his
no harm to anyone; why must I suffer so? Help me!" her look seemed to
on him without changing their expression. "I love you all and have done
Her glittering eyes, filled with childlike fear and excitement, rested
and paused facing her at the foot of the sofa on which she was lying.
downy lip was open and she was smiling joyfully. Prince Andrew entered
her inflamed and perspiring cheeks, her charming rosy mouth with its
head (the pains had just left her). Strands of her black hair lay round
The little princess lay supported by pillows, with a white cap on her


CHAPTER IX





felt boots, he went to the little princess' apartment.
"What a strange fate, Masha darling!" And having taken off his cloak and

station), and again embraced his sister.
who had entered the hall after him (they had met at the last post
speak--he turned back, rapidly mounted the stairs again with the doctor
reply--which he would not have received, for the princess was unable to
"You did not get my letter?" he asked, and not waiting for a

embraced his sister.
softened but agitated expression on his face. He came up the stairs and
candle. Yes, it was he, pale, thin, with a changed and strangely
with snow, appeared on the landing where the footman stood with the
figure of Prince Andrew, in a fur cloak the deep collar of which covered
extraordinary," and at the very moment she thought this, the face and
"It's Andrew!" thought Princess Mary. "No it can't be, that would be too

felt boots approached the unseen bend of the staircase more rapidly.
Then the voice said something more, Demyan replied, and the steps in the

downstairs.
"Gone to bed," replied the voice of Demyan the house steward, who was

"Thank God!" said the voice. "And Father?"

seemed familiar to Princess Mary was saying something.
could hear the footstep of someone in thick felt boots, and a voice that
another candle. Still lower, beyond the turn of the staircase, one
the landing below, Philip, the footman, stood looking scared and holding
a banister post stood a tallow candle which guttered in the draft. On
with lanterns, standing at the entrance. She went out on the stairs. On
As she was crossing the anteroom she saw through the window a carriage
Princess Mary threw a shawl over her head and ran to meet the newcomer.

does not know Russian."
"Oh, my God! thank God!" said Princess Mary. "I must go and meet him, he

doctor."
holding the casement and not closing it. "With lanterns. Most likely the
"Princess, my dear, there's someone driving up the avenue!" she said,

locks of gray hair.
casement. The cold wind flapped the ends of her kerchief and her loose
knitting, went to the window and leaning out tried to catch the open
Princess Mary shuddered; her nurse, putting down the stocking she was
curtain flapping and blew out the candle with its chill, snowy draft.
returned), and, forcing open a loosely closed latch, set the damask
prince, one window frame was removed in each room as soon as the larks
window, from which the double frame had been removed (by order of the
Suddenly a gust of wind beat violently against the casement of the

"God is merciful, doctors are never needed," she said.

midwife.
in Kishenev with only a Moldavian peasant woman to help instead of a
times before: how the late princess had given birth to Princess Mary
hearing or understanding her own words, what she had told hundreds of
Nurse Savishna, knitting in hand, was telling in low tones, scarcely

kerchief, and the loose skin that hung under her chin.
she knew so well), on the lock of gray hair that escaped from under the
luminous eyes fixed on her nurse's wrinkled face (every line of which
Princess Mary had long since put aside her book: she sat silent, her

hollows and snow-covered pools of water.
were sent to the crossroads to guide him over the country road with its
Moscow who was expected every moment, and men on horseback with lanterns
of horses had been sent up the highroad to meet the German doctor from
sway and scatters its last snows and storms with desperate fury. A relay
It was one of those March nights when winter seems to wish to resume its

No one slept.
heart in the presence of the unfathomable did not lessen but increased.
Evening passed, night came, and the feeling of suspense and softening of
had entered. The most solemn mystery in the world continued its course.
shoulder and left the room without snuffing the candles or saying why he
face, shook his head, and going up to him silently kissed him on the
the prince was lying on the sofa, looked at him, noticed his perturbed
After a while he re-entered it as if to snuff the candles, and, seeing

not hear the slightest sound from the study after that.
"Very good!" said the prince closing the door behind him, and Tikhon did

Tikhon went and told the prince.

the messenger a significant look.
"Inform the prince that labor has begun," said Mary Bogdanovna, giving

told me to ask,' and come and tell me her answer."
Tikhon to ask Mary Bogdanovna what news.--"Say only that 'the prince
prince, stepping on his heels, paced up and down his study and sent
quarters torches and candles were burning and no one slept. The old
hall all sat waiting, silently and alert. In the outlying serfs'
There was no laughter in the maids' large hall. In the men servants'

at that moment made itself felt.
consciousness that something great and mysterious was being accomplished
household, a common anxiety, a softening of the heart, and a
ordinary staid and respectful good manners habitual in the prince's
tried to pretend not to know; no one spoke of it, but apart from the
the people who know of it the less a woman in travail suffers, everyone
as she sat in her room. But owing to the superstition that the fewer
house was dominated by the same feeling that Princess Mary experienced
princess anxious and inquiring, the nurse encouraging. Everyone in the
when footsteps or voices were heard did they look at one another, the
with her knitting. Princess Mary took a book and began reading. Only
The nurse lit the gilt candles before the icons and sat down by the door

"God is merciful, birdie."

"Oh, nurse, I'm so glad!"

angel," she said with a sigh.
I've brought the prince's wedding candles to light before his saint, my
"I've come to sit with you a bit, Masha," said the nurse, "and here

her head.
prince had forbidden it, appeared on the threshold with a shawl round
nurse, Praskovya Savishna, who hardly ever came to that room as the old
did not calm her excitement. Suddenly her door opened softly and her old
the icon stand. To her surprise and distress she found that her prayers
down in her easy chair, now taking her prayer book, now kneeling before
not venture to ask any questions, and shut the door again, now sitting
and out of the bedroom glanced at the princess and turned away. She did
what was going on in the passage. Some women passing with quiet steps in
house, now and then opening her door when someone passed and watching
Princess Mary sat alone in her room listening to the sounds in the

faces was a quiet and solemn look.
large leather sofa from Prince Andrew's study into the bedroom. On their
being carried by. She looked out. The men servants were carrying the
Five minutes later Princess Mary from her room heard something heavy

manage very well without a doctor."
"No matter, Princess, don't be alarmed," said Mary Bogdanovna. "We'll

moment.)
sent in good time to Moscow for a doctor and were expecting him at any
princess. (In accordance with Lise's and Prince Andrew's wishes they had
"But how is it the doctor from Moscow is not here yet?" said the

it."
hastening her steps. "You young ladies should not know anything about
"Well, the Lord be thanked, Princess," said Mary Bogdanovna, not

the midwife with wide-open eyes of alarm.
"Mary Bogdanovna, I think it's beginning!" said Princess Mary looking at

white hands with an air of calm importance.
The midwife was already on her way to meet her, rubbing her small, plump

"Mon Dieu! Mon Dieu! Oh!" she heard as she left the room.

affectation. Princess Mary ran out of the room to fetch Mary Bogdanovna.
a suffering child and to wring her little hands even with some
Mary! Say..." And the little princess began to cry capriciously like
"No, it's only indigestion?... Say it's only indigestion, say so,

showed itself.
little princess' face, an expression of childish fear of inevitable pain
"Oh, no, no!" And besides the pallor and the physical suffering on the

my angel." She kissed Lise and was about to leave the room.
"Oh yes," assented Princess Mary, "perhaps that's it. I'll go. Courage,

neighboring town, who had been at Bald Hills for the last fortnight.)
of the maids who was present. (Mary Bogdanovna was a midwife from the
"Your excellency, should not Mary Bogdanovna be sent for?" said one

ponderous steps up to her sister-in-law.
are very pale!" said Princess Mary in alarm, running with her soft,
"What is the matter with you, my darling? You look pale. Oh, you


    * Fruhstuck: breakfast.


calls it--has disagreed with me."
"Dearest, I'm afraid this morning's fruschtique *--as Foka the cook

general sorrow.
without knowing its cause--was such as to remind one still more of the
the smile of the little princess--influenced by the general mood though
every footstep in that house since the terrible news had come, so now
as sorrow was manifest in every smile, the sound of every word, and even
the nineteenth March, and her downy little lip rose from old habit, but
"Dearest," said the little princess after breakfast on the morning of


CHAPTER VIII





of his return.
hoped. She prayed for her brother as living and was always awaiting news
less, ate less, slept less, and became weaker every day. Princess Mary
to change his former way of life, but his strength failed him. He walked
memory, and he told everybody that his son had been killed. He tried not
monument from Moscow which he intended to erect in his own garden to his
sent an official to Austria to seek for traces of his son, he ordered a
he made up his mind that Prince Andrew had been killed, and though he
their grief in their own way. The old prince would not cherish any hope:
within a few days. Princess Mary and the old prince each bore and hid
terrible news from her till after her confinement, which was expected
She had determined not to tell her and persuaded her father to hide the

at her sister-in-law.
"Nothing," answered Princess Mary, looking firmly with her radiant eyes

"So there's nothing?"

feel afraid."
"No, you know it's too soon for news. But my father is anxious and I

"Has anything come from Andrew?" she asked.

and suddenly began to cry.
attention to something within her that is only seen in pregnant women,
Princess Mary, then sat thinking for a while with that expression of
expression and went out again without saying a word. She looked at
always afraid, came into her room with a peculiarly restless and malign
if in search of something. Before dinner the old prince, of whom she was
understand, agitated her. She said nothing but looked about uneasily as
was the little princess, these tears, the cause of which she did not
prepare her sister-in-law, and every time began to cry. Unobservant as
Several times in the course of the morning Princess Mary began trying to

her tears on her sister-in-law's knee.
"Nothing... only I feel sad... sad about Andrew," she said, wiping away

"What is the matter, Mary?"

Princess Mary could not lift her head, she was weeping.

happy eyes at her sister-in-law.
I am going to love him very much," said Lise, looking with bright and
"There, there! Do you feel it? I feel so strange. And do you know, Mary,

sister-in-law's dress.
Princess Mary knelt down before her and hid her face in the folds of her

lifted in childlike happiness.
Her eyes were smiling expectantly, her downy lip rose and remained

her waist.
"give me your hand." She took her sister-in-law's hand and held it below
"Mary," she said, moving away from the embroidery frame and lying back,

joyful and mysterious taking place within her.
Princess Mary but were looking within... into herself... at something
peculiar to pregnant women. It was evident that her eyes did not see
working and looked up with that curious expression of inner, happy calm
When Princess Mary returned from her father, the little princess sat

will follow."
glory were led to destruction. Go, Princess Mary. Go and tell Lise. I
"Go! Go! Killed in battle, where the best of Russian men and Russia's

"Father, tell me how it happened," she asked through her tears.

of eternal peace and blessedness?" she thought.
Had he repented of his unbelief? Was he now there? There in the realms
and amused as he was when he put on the little icon. "Did he believe?
leave of her and of Lise, his look tender yet proud. She saw him tender
wept. She saw her brother now as he had been at the moment when he took
The princess sank helplessly into an armchair beside her father and

tell Lise."
from her. "Destroying the army, destroying the men! And why? Go, go and
"Scoundrels! Blackguards!" shrieked the old man, turning his face away

"Father," she said, "do not turn away from me, let us weep together."

drawing him down put her arm round his thin, scraggy neck.
She forgot all fear of her father, went up to him, took his hand, and
joys and sorrows of this world--overflowed the great grief within her.
beautiful, radiant eyes. It was as if joy--a supreme joy apart from the
hearing these words her face changed and something brightened in her
The princess did not fall down or faint. She was already pale, but on

princess away by that scream... "Killed!"
writes..." and he screamed as piercingly as if he wished to drive the
"Bad news! He's not among the prisoners nor among the killed! Kutuzov

could not bear her look but turned away with a sob.
indescribable charm of sorrow and self-forgetfulness that her father
"Father! Andrew!"--said the ungraceful, awkward princess with such an

incomprehensible--the death of one she loved.
in life, one she had not yet experienced, irreparable and
her and about to crush her was some terrible misfortune, the worst
crushed, but angry and working unnaturally, she saw that hanging over
Her eyes grew dim. By the expression of her father's face, not sad, not
She approached him, saw his face, and something gave way within her.

merged in her memory with what followed.)
and Princess Mary long remembered the dying creak of that wheel, which
down his chisel. (The wheel continued to revolve by its own impetus,
"Ah, Princess Mary!" he said suddenly in an unnatural voice, throwing

lathe and, as usual, did not look round at her.
When Princess Mary went to him at the usual hour he was working at his

he looked very grim he said nothing to anyone.
was silent with his steward, the gardener, and the architect, and though
study, the old prince went for his walk as usual next morning, but he
After receiving this news late in the evening, when he was alone in his

of whom has been sent me under flag of truce."
been mentioned among the officers found on the field of battle, a list
you with the hope that your son is alive, for otherwise he would have
it is still uncertain whether he is alive or not. I comfort myself and
and his fatherland. To the great regret of myself and of the whole army
and at the head of a regiment--he fell as a hero, worthy of his father
"Your son," wrote Kutuzov, "fell before my eyes, a standard in his hand

befallen his son.
came a letter from Kutuzov informing the prince of the fate that had
defeated. A week after the gazette report of the battle of Austerlitz
old prince understood from this official report that our army had been
had had to retreat and had made their withdrawal in perfect order. The
very briefly and vaguely, that after brilliant engagements the Russians
the old prince first heard of the defeat at Austerlitz stated, as usual
strangers and unable to send news of himself. The gazettes from which
place and that he might now be lying, recovering or dying, alone among
his having been picked up on the battlefield by the people of the
all for his relations was the fact that there was still a possibility of
not been found nor was he on the list of prisoners. What was worst of
letters sent through the embassy and all the searches made, his body had
the loss of Prince Andrew had reached Bald Hills, and in spite of the
Two months had elapsed since the news of the battle of Austerlitz and


CHAPTER VII





for Petersburg alone.
in Great Russia, which formed the larger part of his property, and left
A week later Pierre gave his wife full power to control all his estates


have done at that moment had Helene not fled from the room.
voice that the whole house heard it with horror. God knows what he would
on her with outstretched hands shouted, "Get out!" in such a terrible
delight of frenzy. He flung down the slab, broke it, and swooping down
father's nature showed itself in Pierre. He felt the fascination and
Helene's face became terrible, she shrieked and sprang aside. His

brandishing the slab.
with a strength he had never before felt, he made a step toward her
"I'll kill you!" he shouted, and seizing the marble top of a table

Pierre leaped up from the sofa and rushed staggering toward her.

"Separate! That's a thing to frighten me with!"
"Separate? Very well, but only if you give me a fortune," said Helene.

"We had better separate," he muttered in a broken voice.

suffering, but what he wanted to do was too terrible.
not breathe. He knew that he must do something to put an end to this
physically at that moment, there was a weight on his chest and he could
expression she did not understand, and lay down again. He was suffering
Pierre wished to say something, looked at her with eyes whose strange

have taken lovers (des amants), but I have not done so," said she.
that there are not many wives with husbands such as you who would not
"Why shouldn't I speak? I can speak as I like, and I tell you plainly

"Don't speak to me... I beg you," muttered Pierre hoarsely.

yours."
company? If you were cleverer and more agreeable, I should prefer
"And how could you believe he was my lover? Why? Because I like his

moving a muscle.
"Hm... Hm...!" growled Pierre, frowning without looking at her, and not

every way..."
became more and more excited, "A man who's a better man than you in
a man you are jealous of without cause." Helene raised her voice and
will say that you, drunk and not knowing what you were about, challenged
result? That I shall be the laughingstock of all Moscow, that everyone
a fool, que vous etes un sot, but everybody knew that. What will be the
it! Well, what have you proved? What does this duel prove? That you're
uttering the word amant as casually as any other word, "and you believed
was my lover," she said in French with her coarse plainness of speech,
everything you're told. You were told..." Helene laughed, "that Dolokhov
"If you won't answer, I'll tell you..." Helene went on. "You believe

could not reply.
Pierre turned over heavily on the ottoman and opened his mouth, but

is it meant to prove? What? I ask you."
"So it seems you're a hero, eh? Come now, what was this duel about? What

"I? What have I...?" stammered Pierre.

know?" she asked sternly.
"Well, what's this now? What have you been up to now, I should like to

go.
but looked at him with a contemptuous smile, waiting for the valet to
and impossible, he again glanced timidly at her. She did not sit down
enemies, he tried to continue reading. But feeling this to be senseless
who lays back her ears and continues to crouch motionless before her
at her timidly over his spectacles, and like a hare surrounded by hounds
valet had set down the coffee things and left the room. Pierre looked
She knew of the duel and had come to speak about it. She waited till the
imperturbable calm she did not begin to speak in front of the valet.
a wrathful wrinkle on her rather prominent marble brow. With her
a coronet) entered the room, calm and majestic, except that there was
simply dressed hair (two immense plaits twice round her lovely head like
herself in a white satin dressing gown embroidered with silver and with
But before Pierre could decide what answer he would send, the countess

said the valet.
"The countess told me to inquire whether your excellency was at home,"

unable to realize where he was.
He woke up and looked round for a while with a startled expression,

was lying asleep on the ottoman with an open book in his hand.
Next morning when the valet came into the room with his coffee, Pierre

intention to part from her forever.
resolved to go away next day and leave a letter informing her of his
Petersburg. He could not imagine how he could speak to her now. He
In the night he called his valet and told him to pack up to go to

galere?" occurred to him, and he began to laugh at himself.
tenth time, Molibre's words: "Mais que diable alloit-il faire dans cette
aime'?" he kept repeating to himself. And when he had said it for the
and tear whatever came to his hand. "Why did I tell her that 'Je vous
blood rush to his heart and had again to get up and move about and break
most strongly expressed his insincere love for her, and he felt the
she suddenly came into his mind as she was at the moments when he had
But at the moment when he imagined himself calmed by such reflections,

with eternity?"
tormenting oneself, when one has only a moment of life in comparison
tomorrow you'll die as I might have died an hour ago. And is it worth
Who is right and who is wrong? No one! But if you are alive--live:
death for his sake. Then Robespierre was beheaded for being a despot.
were right, as were those too who canonized him and died a martyr's
criminal," came into Pierre's head, "and from their point of view they
"Louis XVI was executed because they said he was dishonorable and a


    * I love you.


thought. "The slur on my name and honor--that's all apart from myself."
A slur on my name? A misfortune for life? Oh, that's nonsense," he
was a lie, and worse than a lie? I am guilty and must endure... what?
did I bind myself to her? Why did I say 'Je vous aime' * to her, which
"It is all, all her fault," he said to himself; "but what of that? Why

digested his sufferings alone.
is called weak character, do not seek a confidant in their troubles. He
Pierre was one of those people who, in spite of an appearance of what

while meeting my remorse with some forced bravado!"
Dolokhov sitting in the snow with a forced smile and perhaps dying,
woman," he repeated, "but dared not admit it to myself. And now there's
"Yes, I never loved her," said he to himself; "I knew she was a depraved


    * "You clear out of this."


and women Pierre could not understand why he did not love her.
she used to say. Often seeing the success she had with young and old men
"I'm not such a fool.... Just you try it on.... Allez-vous promener," *

been brought up in the most aristocratic circles.
vulgarity of the expressions that were natural to her, though she had
Then he recalled the coarseness and bluntness of her thoughts and the

have any children by me."
was not a fool to want to have children, and that she was not going to
felt any symptoms of pregnancy. She laughed contemptuously and said she
do what he pleases,' she used to say of me. One day I asked her if she
with a calm smile that she was not so stupid as to be jealous: 'Let him
kissed. Her father in jest tried to rouse her jealousy, and she replied
naked shoulders. She did not give him the money, but let herself be
"Anatole used to come to borrow money from her and used to kiss her

clear.
woman. Now I have spoken that terrible word to myself all has become
and the whole secret lies in the terrible truth that she is a depraved
constant composure and complacency and lack of all interests or desires,
I was to blame for not understanding her, for not understanding that
her. How often when considering her character I have told myself that
this is what I was proud of! I then thought that I did not understand
received all Petersburg, proud of her unapproachability and beauty. So
and social tact," thought he; "been proud of my house, in which she
"But how often I have felt proud of her, proud of her majestic beauty

understanding of his employer's happiness.
his dressing gown and smiled slightly, as if expressing respectful
steward there, who, bowing respectfully, looked into his face and at
study a little before noon in his silk dressing gown and found his head
how one day soon after his marriage he came out of the bedroom into his
Particularly vivid, humiliating, and shameful was the recollection of
He remembered his honeymoon and blushed at the recollection.

right to do it. And so it turns out."
I felt it," he thought. "I felt then that it was not so, that I had no
so difficult to utter: "I love you." "It all comes from that! Even then
after supper at Prince Vasili's, when he spoke those words he had found
her; in deceiving yourself and her." And he vividly recalled that moment
"But in what was I to blame?" he asked. "In marrying her without loving

it?"--"Because you married her," answered an inner voice.
killed my wife's lover. Yes, that was it! And why? How did I come to do
"What has happened?" he asked himself. "I have killed her lover, yes,

he reeled and sank on the snow.
then that same face pale, quivering, and suffering, as it had been when
insolent, hard, and mocking face as he had seen it at the banquet, and
her face, and then immediately he saw beside her Dolokhov's handsome,
their marriage, with bare shoulders and a languid, passionate look on
room with rapid steps. Now he seemed to see her in the early days of
asleep, nor even remain in one place, but had to jump up and pace the
thoughts, and memories suddenly arose within him that he could not fall
had happened to him, but could not do so. Such a storm of feelings,
He lay down on the sofa meaning to fall asleep and forget all that

father's room, that huge room in which Count Bezukhov had died.
duel he did not go to his bedroom but, as he often did, remained in his
Moscow their house was always full of visitors. The night after the
Pierre had of late rarely seen his wife alone. Both in Petersburg and in


CHAPTER VI





of sons and brothers.
with an old mother and a hunchback sister, and was the most affectionate
learned that Dolokhov the brawler, Dolokhov the bully, lived in Moscow
Rostov went on ahead to do what was asked, and to his great surprise

He implored Rostov to go on and prepare her.
living with his mother, who, if she saw him dying, would not survive it.
When he had become a little quieter, he explained to Rostov that he was

pressed Rostov's hand and burst into tears.
"My mother! My mother, my angel, my adored angel mother," and Dolokhov

"Who?" asked Rostov.

killed... She won't get over it! She won't survive...."
"Where are we? In Moscow, I know. I don't matter, but I have killed her,
"Bad! But it's not that, my friend-" said Dolokhov with a gasping voice.

"Well? How do you feel?" he asked.

face.
altered and unexpectedly rapturous and tender expression on Dolokhov's
was sitting beside him, by the hand. Rostov was struck by the totally
suddenly came to and, lifting his head with an effort, took Rostov, who
a word to the questions addressed to him. But on entering Moscow he
The latter lay silent in the sleigh with closed eyes and did not answer

Rostov and Denisov drove away with the wounded Dolokhov.

Nesvitski stopped him and took him home.

"Folly... folly! Death... lies..." he repeated, puckering his face.

trampling through the deep snow, and muttering incoherent words:
Pierre clutched his temples, and turning round went into the forest,

snow.
"Missed!" shouted Dolokhov, and he lay helplessly, face downwards on the

Dolokhov's angry cry.
closed their eyes. At the same instant they heard a report and
Dolokhov looked sorrowfully at him. Denisov, Rostov, and Nesvitski
helplessly spread out, stood with his broad chest directly facing
Pierre, with a gentle smile of pity and remorse, his arms and legs

"Cover yourself!" even Denisov cried to his adversary.

"Sideways! Cover yourself with your pistol!" ejaculated Nesvitski.

strength. He raised his pistol and aimed.
glittered with effort and exasperation as he mustered his remaining
swallowed the cold snow, his lips quivered but his eyes, still smiling,
in his legs and sat up, seeking a firm center of gravity. He sucked and
snow, greedily bit at it, again raised his head, adjusted himself, drew
saber. Only ten paces divided them. Dolokhov lowered his head to the
"To your barrier!" and Pierre, grasping what was meant, stopped by his

was about to cross the space between the barriers, when Dolokhov cried:
Pierre, hardly restraining his sobs, began running toward Dolokhov and

"Please," he uttered with an effort.

"Plea..." began Dolokhov, but could not at first pronounce the word.

quivered.
coat and supported himself with it. His frowning face was pallid and
on the snow beside it. His left hand was bloody; he wiped it on his
after stumbling a few staggering steps right up to the saber, he sank
"No-o-o!" muttered Dolokhov through his teeth, "no, it's not over." And

something.
his drooping pistol. His face was pale. Rostov ran toward him and said
He was pressing one hand to his left side, while the other clutched
Dolokhov's hurried steps, and his figure came in view through the smoke.
but there was no second report as he had expected. He only heard
denser by the mist, prevented him from seeing anything for an instant,
then, smiling at his own sensations, stood still. The smoke, rendered
Not at all expecting so loud a report, Pierre shuddered at the sound and
glanced at Dolokhov and, bending his finger as he had been shown, fired.
the track into the snow, Pierre looked down at his feet, then quickly
knew he must not do so. Having advanced six paces and strayed off
carefully back, because he wished to support his right hand with it and
apparently afraid of shooting himself with it. His left hand he held
the deep snow. He held the pistol in his right hand at arm's length,
went quickly forward, missing the trodden path and stepping into
"So I can fire when I like!" said Pierre, and at the word "three," he

its usual semblance of a smile.
bright, sparkling blue eyes into his antagonist's face. His mouth wore
walked slowly without raising his pistol, looking intently with his
right to fire when they liked as they approached the barrier. Dolokhov
one another, beginning to see one another through the mist. They had the
The combatants advanced along the trodden tracks, nearer and nearer to

"O-ne! T-wo! Thwee!" he shouted angrily and stepped aside.

the word thwee begin to advance.
have wefused a weconciliation, please pwoceed. Take your pistols, and at
Denisov first went to the barrier and announced: "As the adve'sawies

men's will.
could no longer be averted but was taking its course independently of
dread was in the air. It was evident that the affair so lightly begun
"All right," said Pierre, still smiling in the same way. A feeling of

"Well begin!" said Dolokhov.


CHAPTER V





ready, but they still delayed and all were silent.
paces' distance nothing could be seen. For three minutes all had been
ten paces apart to mark the barrier. It was thawing and misty; at forty
Nesvitski's and Dolokhov's sabers, which were stuck into the ground
the deep wet snow between the place where they had been standing and
edge of the clearing. The seconds, measuring the paces, left tracks in
last few days. The antagonists stood forty paces apart at the farther
covered with melting snow, the frost having begun to break up during the
where the sleighs had been left, in a small clearing in the pine forest
The spot chosen for the duel was some eighty paces from the road,

appointed place.
side had been attempting a reconciliation), and he also went up to the
"No apologies, none whatever," said Dolokhov to Denisov (who on his

"Oh yes, like that, I know, I only forgot," said he.

did not wish to confess.
trigger, as he had not before held a pistol in his hand--a fact that he
He took the pistol in his hand and began asking about the working of the

shoot," he said with an unnaturally gentle smile.
Is everything ready?" he added. "Only tell me where to go and where to
"No! What is there to talk about?" said Pierre. "It's all the same....

There was no insult on either side. Allow me to convey...."
honorable to admit one's mistake than to let matters become irreparable.
affair had come to an actual duel). "You know, Count, it is much more
affair, and like everyone in similar cases, did not yet believe that the
will accept them," said Nesvitski (who like the others concerned in the
"Then allow me to express your regrets, and I am sure your opponent

"Oh yes, it is horribly stupid," said Pierre.

not quite in the right, you were impetuous..."
for this affair, or for blood to be shed over it.... You were not right,
did not tell you the whole truth. I think there is no sufficient ground
choosing me for your second, if at this grave, this very grave, moment I
should not justify your confidence and the honor you have done me in
"I should not be doing my duty, Count," he said in timid tones, "and

and the pistols loaded, Nesvitski went up to Pierre.
When all was ready, the sabers stuck in the snow to mark the barriers,

be long? Are things ready?"
absent-minded way, which inspired the respect of the onlookers, "Will it
thoughts occurred to him, he would ask in a particularly calm and
somewhere?" passed through his mind. But just at moments when such
or elbow, or knee. Can't I go away from here, run away, bury myself
this murder? Either I shall kill him, or he will hit me in the head,
"It's even certain that I should have done the same, then why this duel,
should perhaps have done the same thing in his place," thought Pierre.
no reason to preserve the honor of a man who was nothing to him.... "I
had not the slightest doubt, and the guiltlessness of Dolokhov, who had
considerations: his wife's guilt, of which after his sleepless night he
up his eyes as if dazzled by the sun. He was entirely absorbed by two
evidently not slept that night. He looked about distractedly and screwed
connection with the matter in hand. His haggard face was yellow. He had
Pierre had the air of a man preoccupied with considerations which had no
Sokolniki forest and found Dolokhov, Denisov, and Rostov already there.
Next day, at eight in the morning, Pierre and Nesvitski drove to the


    * Till tomorrow, my dear fellow.


how it is with me. A demain, mon cher." *
all gone, and your only thought is not to let him get away!' And that's
me. 'Everyone fears a bear,' he says, 'but when you see one your fear's
then all will be right, as our bear huntsman at Kostroma used to tell
intention of killing your man as quickly and surely as possible, and
killed, you are a fool and are lost for certain. But go with the firm
affectionate letters to your parents, and if you think you may be
words. If you are going to fight a duel, and you make a will and write
"Well, you see, I'll tell you the whole secret of dueling in two

Dolokhov paused.

"And do you feel quite calm?" Rostov asked.

of Rostov in the Club porch.
"Well then, till tomorrow at Sokolniki," said Dolokhov, as he took leave

and other singers.
and Denisov stayed on at the Club till late, listening to the gypsies
Nesvitski, Bezukhov's second. Pierre went home, but Rostov with Dolokhov
second, and after dinner he discussed the arrangements for the duel with
that he would take no part in the matter, Rostov agreed to be Dolokhov's
hated her and was forever sundered from her. Despite Denisov's request
whole day was finally and indubitably answered in the affirmative. He
that the question of his wife's guilt which had been tormenting him the
At the very instant he did this and uttered those words, Pierre felt

back his chair, he rose from the table.
"You...! you... scoundrel! I challenge you!" he ejaculated, and, pushing

Pale, with quivering lips, Pierre snatched the copy.

"You shan't have it!" he said distinctly.

smile of his which seemed to say, "Ah! This is what I like!"
Dolokhov looked at Pierre with clear, mirthful, cruel eyes, and that

"Don't! Don't! What are you about?" whispered their frightened voices.

neighbor on his right quickly turned in alarm to Bezukhov.
Hearing that cry and seeing to whom it was addressed, Nesvitski and the

"How dare you take it?" he shouted.

leaned his whole massive body across the table.
had tormented him all dinnertime rose and took possession of him. He
Dolokhov and his eyes dropped, the something terrible and monstrous that
snatched it from his hand and began reading it. Pierre looked at
guests. He was just going to take it when Dolokhov, leaning across,
with Kutuzov's cantata, laid one before Pierre as one of the principal
Dolokhov or answering him. The footman, who was distributing leaflets
Pierre, with downcast eyes, drank out of his glass without looking at

added.
"Here's to the health of lovely women, Peterkin--and their lovers!" he

mouth, he turned with his glass to Pierre.
a serious expression, but with a smile lurking at the corners of his
"Well, now to the health of handsome women!" said Dolokhov, and with

about him. He reddened and turned away.
Pierre did not catch what they were saying, but knew they were talking

"One should make up to the husbands of pretty women," said Denisov.

"Confound him, he's a fool!" said Rostov.

"Why don't you renew the acquaintance?" said Dolokhov to Rostov.

engaged; he was shouting "Hurrah!"
"Why, I didn't recognize you!" he said. But Rostov was otherwise

all were seated again, turned with his kindly smile to Rostov.
Pierre sighed, rose submissively, emptied his glass, and, waiting till

exasperation. "Don't you hear it's His Majesty the Emperor's health?"
"What are you about?" shouted Rostov, looking at him in an ecstasy of

Pierre, lost in thought, did not rise or lift his glass.
not responded to his greeting. When the Emperor's health was drunk,
preoccupation and absent-mindedness had not recognized Rostov and had
beauty, and in a word--an old woman; and secondly because Pierre in his
appeared to his hussar eyes as a rich civilian, the husband of a
at the dinner. Rostov looked inimically at Pierre, first because Pierre
preoccupied, absent-minded, and massive figure was a very noticeable one
rake, and every now and then he glanced ironically at Pierre, whose
whom was a dashing hussar and the other a notorious duelist and
seemed very gay. Rostov was talking merrily to his two friends, one of
Dolokhov, Denisov, and Rostov were now sitting opposite Pierre and
and again he felt something terrible and monstrous rising in his soul.
I, too, am afraid of him--and in fact I am afraid of him," he thought,
everyone is afraid of him, and that must please him. He must think that
Pierre, "to kill a man means nothing to him. It must seem to him that
on Dolokhov's face when looking at him. "Yes, he is a bully," thought
or shot a post-boy's horse with a pistol. That expression was often
the water, or when he challenged a man to a duel without any reason,
cruelty, as when tying the policeman to the bear and dropping them into
remembered the expression Dolokhov's face assumed in his moments of
do not believe it. I have no right to, and can't, believe it." He
of deceiving me, if it really were true. Yes, if it were true, but I
him. I know and understand what a spice that would add to the pleasure
because I have exerted myself on his behalf, befriended him, and helped
particularly pleasant to him to dishonor my name and ridicule me, just
"Yes, he is very handsome," thought Pierre, "and I know him. It would be

not left them for a day.
his wife's beauty to him and from that time till they came to Moscow had
Dolokhov's living at their house, and how cynically Dolokhov had praised
money. Pierre recalled how Helene had smilingly expressed disapproval of
had come straight to his house, and Pierre had put him up and lent him
of his friendly relations with Pierre as a boon companion, Dolokhov
campaign, had returned to Petersburg and come to him. Availing himself
how Dolokhov, who had fully recovered his former position after the
true had it not referred to his wife. He involuntarily remembered
what was said in the letter might be true, or might at least seem to be
wife's past and her relations with Dolokhov, Pierre saw clearly that
rising in his soul and turned quickly away. Involuntarily recalling his
handsome insolent eyes, Pierre felt something terrible and monstrous
who was sitting opposite him. Every time he chanced to meet Dolokhov's
princess' hints and the letter, but he feared now to look at Dolokhov,
a secret to no one but himself. Pierre absolutely disbelieved both the
through his spectacles, but that his wife's connection with Dolokhov was
the mean jocular way common to anonymous letters said that he saw badly
wife, and by an anonymous letter he had received that morning, which in
princess, his cousin, at Moscow, concerning Dolokhov's intimacy with his
The unsolved problem that tormented him was caused by hints given by the

depressing and unsolved problem.
nothing of what was going on around him and to be absorbed by some
nose. His face was depressed and gloomy. He seemed to see and hear
a look of complete absent-mindedness, kept rubbing the bridge of his
dinner and looked about, blinking and scowling, or, with fixed eyes and
some great change had come over him that day. He was silent all through
drank much, and eagerly. But those who knew him intimately noticed that
Pierre sat opposite Dolokhov and Nicholas Rostov. As usual, he ate and


CHAPTER IV





outright.
toast, the count took out his handkerchief and, covering his face, wept
Ilya Rostov separately, as the organizer of the banquet. At that
all the Club members and to all the Club guests, and finally to Count
Naryshkin, Uvarov, Dolgorukov, Apraksin, Valuev, to the committee, to
smashed, and the shouting grew louder. They drank to Bekleshev,
and Count Ilya Rostov became more and more moved, more glass was
As soon as the singing was over, another and another toast was proposed


   He brings foe men to their knees,... etc.
   Have we not Bagration?
   Courage conquest guarantees;
   Russians! O'er all barriers on!

by Paul Ivanovich Kutuzov:
again, but instead of the band a choir began singing a cantata composed
his blue eyes grew moist. "Hurrah!" cried the three hundred voices
hero of our last campaign, Prince Peter Ivanovich Bagration!" and again
note lying beside his plate, and proposed a toast, "To the health of the
made and exchanging remarks. The old count rose once more, glanced at a
broken glass and everybody sat down again, smiling at the noise they had
for a long time. When the voices subsided, the footmen cleared away the
the floor. Many followed his example, and the loud shouting continued
he roared, "Hurrah!" and emptying his glass at one gulp he dashed it to
others. He nearly wept. "To the health of our Sovereign, the Emperor!"
Young Rostov's ecstatic voice could be heard above the three hundred
the same voice in which he had shouted it on the field at Schon Grabern.
and cried "Hurrah!" Bagration also rose and shouted "Hurrah!" in exactly
band immediately struck up "Conquest's joyful thunder waken..." All rose
moment his kindly eyes grew moist with tears of joy and enthusiasm. The
"To the health of our Sovereign, the Emperor!" he cried, and at the same

for what he would say.
whispered, and taking up his glass, he rose. All were silent, waiting
other committeemen. "There will be many toasts, it's time to begin," he
which made a certain sensation, the count exchanged glances with the
began popping corks and filling the champagne glasses. After the fish,
which Ilya Rostov blushed with self-conscious pleasure), the footmen
was excellent. With the second course, a gigantic sterlet (at sight of
footmen, and awaited each expected dish with some anxiety. Everything
end of the meal. He winked at the butler, whispered directions to the
other fare, was splendid, yet he could not feel quite at ease till the
His efforts had not been in vain. The dinner, both the Lenten and the

did the honors to the prince.
facing Bagration and, as the very personification of Moscow hospitality,
Nesvitski. Count Ilya Rostov with the other members of the committee sat
almost at the middle of the table. Facing them sat Pierre, beside Prince
Nicholas Rostov, with Denisov and his new acquaintance, Dolokhov, sat

and proudly around while Bagration spoke to his son.
as were all the words he spoke that day, and Count Ilya looked joyfully
who recognized him and said a few words to him, disjointed and awkward,
Just before dinner, Count Ilya Rostov presented his son to Bagration,

the land lies lowest.
nearer to the honored guest, as naturally as water flows deepest where
dining room, according to their rank and importance: the more important
the name of the sovereign. Three hundred persons took their seats in the
Alexanders--Bekleshev and Naryshkin--which was a significant allusion to
went in to dinner. He was seated in the place of honor between two
important than verses, and Bagration, again preceding all the rest,
verses, bowed to Bagration. Everyone rose, feeling that dinner was more
and Count Rostov, glancing angrily at the author who went on reading his

   Triumph, valiant Russians, now!...
   Conquest's joyful thunder waken,

the resounding strains of the polonaise:
that dinner was ready! The door opened, and from the dining room came
But before he had finished reading, a stentorian major-domo announced

   And dare not Herculean Russians trouble...
   Knows by experience, now, Bagration,
   E'en fortunate Napoleon
   A Rhipheus at home, a Caesar in the field!
   A dreaded foe be thou, kindhearted as a man,
   And on the throne our Titus shield.
   Bring glory then to Alexander's reign

them aloud. Bagration bowed his head and listened:
expression. But the author himself took the verses and began reading
his weary eyes on the paper, began to read them with a fixed and serious
"Well, I will read them, then!" Bagration seemed to say, and, fixing

dinner with it) and drew his attention to the verses.
(or he would, it seemed, have held it till evening and have gone in to
had presented it to him. Someone obligingly took the dish from Bagration
with both hands and looked sternly and reproachfully at the count who
submit. Feeling himself in their power, he resolutely took the salver
in dismay, as though seeking help. But all eyes demanded that he should
in the hero's honor. Bagration, on seeing the salver, glanced around
to Prince Bagration. On the salver lay some verses composed and printed
another committeeman, carrying a large silver salver which he presented
crowd, went out of the drawing room and reappeared a minute later with
beset the new arrivals. Count Ilya, again thrusting his way through the
the center sofa. The bigwigs, the most respected members of the Club,
than anyone, led the guests into the drawing room, and seated them on
boy! Make way, make way!" pushed through the crowd more energetically
Count Ilya Rostov, laughing and repeating the words, "Make way, dear
Bagration over each other's shoulders, as if he were some rare animal.
members and guests jostling one another and trying to get a good look at
at first impossible to enter the drawing-room door for the crowd of
for his reply, surrounded him, and led him to the drawing room. It was
highly honored guest, took possession of him as it were, without waiting
met him at the first door and, expressing their delight at seeing such a
Schon Grabern--and he would have found that easier. The committeemen
field under fire, as he had done at the head of the Kursk regiment at
what to do with his hands; he was more accustomed to walk over a plowed
and awkwardly over the parquet floor of the reception room, not knowing
at the doors, but after all he did at last enter first. He walked shyly
wishing to avail himself of their courtesy, and this caused some delay
as the guest of honor, to enter first. Bagration was embarrassed, not
Uvarov, who had arrived with him, paused at the doorway to allow him,
features, gave him a rather comical expression. Bekleshev and Theodore
festive in his air, which, in conjunction with his firm and virile
which changed his appearance for the worse. There was something naively
before coming to the dinner he had had his hair and whiskers trimmed,
Orders, and the Star of St. George on his left breast. Evidently just
of Austerlitz, but wore a tight new uniform with Russian and foreign
over his shoulder, as when Rostov had seen him on the eve of the battle
porter. He had no lambskin cap on his head, nor had he a loaded whip
which, in accord with the Club custom, he had given up to the hall
Bagration appeared in the doorway of the anteroom without hat or sword,

ballroom.
came together and crowded in the large drawing room by the door of the
in a shovel--the guests who had been scattered about in different rooms
Bells rang, the stewards rushed forward, and--like rye shaken together

had run in announced, with a frightened face: "He's arrived!"
he had finished his greeting there was a general stir, and a footman who
old fellow?" he said, turning to an old man who was passing, but before
there... both playing the hero... Ah, Vasili Ignatovich... How d'ye do,
"Please come and visit us... you know my brave boy... been together out

old count came up to them and pressed Dolokhov's hand.
Dolokhov, whose acquaintance he had lately made and highly valued. The
on him and winking joyfully at him. Young Rostov stood at a window with
eyes occasionally sought out his fine well-set-up young son, resting
unimportant, all of whom he knew, as if they were all equals, while his
between the dining and drawing rooms, hastily greeting the important and
Count Ilya Rostov, hurried and preoccupied, went about in his soft boots

Kutuzov.
feel that in that place and on that day, it was improper to speak so of
cock, but the elder members glanced severely at the wit, making him
learn from Suvorov even so simple a thing as the art of crowing like a
by, tried to make a joke, saying that Kutuzov had evidently failed to
the nonsense talked by the Austrian generals. Shinshin, standing close
Austrian Council of War at which Suvorov crowed like a cock in reply to
In the third circle, Naryshkin was speaking of the meeting of the

Petersburg to ascertain what Moscow was thinking about Austerlitz.
Valuev was confidentially telling that Uvarov had been sent from

force their way through them with bayonets.
the Russians had been overwhelmed by flying Austrians and had had to
Count Rostopchin, Valuev, and Naryshkin. Rostopchin was describing how
to hear the voices of well-known men. The largest circles formed round
were the center of groups which even strangers approached respectfully
so he went from one group to another. Some of the most important old men
and connections he belonged to the groups old and honored guests, and
By his age he should have belonged to the younger men, but by his wealth

treated them with absent-minded contempt.
wealth, and being in the habit of lording it over these people, he
elsewhere, he was surrounded by an atmosphere of subservience to his
about the rooms fashionably dressed but looking sad and dull. Here, as
wife's command had let his hair grow and abandoned his spectacles, went
Nesvitski was there as an old member of the Club. Pierre, who at his

honor you, but all the same remember that the future belongs to us."
seems to say to the older generation, "We are prepared to respect and
bore that expression of condescending respect for their elders which
faces of these young people, especially those who were military men,
and Dolokhov--who was now again an officer in the Semenov regiment. The
were casual guests--chiefly young men, among whom were Denisov, Rostov,
places and met in certain habitual groups. A minority of those present
and voices. This class of guests and members sat in certain habitual
men with broad, self-confident faces, fat fingers, and resolute gestures
to offer their services. Most of those present were elderly, respected
stood at every door anxiously noting visitors' every movement in order
Powdered footmen, in livery with buckled shoes and smart stockings,
and a few here and there with powdered hair and in Russian kaftans.
stood, met, and separated, some in uniform and some in evening dress,
The members and guests of the Club wandered hither and thither, sat,
with a hum of conversation, like the hum of bees swarming in springtime.
On that third of March, all the rooms in the English Club were filled


CHAPTER III





eccentric father.
regretted that he had died so young, leaving a pregnant wife with his
Bolkonski, nothing was said, and only those who knew him intimately
in the right hand, taken his sword in the left, and gone forward. Of
was mentioned, by those who did not know him, as having, when wounded
killed five Frenchmen, a third had loaded five cannon singlehanded. Berg
officers and men at Austerlitz. One had saved a standard, another had
anecdotes were heard of individual examples of heroism shown by our
only need to be restrained and held back! On all sides, new and fresh
is more dangerous to run away than to advance, but that Russian soldiers
highfalutin words, and Germans by logical arguments to show them that it
Rostopchin, that French soldiers have to be incited to battle by
for our defeat by the memory of former victories; and the words of
and modeling you must get smeared with clay," suggesting consolation
All Moscow repeated Prince Dolgorukov's saying: "If you go on modeling

court weathercock and an old satyr.
no one spoke of, except some who abused him in whispers, calling him a
him," said the wit Shinshin, parodying the words of Voltaire. Kutuzov
"Had there been no Bagration, it would have been necessary to invent

disapproval and dislike of Kutuzov.
Moreover, paying such honor to Bagration was the best way of expressing
by memories of the Italian campaign with the name of Suvorov.
soldier without connections and intrigues, and to one who was associated
there. In his person, honor was shown to a simple fighting Russian
the fact that he had no connections in the city and was a stranger
What also conduced to Bagration's being selected as Moscow's hero was
had all day beaten back an enemy force twice as numerous as his own.
from Austerlitz, where he alone had withdrawn his column unbroken and
Bagration, distinguished by his Schon Grabern affair and by the retreat
officers, and generals were heroes. But the hero of heroes was Prince
was extraordinary and had achieved miracles of valor. The soldiers,
insignificant people. But the army, the Russian army, everyone declared,
youth and inexperience of the sovereign, who had trusted worthless and
Frenchman Langeron, Kutuzov's incapacity, and (it was whispered) the
commissariat, the treachery of the Pole Przebyszewski and of the
said. These reasons were the treachery of the Austrians, a defective
clear, and in all corners of Moscow the same things began to be
unheard-of, and impossible event of a Russian defeat, everything became
clearly and definitely. Reasons were found for the incredible,
who guided the Club's opinion reappeared, and everybody began speaking
But after a while, just as a jury comes out of its room, the bigwigs
discuss the bad news was difficult, and so it was best to be silent.
leaders. The Moscovites felt that something was wrong and that to
while without any definite opinion on the subject of the war and without
their opinions from others--Ilya Rostov among them--remained for a
met in private houses in intimate circles, and the Moscovites who took
Markov, and Prince Vyazemski--did not show themselves at the Club, but
conversation--Count Rostopchin, Prince Yuri Dolgorukov, Valuev, Count
though all were in a conspiracy of silence. The men who set the tone in
December, nothing was said about the war and the last battle, as
and well informed foregathered when the news began to arrive in
event. In the English Club, where all who were distinguished, important,
while others sought some extraordinary explanation of so strange an
that on receiving news of the defeat some would simply not believe it,
been bewildered. At that time, the Russians were so used to victories
On the first arrival of the news of the battle of Austerlitz, Moscow had

dinner.
guest of honor and hero of the Austrian campaign, Prince Bagration, to
fifty members of the English Club and fifty guests were awaiting the
Next day, the third of March, soon after one o'clock, two hundred and

over. It will be a tremendous banquet."
"Dear, dear! But still tell him to come to the Club--it will all blow

is quite broken by his misfortune."
sympathy for the "daredevil," as she called Dolokhov. "They say Pierre
Pierre, but by involuntary intonations and a half smile betraying her
after her!" said Anna Mikhaylovna, wishing to show her sympathy for
his house in Petersburg, and now... she has come here and that daredevil
compromised her completely, they say. Pierre took him up, invited him to
"Dolokhov, Mary Ivanovna's son," she said in a mysterious whisper, "has

Anna Mikhaylovna sighed deeply.

"Wh-what is the matter?" asked both the young and old Rostov.

consolation I can."
Bezukhov! Yes, I pity him from my heart, and shall try to give him what
were rejoicing at his happiness! And such a lofty angelic soul as young
is true, it is dreadful. How little we dreamed of such a thing when we
"Ah, my dear friend, he is very unfortunate," she said. "If what we hear

on her face.
Anna Mikhaylovna turned up her eyes, and profound sadness was depicted

he asked.
"Tell Bezukhov to come. I'll put his name down. Is his wife with him?"

his commissions and ordered the small closed carriage for her.
The count was delighted at Anna Mikhaylovna's taking upon herself one of

staff."
He has forwarded me a letter from Boris. Thank God, Boris is now on the
get anything we want from his hothouses. I have to see him in any case.
"But I'll go to Bezukhov's myself. Pierre has arrived, and now we shall
"No matter at all, my dear count," she said, meekly closing her eyes.

excuse his costume.
dressing gown every day, he invariably became confused and begged her to
Mikhaylovna entered the hall. Though she came upon the count in his
preoccupied, yet meekly Christian look which never left her face, Anna
At that moment, with noiseless footsteps and with the businesslike,

laughing. "Dear, dear!..."
"And am I to bring the gypsy girls along with him?" asked Nicholas,

me."
Orlov's, you remember, in a white Cossack coat, and bring him along to
knows--and look up the gypsy Ilyushka, the one who danced at Count
princesses; and from there go on to the Rasgulyay--the coachman Ipatka
anyone else. He's not there himself, so you'll have to go in and ask the
to ask for strawberries and fresh pineapples.' We can't get them from
at once, and go to Bezukhov's, and tell him 'Count Ilya has sent you
by both hands, he cried, "Now I've got you, so take the sleigh and pair
"That's it, that's it!" exclaimed the count, and gaily seizing his son

business!"
dinner, but providing it and serving it all up, that's not their
"That's so, your excellency, all they have to do is to eat a good

"Laughing at us old fellows!"
"What have the young people come to nowadays, eh, Feoktist?" said he.

son.
expression, looked observantly and sympathetically at the father and
And the count turned to the cook, who, with a shrewd and respectful

"Yes, you talk, but try it yourself!"

The old count pretended to be angry.

the battle of Schon Grabern than you do now," said his son with a smile.
"Really, Papa, I believe Prince Bagration worried himself less before

sort of thing."
shouldn't we get the gypsy singers as well? You military men like that
a bit! I must have singers too. I shall have my own orchestra, but
he felt a little confused before his son. "Now, if you would only help
"Ah, my boy, my head's in a whirl!" said the old man with a smile, as if

Moscow, entered the room.
little mustache, evidently rested and made sleeker by his easy life in
heard at the door, and the young count, handsome, rosy, with a dark
began giving orders. A light footstep and the clinking of spurs were
he returned again, called back the cook and the club steward, and again
countess" to have a rest, but remembering something else of importance,
Having given several more orders, he was about to go to his "little

on Friday."
brought here well wrapped up in felt. I must have two hundred pots here
the serfs to work. Say that everything out of the hothouses must be
appeared at his call. "Hurry off and tell Maksim, the gardener, to set
Dmitri! Gallop off to our Moscow estate," he said to the factotum who
clutched at his head. "Who is going to get me the flowers? Dmitri! Eh,
forgetting. We must have another entree. Ah, goodness gracious!" he
"Yes, it can't be helped if they won't take less. Ah, dear me! I was

"Then am I to order those large sterlets?" asked the steward.

bending down a finger.
"We can't have less--yes, three... the mayonnaise, that's one," said he,

The count considered.

"Shall we have three cold dishes then?" asked the cook.

"Well then, mind and have cocks' comb in the turtle soup, you know!"

several thousand rubles.
so easily extract a good profit for themselves from a dinner costing
pleased faces, for they knew that under no other management could they
The club cook and the steward listened to the count's orders with
their own resources what might be needed for the success of the fete.
still fewer men would be so well able and willing to make up out of
well how to arrange a feast on an open-handed, hospitable scale, and
arrangement of the festival in honor of Bagration, for few men knew so
the Club from the day it was founded. To him the Club entrusted the
for this dinner. The count had been a member and on the committee of
cook, about asparagus, fresh cucumbers, strawberries, veal, and fish
orders to the club steward and to the famous Feoktist, the Club's head
The count walked up and down the hall in his dressing gown, giving

a dinner in honor of Prince Bagration at the English Club.
At the beginning of March, old Count Ilya Rostov was very busy arranging

was another matter and quite the thing for a dashing young hussar!
English Club, sprees with Denisov, and visits to a certain house--that
society with an affectation of doing so against his will. The races, the
was rather derogatory to his manhood. He went to balls and into ladies'
now I have no time." Besides, it seemed to him that the society of women
know. There will be time enough to think about love when I want to, but
be, and there are, many more such girls somewhere whom I do not yet
Sonya, during this stay in Moscow, he said to himself, "Ah, there will
his freedom which he needs for so many other things. When he thought of
for that sort of thing and a young man fears to bind himself and prizes
the period of youth when there seems so much to do that there is no time
pretty and sweet, and evidently deeply in love with him, but he was at
not draw closer to Sonya, but rather drifted away from her. She was very
During Rostov's short stay in Moscow, before rejoining the army, he did

as the "angel incarnate."
the adoration then common in Moscow for the Emperor, who was spoken of
Emperor not everyone could understand, and with his whole soul he shared
had not told all and that there was something in his feelings for the
about him and about his love for him, letting it be understood that he
he did not see him and had no opportunity of seeing him, he often spoke
His passion for the Emperor had cooled somewhat in Moscow. But still, as

forty to whom Denisov had introduced him.
visited the English Club, and was on intimate terms with a colonel of
the Arkharovs' ball, talked about the war with Field Marshal Kamenski,
of the boulevards whom he visited of an evening. He led the mazurka at
men was training a trotter of his own for a race. He knew a lady on one
action, and in the company of well-known, elderly, and respected racing
wearing the Cross of St. George, awarded to soldiers for bravery in
Now he was a lieutenant of hussars, in a jacket laced with silver, and
recalled all this as childishness he had left immeasurably behind.
Gavril to pay a sleigh driver, his kissing Sonya on the sly--he now
despair at failing in a Scripture examination, his borrowing money from
at home again. He felt that he had grown up and matured very much. His
to the old conditions of life, Nicholas found it very pleasant to be
passed his time very gaily. After a short period of adapting himself
latest fashion, with extremely pointed toes and small silver spurs,
latest cut, such as no one else yet had in Moscow, and boots of the
acquiring a trotter of his own, very stylish riding breeches of the
that year, as all his estates had been remortgaged, and so Nicholas,
The Rostovs knew everybody in Moscow. The old count had money enough

dancer, and one of the best matches in the city.
man; by his acquaintances as a handsome lieutenant of hussars, a good
Nikolenka; by his relations as a charming, attractive, and polite young
by his home circle as the best of sons, a hero, and their darling
On his return to Moscow from the army, Nicholas Rostov was welcomed


CHAPTER II





and gentlemen than Rostov had ever expected to see him.
himself when going into battle, and he was more amiable to the ladies
hair, perfumed, and in a new uniform, looking just as smart as he made
Denisov, to Rostov's surprise, appeared in the drawing room with pomaded

match--blushed like a girl.
this love affair which might hinder Nicholas from making a brilliant
Nicholas, and Natasha, but even the old countess, who--dreading
her observations, it made everyone feel uncomfortable, not only Sonya,
Vera's remark was correct, as her remarks always were, but, like most of

strangers."
"that Sonya and Nicholas now say you to one another and meet like
"How strange it is," said Vera, selecting a moment when all were silent,

another he would never cease to love her, for that would be impossible.
thanked her for offering him his freedom and told her that one way or
remind him of his promise, and then thanked him for his love. His looks
asked him to forgive her for having dared, by Natasha's intermediacy, to
But their eyes met and said thou, and exchanged tender kisses. Her looks
her. He kissed her hand and addressed her not as thou but as you--Sonya.
looking inquiringly at him and watching to see how he would behave with
be done; he felt that everybody, including his mother and sisters, was
meeting, they had kissed each other, but today they felt it could not
to behave with her. The evening before, in the first happy moment of
Rostov met Sonya in the drawing room, he reddened. He did not know how
dancer, but smiling as only happy girls of fifteen can smile. When
And Natasha rose and went out of the room on tiptoe, like a ballet

"Well then, be quick. We'll all have breakfast together."

"Very."

"You call him Vaska? That's funny! And is he very nice?"

"Why terrible?" asked Nicholas. "No, Vaska is a splendid fellow."

"Oh, well then, good-by: go and dress. Is he very terrible, Denisov?"

"Yes, indeed!"

she asked.
"But that's all rubbish," Natasha chattered on. "And is Denisov nice?"

"Dear me!" said Rostov.

when I see him!"
Natasha flared up. "I don't want to marry anyone. And I'll tell him so

"Nice! And so you no longer wish to marry Boris?"

"No, but don't you think it's nice?" she kept repeating.

envious and Natasha could not help joining in.
Rostov laughed so loud and merrily that Denisov, in his bedroom, felt

but will be a dancer. Only don't tell anyone."
her toes any longer. "So that's what I'm up to! I'll never marry anyone,
"See, I'm standing! See!" she said, but could not maintain herself on

together, and made some steps on the very tips of her toes.
a few steps, turned, cut a caper, brought her little feet sharply
Curving her arms, Natasha held out her skirts as dancers do, ran back

That's what I'm up to."
"Not seen Duport--the famous dancer? Well then, you won't understand.

"No."

seen Duport?"
"Now?" repeated Natasha, and a happy smile lit up her face. "Have you

"Dear me! Then what are you up to now?"

or anyone else, and I don't want anything of the kind."
"Oh, what nonsense!" cried Natasha, laughing. "I don't think about him

"Well, and are you still true to Boris?" he continued.

Oh, how glad I am to have you!"
"Well then, that's excellent," said he. "We'll talk it over later on.

thought, "I must remain free."
and interests before him! "Yes, they have taken a wise decision," he
her, Rostov thought, but just now there were so many other pleasures
that for an instant). Why should he not love her now, and even marry
of sixteen, evidently passionately in love with him (he did not doubt
a glimpse of her, she seemed still more lovely. She was a charming girl
struck him by her beauty on the preceding day. Today, when he had caught
Rostov saw that it had been well considered by them. Sonya had already

must, and that wouldn't do at all."
meant it seriously. It makes it as if you were marrying her because you
consider yourself bound by your promise--it will seem as if she had not
you'd say so. But it won't do, because you see, if you say that--if you
"No, no!" cried Natasha, "she and I have already talked it over. We knew

that only a fool would renounce such happiness."
"I never go back on my word," he said. "Besides, Sonya is so charming

Rostov became thoughtful.

was now saying she had talked of before, with tears.
Natasha, so seriously and excitedly that it was evident that what she
free.' Isn't that lovely and noble! Yes, very noble? Isn't it?" asked
forget all that.... She says: 'I shall love him always, but let him be
"Why, you remember before you went away?... Well, she says you are to

Natasha suddenly flushed.

"Well, she loves me and you like that."

"Well, what then?"

for life, but I don't understand that, I forget quickly."
nonsense, but we are friends forever. She, if she loves anyone, does it
"We are such friends, such friends! All that ruler business was just

"Well, and is that all?" he asked.

senseless, he understood and was not surprised at it.
burning of an arm with a ruler as a proof of love did not seem to him
for anyone else, but gave him some of the best joys of his life; and the
Rostov re-entered that world of home and childhood which had no meaning
to be his old schoolroom, and looking into Natasha's wildly bright eyes,
Sitting on the sofa with the little cushions on its arms, in what used

fire and pressed it there!"
"I burned this to prove my love for her. I just heated a ruler in the

even by a ball dress.
slender, delicate arm, high above the elbow on that part that is covered
She pulled up her muslin sleeve and showed him a red scar on her long,

that I burned my arm for her sake. Look here!"
No, I'll tell you now. You know Sonya's my dearest friend. Such a friend
"No, call her you, please! I'll tell you all about it some other time.

"As may happen," said Rostov.

her--thou or you?"
"Ah, yes! That's a whole long story! How are you going to speak to

"Why did Sonya run away?" asked Rostov.

know what you men are like. Are you the same as we? No?"
awfully glad you're my brother." She touched his mustache. "I want to
"No, but listen," she said, "now you are quite a man, aren't you? I'm

soul and his face.
home now for the first time after eighteen months again brightened his
childlike smile which had not once appeared on his face since he left
Rostov felt that, under the influence of the warm rays of love, that

"Oh, how nice, how splendid!" she said to everything.

to control her joy which expressed itself by laughter.
they were saying was amusing, but because she felt happy and was unable
laughed at every word he said or that she said herself, not because what
little matters which could not interest anyone but themselves. Natasha
another time to ask questions and give replies concerning a thousand
into the sitting room, where they began talking. They hardly gave one
bright. Sonya ran away, but Natasha, taking her brother's arm, led him
dressed alike, in new pale-blue frocks, and were both fresh, rosy, and
was about to expand her dresses into a balloon and sit down. They were
her foot into the other. Sonya, when he came in, was twirling round and
and went out. Natasha had put on one spurred boot and was just getting
Rostov hurriedly put something on his feet, drew on his dressing gown,

the black-mustached Denisov with servile deference.
"Is this your saber?" asked Petya. "Or is it yours?" he said, addressing

"Nicholas! Come out in your dressing gown!" said Natasha's voice.

Petya in, closed again. A sound of laughter came from behind it.
looking with a scared face at his comrade for help. The door, having let
The girls sprang aside. Denisov hid his hairy legs under the blanket,

"Is this your saber?" he shouted.

opened the bedroom door.
forgetting that it was unbecoming for the girls to see men undressed,
with the delight boys feel at the sight of a military elder brother, and
Meanwhile, Petya, having found and seized the sabers in the outer room,

"Directly!"

"Nicholas! Get up!" Natasha's voice was again heard at the door.

getting up.
It was Natasha, Sonya, and Petya, who had come to see whether they were
a glimpse of something blue, of ribbons, black hair, and merry faces.
came from the adjoining room. The door was opened a crack and there was
starched petticoats and the whispering and laughter of girls' voices
"Late! It's nearly ten o'clock," answered Natasha's voice. A rustle of

"Why, is it late?"

disheveled head from the hot pillow.
Rostov, rubbing his eyes that seemed glued together, raised his

get up!"
"Hallo, Gwiska--my pipe!" came Vasili Denisov's husky voice. "Wostov,

well-brushed clothes. There was a masculine odor and a smell of tobacco.
were bringing in jugs and basins, hot water for shaving, and their
cleaned pairs with spurs had just been placed by the wall. The servants
satchels, sabretaches, open portmanteaus, and dirty boots. Two freshly
In the room next their bedroom there was a confusion of sabers,

till ten o'clock.
Next morning, after the fatigues of their journey, the travelers slept

insufficient, and he kept expecting something more, more and yet more.
moment of meeting had been so beatific that his present joy seemed
Rostov was very happy in the love they showed him; but the first

handkerchief, and pipe.
to him and disputed with one another who should bring him his tea,
eyes off him. His brother and sisters struggled for the places nearest
movement, word, or look of his, never taking their blissfully adoring
moment, sat beside him: the rest, crowding round him, watched every
The old countess, not letting go of his hand and kissing it every

gathered round Nicholas in the sitting room.
Denisov was shown to the room prepared for him, and the Rostovs all

and, taking Natasha's hand, kissed it.
escapade made everybody feel confused. Denisov blushed too, but smiled
springing to him, putting her arms round him, and kissing him. This
"Darling Denisov!" screamed Natasha, beside herself with rapture,

The same happy, rapturous faces turned to the shaggy figure of Denisov.

Denisov!"
embracing Denisov. "Nicholas wrote us... Natasha, Vera, look! Here is
"You are most welcome! I know, I know," said the count, kissing and

count, who was looking inquiringly at him.
"Vasili Denisov, your son's friend," he said, introducing himself to the

his eyes at the sight.
who had come into the room unnoticed by anyone, stood there and wiped
only pressed it to the cold braiding of his hussar's jacket. Denisov,
met, she fell on his breast, sobbing. She could not lift her face, but
he had left. All the others let him go, and he ran to her. When they
Yet it was she, dressed in a new gown which he did not know, made since

so rapid that they could hardly be his mother's.
countess had not yet come. But now steps were heard at the door, steps
grateful look, but was still expectant and looking for someone. The old
her eyes off him, and smiling and holding her breath. He gave her a
this moment of happy, rapturous excitement. She gazed at him, not taking
longed. Sonya now was sixteen and she was very pretty, especially at
looked eagerly toward his eyes, waiting for the look for which she
Sonya too, all rosy red, clung to his arm and, radiant with bliss,

were lips seeking a kiss.
All around were loving eyes glistening with tears of joy, and all around

pranced up and down in one place like a goat and shrieked piercingly.
with kisses, holding him tight by the skirt of his coat, sprang away and
Natasha, after she had pulled him down toward her and covered his face

Petya, clinging to his legs, kept shouting, "And me too!"

exclaiming and oh-ing and ah-ing.
all hugging him, and the serfs, men and maids, flocked into the room,
Sonya, Natasha, Petya, Anna Mikhaylovna, Vera, and the old count were

"Dearest... and me!"

"And me, kiss me!"


    * Nicholas.


Where are the candles?... Tea!..."
"Here he is... our own... Kolya, * dear fellow... How he has changed!...

"And I did not know... Nicholas... My darling!..."

that.
kissed him at the same time. Only his mother was not there, he noticed
Papa, which Natasha, and which Petya. Everyone shouted, talked, and
more outcries, and tears of joy. He could not distinguish which was
kind sprang from a second door and a third; more hugging, more kissing,
hugging and kissing him. Another and yet another creature of the same
room, something flew out from a side door like a tornado and began
already seen the young master, and, before he had reached the drawing
tables and the same chandelier with a cover over it; but someone had
large dark ballroom. All was the same: there were the same old card
forestall him, threw off his fur coat and ran on tiptoe through the
Rostov, who had completely forgotten Denisov, not wishing anyone to

"The Lord be thanked, yes!"

"Is everything quite all right?"

look at you, your excellency."
"Yes, God be thanked! Yes! They've just finished supper. Let me have a

"All well?" asked Rostov, drawing away his arm.

young man's shoulder.
announce him, but, changing his mind, came back and stooped to kiss the
excitement, rushed toward the drawing-room door, probably in order to
young master. "Can it be? My treasure!" and Prokofy, trembling with
"Gracious heavens! The young count!" he cried, recognizing his

of delighted amazement.
door and his expression of sleepy indifference suddenly changed to one
plaiting slippers out of cloth selvedges. He looked up at the opening
strong that he could lift the back of the carriage from behind, sat
Old Michael was asleep on the chest. Prokofy, the footman, who was so

anteroom.
turned as loosely as ever. A solitary tallow candle burned in the
which always angered the countess when it was not properly cleaned,
warped steps of the familiar staircase. The well-known old door handle,
heart, and then immediately starting to run along the hall and up the
everyone all right?" he thought, stopping for a moment with a sinking
of who had come to it. There was no one in the hall. "Oh God! Is
into the hall. The house stood cold and silent, as if quite regardless
side of the pavement. He sprang out before the sleigh stopped, and ran
cornice with a bit of plaster broken off, the porch, and the post by the
right, drew up at an entrance, and Rostov saw overhead the old familiar
to him the horses were not moving at all. At last the sleigh bore to the
shouted, when the sleigh was only three houses from his door. It seemed
"Come, get on! You shall have three rubles for vodka--get on!" Rostov
Vaska!" he went on, turning to Denisov, whose head was again nodding.
mustache. "Now then, get on," he shouted to the driver. "Do wake up,
don't forget to put out my new coat," added Rostov, fingering his new
"Then they've not gone to bed yet? What do you think? Mind now,

"Yes, sir, and there's a light in your father's study."

house, aren't they?"
"Dmitri," said Rostov to his valet on the box, "those lights are in our

Denisov raised his head, coughed, and made no answer.

almost there!"
house," said Rostov. "Of course, it's our house! Denisov, Denisov! We're
"Why, that one, right at the end, the big one. Don't you see? That's our

"Which house is it?" asked the driver.

Now then!"
the little shop where we used to buy gingerbread! Can't you hurry up?
stand, and there's Zakhar himself and still the same horse! And here's
"There's the corner at the crossroads, where the cabman, Zakhar, has his

Denisov gave no answer.

sleigh.
whole body as if in that position he hoped to hasten the speed of the
"Denisov! We're here! He's asleep," he added, leaning forward with his

entered Moscow.
when their leave permits had been passed at the town gate and they had
shops, bakers' signboards, street lamps, and sleighs!" thought Rostov,
"How much longer? How much longer? Oh, these insufferable streets,

they got to Moscow.
of the sleigh beside Rostov, who grew more and more impatient the nearer
road, did not once wake up on the way to Moscow, but lay at the bottom
of wine with him and, despite the jolting ruts across the snow-covered
last post station but one before Moscow, Denisov had drunk three bottles
as far as Moscow and to stay with him there. Meeting a comrade at the
was going home to Voronezh and Rostov persuaded him to travel with him
Early in the year 1806 Nicholas Rostov returned home on leave. Denisov


CHAPTER I





BOOK FOUR: 1806





the inhabitants of the district.
And Prince Andrew, with others fatally wounded, was left to the care of

"He is a nervous, bilious subject," said Larrey, "and will not recover."

Larrey, was much more likely to end in death than in convalescence.
unconciousness and oblivion which in the opinion of Napoleon's doctor,
all these dreams melted and merged into the chaos and darkness of
had followed, and only the heavens promised peace. Toward morning
shortsighted delight at the misery of others, and doubts and torments
little Napoleon had suddenly appeared with his unsympathizing look of
itself to him. He was already enjoying that happiness when that
The quiet home life and peaceful happiness of Bald Hills presented

fancies.
above all this the lofty sky, formed the chief subjects of his delirious
before the battle, the figure of the insignificant little Napoleon, and
wife, sister, and future son, and the tenderness he had felt the night
his feverishness increased and he grew delirious. Visions of his father,
The stretchers moved on. At every jolt he again felt unendurable pain;

the greatness of something incomprehensible but all-important."
nothing at all except the unimportance of everything I understand, and
who has been sewn into this amulet by Mary! There is nothing certain,
words--the Great All or Nothing-" said he to himself, "or to that God
which I not only cannot address but which I cannot even express in
should I say that? Either to a Power indefinable, incomprehensible,
should be if I could now say: 'Lord, have mercy on me!'... But to whom
and what to expect after it beyond the grave! How happy and calm I
Mary. How good it would be to know where to seek for help in this life,
would be good if everything were as clear and simple as it seems to
sister had hung round his neck with such emotion and reverence, "it
"It would be good," thought Prince Andrew, glancing at the icon his

outside his uniform.
little icon with its thin gold chain suddenly appeared upon his chest
Prince Andrew did not see how and by whom it was replaced, but the

return the holy image.
seeing the favor the Emperor showed the prisoners, they now hastened to
little gold icon Princess Mary had hung round her brother's neck, but
The soldiers who had carried Prince Andrew had noticed and taken the

His face shone with self-satisfaction and pleasure.

Prince Repnin!" and he spurred his horse and galloped away.
to my bivouac; let my doctor, Larrey, examine their wounds. Au revoir,
the officers as he went: "Have these gentlemen attended to and taken
The Emperor without waiting for an answer turned away and said to one of

alive could understand or explain.
the still greater unimportance of death, the meaning of which no one
greatness, the unimportance of life which no one could understand, and
Napoleon's eyes Prince Andrew thought of the insignificance of
suffering, and the nearness of death aroused in him. Looking into
stern and solemn train of thought that weakness from loss of blood,
Everything seemed so futile and insignificant in comparison with the

understood, that he could not answer him.
compared to the lofty, equitable, and kindly sky which he had seen and
hero himself with his paltry vanity and joy in victory appear,
seemed to him all the interests that engrossed Napoleon, so mean did his
straight on Napoleon, he was silent.... So insignificant at that moment
words to the soldiers who were carrying him, now with his eyes fixed
Though five minutes before, Prince Andrew had been able to say a few

"Well, and you, young man," said he. "How do you feel, mon brave?"

connected in his memory with Prince Andrew.
and, addressing him, again used the epithet "young man" that was
attention. Napoleon apparently remembered seeing him on the battlefield
eyes to complete the show of prisoners, could not fail to attract his
Prince Andrew, who had also been brought forward before the Emperor's

"A splendid reply!" said Napoleon. "Young man, you will go far!"

voice.
"Youth is no hindrance to courage," muttered Sukhtelen in a failing

"He's very young to come to meddle with us."

After looking at him Napoleon smiled.

Prince Repnin named Lieutenant Sukhtelen.

beside you?"
"I bestow it with pleasure," said Napoleon. "And who is that young man

Repnin.
"The praise of a great commander is a soldier's highest reward," said

"Your regiment fulfilled its duty honorably," said Napoleon.

"I commanded a squadron," replied Repnin.

Guards?" asked Napoleon.
"You are the commander of the Emperor Alexander's regiment of Horse

They named the colonel, Prince Repnin.

"Which is the senior?" he asked, on seeing the prisoners.

Bonaparte, having come up at a gallop, stopped his horse.

the Horse Guards.
society. Beside him stood a lad of nineteen, also a wounded officer of
Bolkonski recognized Prince Repnin whom he had met in Petersburg

the white uniform of the Horse Guards.
Alexander's Guards," said the first one, indicating a Russian officer in
"All the same! They say this one is the commander of all the Emperor

he is probably tired of them," said another officer.
"There are so many prisoners today, nearly the whole Russian army, that

prisoners."
will pass here immediately; it will please him to see these gentlemen
convoy officer, who said rapidly: "We must halt here: the Emperor
The first words he heard on coming to his senses were those of a French

about him and even speak.
During this transfer he felt a little stronger and was able to look
wounded and captured Russian officers he was carried to the hospital.
He did not regain consciousness till late in the day, when with other
being moved, and the probing of his wound at the dressing station.
terrible pain of being lifted onto the stretcher, the jolting while
Prince Andrew remembered nothing more: he lost consciousness from the

hand, rode up smiling to the Emperor to congratulate him on the victory.
Having said this, Napoleon rode on to meet Marshal Lannes, who, hat in

to the dressing station."
"Ah! He is alive," said Napoleon. "Lift this young man up and carry him

which aroused his own pity.
utter a sound. He feebly moved his leg and uttered a weak, sickly groan
understand it so differently. He collected all his strength, to stir and
life, which seemed to him so beautiful now that he had today learned to
him and only wished that they would help him and bring him back to
what was said of him; he was only glad that people were standing near
that moment it meant nothing to him who might be standing over him, or
himself and that lofty infinite sky with the clouds flying over it. At
small, insignificant creature compared with what was passing now between
was Napoleon--his hero--but at that moment Napoleon seemed to him such a
and he saw above him the remote, lofty, and everlasting sky. He knew it
forgot them. His head was burning, he felt himself bleeding to death,
did they not interest him, but he took no notice of them and at once
heard the words as he might have heard the buzzing of a fly. Not only
Napoleon who said it. He heard the speaker addressed as Sire. But he
Prince Andrew understood that this was said of him and that it was

"That's a fine death!" said Napoleon as he gazed at Bolkonski.

been taken by the French as a trophy.)
the flagstaff that had been dropped beside him. (The flag had already
a few steps he stopped before Prince Andrew, who lay on his back with
"Have some brought from the reserve," said Napoleon, and having gone on

Augesd.
said an adjutant who had come from the batteries that were firing at
"The ammunition for the guns in position is exhausted, Your Majesty,"

stomach with an already stiffened arm flung wide.
who, with his face buried in the ground and a blackened nape, lay on his
"Fine men!" remarked Napoleon, looking at a dead Russian grenadier,

on the field.
firing at the Augesd Dam and was looking at the killed and wounded left
over the battlefield had given final orders to strengthen the batteries
It was Napoleon accompanied by two aides-de-camp. Bonaparte riding

and stopped near him.
see those who, judging by the sound of hoofs and voices, had ridden up
between them gleamed blue infinity. He did not turn his head and did not
sky with clouds that had risen and were floating still higher, and
speaking French. He opened his eyes. Above him again was the same lofty
He listened and heard the sound of approaching horses, and voices

now. But where am I?"
either," he thought. "Yes, I did not know anything, anything at all till
today?" was his first thought. "And I did not know this suffering
"Where is it, that lofty sky that I did not know till now, but saw

alive and suffering from a burning, lacerating pain in his head.
how long his unconsciousness lasted. Suddenly he again felt that he was
Toward evening he ceased moaning and became quite still. He did not know

uttering a gentle, piteous, and childlike moan.
hand, lay Prince Andrew Bolkonski bleeding profusely and unconsciously
On the Pratzen Heights, where he had fallen with the flagstaff in his


CHAPTER XIX





the dam, the pond, and the bank.
ice and into the water and oftenest of all among the crowd that covered
Still the cannon balls continued regularly to whistle and flop onto the

it dashed, some forward and some back, drowning one another.
those on foot, collapsed in a great mass, and some forty men who were on
move on. The horses moved off the bank. The ice, that had held under
near the gun waved their arms and beat the horses to make them turn and
on! Go on!" And cries of horror were heard in the crowd. The soldiers
from behind still came the shouts: "Onto the ice, why do you stop? Go
The nearest soldiers shrank back, the gun driver stopped his horse, but
into the water. He tried to right himself but fell in up to his waist.
The ice gave way under one of the foremost soldiers, and one leg slipped
ice. Crowds of soldiers from the dam began running onto the frozen pond.
One of the hindmost guns that was going onto the dam turned off onto the

shouting.
general, the men themselves not knowing what, or why, they were
innumerable voices suddenly shouted after the ball had struck the
"Get onto the ice, over the ice! Go on! Turn! Don't you hear? Go on!"

raising him.
from his horse in a pool of blood. Nobody gave him a look or thought of
everyone ducked. It flopped into something moist, and the general fell
Dolokhov. Suddenly a cannon ball hissed so low above the crowd that
entrance to the dam raised his hand and opened his mouth to address
bank, hesitating to step onto the ice. The general on horseback at the
under his weight alone. The men looked at him and pressed to the
would give way not only under a cannon or a crowd, but very soon even
The ice bore him but it swayed and creaked, and it was plain that it

him; "turn this way!" he shouted to those with the gun. "It bears!..."
"Turn this way!" he shouted, jumping over the ice which creaked under

ice that covered the millpool.
the dam, throwing two soldiers off their feet, and ran onto the slippery
Dolokhov who was in the midst of the crowd forced his way to the edge of

two minutes and it is certain death," thought each one.
"Move on a hundred yards and we are certainly saved, remain here another

steps, and again stopped.
The crowd, pushing forward desperately, squeezed together, moved a few
behind them, another fell in front and splashed Dolokhov with blood.
cannon and the crowd were dragging it out. A cannon ball killed someone
on all sides, had stopped because a horse in front had fallen under a
crowd, they had got wedged in at the approach to the dam and, jammed in
represented all that was left of that whole regiment. Impelled by the
regimental commander on horseback and some ten men of his company,
Dolokhov--now an officer--wounded in the arm, and on foot, with the

splashing with blood those near them.
a shell burst in the midst of that dense throng, killing some and
Every ten seconds a cannon ball flew compressing the air around, or

a few steps and be killed themselves in the same way.
dying, stepping over the dying and killing one another, only to move on
disfigured by fear of death now crowded together, crushing one another,
the cannon, under the horses' hoofs and between the wagon wheels, men
with flour whitening their carts--on that narrow dam amid the wagons and
driven their two-horse carts loaded with wheat and had returned dusty
so many years Moravians in shaggy caps and blue jackets had peacefully
floundering silvery fish in the watering can, on that dam over which for
angling, while his grandson, with shirt sleeves rolled up, handled the
old miller had been accustomed to sit in his tasseled cap peacefully
was growing dusk. On the narrow Augesd Dam where for so many years the
a musketry fire at the French cavalry that was pursuing our troops. It
In the rearguard, Dokhturov and others rallying some battalions kept up

retreating forces.
batteries ranged on the slopes of the Pratzen Heights, directed at our
(delivered by the French alone) was still to be heard from numerous
After five o'clock it was only at the Augesd Dam that a hot cannonade

around the dams and banks of the ponds near the village of Augesd.
The remains of Langeron's and Dokhturov's mingled forces were crowding

masses.
after losing half their men were retreating in disorderly confused
Przebyszewski and his corps had laid down their arms. Other columns

than a hundred cannon were already in the hands of the French.
Before five in the evening the battle had been lost at all points. More


silence, and then the same joke was repeated.
"Oh, you fool!" said the old man, spitting angrily. Some time passed in

"Go, Tit! Thresh a bit!"

"What?" answered the old man absent-mindedly.

"Tit! I say, Tit!" said the groom.

bandy-legged domestic serf in a peaked cap and sheepskin coat.
in horsecloths. Then came a cart, and behind that walked an old,
followed them. In front of him walked Kutuzov's groom leading horses
not far off, in the village the vehicles were going to. Rostov
passing by. From one of the drivers he learned that Kutuzov's staff were
was no one beyond the ditch now. Only some carts and carriages were
and galloped back to the place where he had seen the Emperor, but there
made use of it.... "What have I done?" thought he. And he turned round
was a unique chance to show his devotion to the Emperor and he had not
He might... not only might but should, have gone up to the sovereign. It

the cause of his grief.
His despair was all the greater from feeling that his own weakness was

despair, not knowing where to or why he was now riding.
restraining his tears of pity for the Emperor, he rode on in utter
"And I might have been in his place!" thought Rostov, and hardly

covered his eyes with his hand and pressed von Toll's hand.
long and warmly to the Emperor and how the Emperor, evidently weeping,
Rostov from a distance saw with envy and remorse how von Toll spoke
unwell, sat down under an apple tree and von Toll remained beside him.
to cross the ditch on foot. The Emperor, wishing to rest and feeling
Emperor at once rode up to him, offered his services, and assisted him
Captain von Toll chanced to ride to the same spot, and seeing the
While Rostov was thus arguing with himself and riding sadly away,

who still remained in the same attitude of indecision.
a heart full despair he rode away, continually looking back at the Tsar,
look or bad opinion from him," Rostov decided; and sorrowfully and with
reflections. Better die a thousand times than risk receiving an unkind
No, certainly I must not approach him, I must not intrude on his
flank now that it is nearly four o'clock and the battle is lost?
"Besides how can I ask the Emperor for his instructions for the right

while dying he expressed the love his actions had proved.
dying of wounds and the sovereign had thanked him for heroic deeds, and
to be spoken at a moment of victory and triumph, generally when he was
were intended for quite other conditions, they were for the most part
he had composed in his imagination could he now recall. Those speeches
him?" Not one of the innumerable speeches addressed to the Emperor that
now, when my heart fails me and my mouth feels dry at the mere sight of
painful to him at this moment of sorrow; besides, what can I say to him
being alone and despondent! A strange face may seem unpleasant or
"What! It is as if I were glad of a chance to take advantage of his

inconvenient, unseemly, and impossible to do so.
the Emperor, and a thousand reasons occurred to him why it would be
for more than anything else in the world, did not know how to approach
alone with her, so Rostov, now that he had attained what he had longed
chance of delay and flight when the longed-for moment comes and he is
thoughts he has dreamed of for nights, but looks around for help or a
But as a youth in love trembles, is unnerved, and dares not utter the

deliver.
go straight to him and give the message Dolgorukov had ordered him to
was happy to be seeing him. He knew that he might and even ought to
assurance that the rumors about the Emperor being wounded were false. He
mildness of his features, was all the greater. Rostov was happy in the
was pale, his cheeks sunken and his eyes hollow, but the charm, the
beloved features that were so deeply engraved on his memory. The Emperor
Rostov. At that moment Alexander turned his head and Rostov saw the
"But it can't be he, alone in the midst of this empty field!" thought

monarch.
by that gesture Rostov instantly recognized his lamented and adored
his attention, made a gesture of refusal with his head and hand and
rider, whose figure seemed familiar to Rostov and involuntarily riveted
the white plumes, evidently suggesting that he should do the same. The
he again jumped the ditch, and deferentially addressed the horseman with
from the bank under the horse's hind hoofs. Turning the horse sharply,
and giving it the rein leaped lightly over. Only a little earth crumbled
had seen before) rode up to the ditch, struck his horse with his spurs,
Rostov; the other on a beautiful chestnut horse (which Rostov fancied he
facing the ditch. One with a white plume in his hat seemed familiar to
saw, near a kitchen garden with a ditch round it, two men on horseback
ridden about two miles and had passed the last of the Russian troops, he
not hoping to find anyone but merely to ease his conscience. When he had
headquarters behind the village to the left, and thither Rostov rode,
Emperor's suite. One officer told Rostov that he had seen someone from
Tolstoy, who had ridden out to the battlefield with others in the
the field of battle with the pale and terrified Ober-Hofmarschal Count
spread by the fact that the Emperor's carriage had really galloped from
correct, others that it was not, and explained the false rumor that had
or Kutuzov was. Some said the report that the Emperor was wounded was
was lost. No one whom Rostov asked could tell him where the Emperor
sounded far away. Here everyone clearly saw and said that the battle
disordered. The French cannon did not reach there and the musketry fire
the field of battle, who though still in some confusion were less
In the village of Hosjeradek there were Russian troops retiring from

at me?"
thought he, "if she saw me here now on this field with the cannon aimed
himself. He remembered his mother's last letter. "What would she feel,"
him merged in Rostov's mind into a single feeling of terror and pity for
sensation of those terrible whistling sounds and of the corpses around
riding over it trained a gun on him and fired several shots. The
wounded where there was no one left to fire at, on seeing an adjutant
The French, who had ceased firing at this field strewn with dead and

these unfortunates.
for the courage he needed and which he knew would not stand the sight of
these suffering men, and he felt afraid--afraid not for his life, but
so it seemed to Rostov. He put his horse to a trot to avoid seeing all
could hear their distressing screams and groans, sometimes feigned--or
couple of acres. The wounded crept together in twos and threes and one
on well-kept plowland, lay from ten to fifteen dead and wounded to each
wounded--had left it long ago. All about the field, like heaps of manure
occupied that region, and the Russians--the uninjured and slightly
of men had perished in fleeing from Pratzen. The French had not yet
myself?" he thought. He rode on to the region where the greatest number
"It's all the same now. If the Emperor is wounded, am I to try to save

would be killed.
Rostov considered, and then went in the direction where they said he

way is nearer."
"Oh, what are you talking about?" said another. "Where is he to go? That

soldier shouted to him. "They'd kill you there!"
"Take this road, your honor, that way you will be killed at once!" a

to the Tsar or to Kutuzov, even if they were alive and unwounded?
he saw turrets and a church. What need to hurry? What was he now to say
doubt it now. Rostov rode in the direction pointed out to him, in which
going. The Emperor was wounded, the battle lost. It was impossible to
Rostov rode on at a footpace not knowing why or to whom he was now

walked on.
there," said the officer, pointing to the village of Hosjeradek, and he
many left alive. Go that way, to that village, all the commanders are
"Not Kutuzov, but what's his name--well, never mind... there are not

"Who? Kutuzov?" asked Rostov.

"Not killed--wounded!" another officer corrected him.

by a cannon ball--struck in the breast before our regiment."
"Who is it you want?" he asked. "The commander in chief? He was killed

officer passing by addressed him:
Rostov let go of the horse and was about to ride on, when a wounded

and Ilya Ivanych. I don't think Ilya drives anyone except the Tsar!"
Gracious me, they did rattle past! It's time I knew the Imperial horses
carriage as pale as anything. How they made the four black horses fly!
him in Petersburg. I saw him just as I see you.... There he sat in the
derision. "I ought to know the Emperor by now, after the times I've seen
"I saw him myself," replied the man with a self-confident smile of

"It can't be!" said Rostov. "It must have been someone else."

that he was dangerously wounded.
carriage at full speed about an hour before along that very road and
question him. The man announced that the Tsar had been driven in a
horse of a batman or groom of some important personage and began to
Having left that soldier who was evidently drunk, Rostov stopped the

for some reason and shaking himself free.
"Eh, brother! They've all bolted long ago!" said the soldier, laughing

At last seizing a soldier by his collar he forced him to answer.

could stop, but got no answer from anyone.
"Where is the Emperor? Where is Kutuzov?" Rostov kept asking everyone he

stationed on the Pratzen Heights.
dismal influence of cannon balls flying from the French batteries
some not. This whole mass droned and jostled in confusion under the
sorts, and Russian and Austrian soldiers of all arms, some wounded and
which he had come out was thronged with caleches, carriages of all
the farther he went the more disorganized they were. The highroad on
urged on his already weary horse to get quickly past these crowds, but
were there, only disorganized crowds of troops of various kinds. He
village of Pratzen. But neither they nor a single commanding officer
Rostov had been ordered to look for Kutuzov and the Emperor near the


CHAPTER XVIII





not wish to, believe that.
had been ordered to look for the commander in chief, he could not, did
saw French cannon and French troops on the Pratzen Heights just where he
The idea of defeat and flight could not enter Rostov's head. Though he

to get past them quicker, quicker!"
of scoundrels. It will soon be over, it can't be that, it can't be! Only
moment the Emperor may see them.... But no, these must be only a handful
"My God! What does it all mean?" thought he. "And here, where at any

at one another.
Rostov learned later that Russian and Austrian soldiers had been firing
and groans mingled in a general hubbub, then the firing died down.
Several wounded men passed along the road, and words of abuse, screams,


    * "Hang these Russians!"


"Zum Henker diese Russen!" * muttered a German.

"May the devil take them--the traitors!"

"Kill the Germans!" shouted one.

understood what was happening as little as he did.
was told in Russian, German, and Czech by the crowd of fugitives who
"The devil knows! They've killed everybody! It's all up now!" he

running in confused crowds across his path.
Rostov kept asking as he came up to Russian and Austrian soldiers
"What does it mean? What is it? Whom are they firing at? Who is firing?"

Pratzen, which was full of troops of all kinds.
more confirmed the farther he rode into the region behind the village of
The foreboding of evil that had suddenly come over Rostov was more and

the rest."
commander in chief here, and if all is lost it is for me to perish with
he reflected, "there is no riding round it now. I must look for the
and for the issue of the whole battle. "But be that what it may,"
Impossible!" And suddenly he was seized by a panic of fear for himself
"What can it be?" he thought. "The enemy in the rear of our army?

where he could never have expected the enemy to be.
heard musket fire quite close in front of him and behind our troops,
where the hottest musket fire and cannonade were heard. Suddenly he
Guards charged, followed the line of reserves, going far round the place
again getting in front of the first line as he had done when the Horse
Having passed the Guards and traversed an empty space, Rostov, to avoid

away.
He said something more, but Rostov did not wait to hear it and rode

Bergs--have been knights!"
front. I held my sword in my left hand, Count. All our family--the von
bleeding hand with a handkerchief tied round it) "and I remained at the
as Boris. "Count! I am wounded in my right hand" (and he showed his
"Count! Count!" shouted Berg who ran up from the other side as eager

Emperor," said Rostov, and was about to spur his horse.
"But that's the Grand Duke, and I want the commander in chief or the

officer.
Guards' jacket, shouting something to a pale, white uniformed Austrian
brows stood a hundred paces away from them in his helmet and Horse
and pointing to the Grand Duke who with his high shoulders and frowning
"There he is!" said Boris, thinking Rostov had said "His Highness,"

"With a message to His Majesty."

"Where are you off to?" asked Boris.

spurred his horse.
unexpectedly to go into action. Rostov without hearing Boris to the end
by those troops that they were themselves in the front line and had
Austrians, and all at once discovered from the cannon balls discharged
up their position and seeing troops before them, thought they were
you imagine it?" and he began describing how the Guards, having taken
"We drove them back!" said Boris with animation, growing talkative. "Can

"Have you?" he said. "Well, how did it go?"

Rostov stopped.

fire for the first time.
with the happy smile seen on the faces of young men who have been under
"I say, we've been in the front line! Our regiment attacked!" said Boris

"What?" he answered, not recognizing Boris.

"Rostov!"

voice calling him by name.
Passing behind one of the lines of a regiment of Foot Guards he heard a

officers.
the soldiers' faces and unnatural warlike solemnity on those of the
much because he heard their sound as because he saw uneasiness on
around them cannon balls were flying, of which he was aware not so
When he came level with the Foot Guards he noticed that about them and

the Emperor immediately!" thought Rostov and galloped on.
"Why should I envy them? My chance is not lost, and maybe I shall see

thousand-ruble horses, only eighteen were left after the charge.
rich youths, officers and cadets, who had galloped past him on their
of all that mass of huge and handsome men, of all those brilliant,
amazed the French themselves. Rostov was horrified to hear later that
he was sent. This was the brilliant charge of the Horse Guards that
the smoke, Rostov hesitated whether to gallop after them or to go where
At that moment, as the Horse Guards, having passed him, disappeared in

enveloped everything.
immediately afterwards cannon began firing from somewhere and smoke
with red epaulets, probably French. He could see nothing more, for
that their foremost ranks were mixed up with some foreign cavalry
passed Rostov before he heard them shout, "Hurrah!" and looking back saw
extending its neck, galloped on yet faster. Hardly had the Horse Guards
his huge spurs in violently, and the horse, flourishing its tail and
high, shied, throwing back its ears; but the pockmarked Guardsman drove
the eyes of the Guardsman's horse. The heavy black horse, sixteen hands
and horses) had it not occurred to Rostov to flourish his whip before
(Rostov felt himself quite tiny and weak compared to these gigantic men
This Guardsman would certainly have bowled Rostov and his Bedouin over
on seeing Rostov before him, with whom he would inevitably collide.
The last of the Horse Guards, a huge pockmarked fellow, frowned angrily

not in time to avoid them.
galloped along the front as hard as his horse could go, but still was
Rostov, fearing to be crushed or swept into the attack on the French,
shouted by an officer who was urging his thoroughbred to full speed.
Rostov could already see their faces and heard the command: "Charge!"
The Horse Guards were galloping, but still holding in their horses.

advancing to attack the French cavalry that was coming to meet them.
even their faces, more and more distinctly. They were our Horse Guards,
the jingle of their weapons and saw their horses, their figures, and
horses were already galloping. Rostov heard the thud of their hoofs and
same speed, but they kept increasing their pace, so that some of the
way of these men, and he would have got clear had they continued at the
across his path. Rostov put his horse to full gallop to get out of the
uniforms, mounted on black horses, trotting straight toward him and
width of the field, an enormous mass of cavalry in brilliant white
hundred yards after that before he saw to his left, across the whole
"That is no business of mine," he thought. He had not ridden many

involuntarily noticed that one of them was bleeding, and galloped on.
ranks were returning from the attack. Rostov got out of their way,
galloping toward him. They were our Uhlans who with disordered
He was riding almost along the front line. A handful of men came

"So much the better! I shall see it close," he thought.

line (the Guards) was already in action.
After passing some Austrian troops he noticed that the next part of the

Rostov.
"How it will be there I don't know, but all will be well!" thought

farther into the region where the army was already in action.
and again proceeded to gallop along the line, penetrating farther and
"Go on! Go on! Give it them!" he mentally exclaimed at these sounds,

contrary, they stimulated his energy and determination.
and sounds had no depressing or intimidating effect on him; on the
whither, and who they were, it was impossible to make out. These sights
were moving about, in front and behind moved lines of troops; but why,
out anything of what was happening: there in the smoke men of some sort
on, but strain his attention as he would he could not understand or make
Rostov stopped his horse for a moment on a hillock to see what was going

lines of artillery with green caissons.
visible through the smoke, make out moving masses of infantry and narrow
and mingling with one another. He could also, by the gleam of bayonets
down the hillsides, and clouds of cannon smoke rolling, spreading,
He could see puffs of musketry smoke that seemed to chase one another

general roar.
several of them were not separated from one another but merged into a
Pratzen, interrupted by such frequent reports of cannon that sometimes
but a roll of volleys of musketry from the slopes of the hill before
at irregular intervals as before, followed by one or two cannon shots,
In the fresh morning air were now heard, not two or three musket shots

musketry ahead of him. The firing grew louder and louder.
passed Uvarov's cavalry he clearly heard the sound of cannon and
and here he noticed a stir and signs of preparation for battle; having
motionless; then he came to the region occupied by Uvarov's cavalry
troops, which had not yet advanced into action but were standing
galloped along the line. At first he rode along the line of Bagration's
joy and happiness. On receiving the order he gave his horse the rein and
was bright, he had a good horse under him, and his heart was full of
message to Kutuzov, perhaps even to the sovereign himself. The morning
orderly to the bravest general, and still more, he was going with a
general engagement in which he was taking part, more than that, he was
All his wishes were being fulfilled that morning: there was to be a

state of mind which makes everything seem possible, pleasant, and easy.
elasticity of movement, faith in his good fortune, and generally in that
hours' sleep before morning and felt cheerful, bold, and resolute, with
On being relieved from picket duty Rostov had managed to get a few

interrupting Bagration.
"You can give the message to His Majesty," said Dolgorukov, hurriedly

your excellency?" said Rostov, with his hand to his cap.
"And if I should meet His Majesty before I meet the commander in chief,

first to catch his eye. He sent him.
and the boyish face Rostov, breathless with excitement and hope, was the
Bagration cast his large, expressionless, sleepy eyes round his suite,

evening.
(which would be very difficult), he would not be able to get back before
(which he very likely would be), and found the commander in chief
flanks was more than six miles, even if the messenger were not killed
commander in chief. Bagration knew that as the distance between the two
Prince Bagration proposed to Dolgorukov to send to inquire of the
commence the action, and wishing to avert responsibility from himself,
had not yet begun. Not wishing to agree to Dolgorukov's demand to
On our right flank commanded by Bagration, at nine o'clock the battle


CHAPTER XVII





Thank God!..."
that. But even it does not exist, there is nothing but quiet and peace.
all falsehood, except that infinite sky. There is nothing, nothing, but
before? And how happy I am to have found it at last! Yes! All is vanity,
across that lofty infinite sky! How was it I did not see that lofty sky
faces struggled for the mop: how differently do those clouds glide
not at all as the gunner and the Frenchman with frightened and angry
as I ran," thought Prince Andrew--"not as we ran, shouting and fighting,
gliding slowly across it. "How quiet, peaceful, and solemn; not at all
lofty sky, not clear yet still immeasurably lofty, with gray clouds
But he saw nothing. Above him there was now nothing but the sky--the
been killed or not and whether the cannon had been captured or saved.
the Frenchmen with the gunners ended, whether the red-haired gunner had
fell on his back. He opened his eyes, hoping to see how the struggle of
"What's this? Am I falling? My legs are giving way," thought he, and

been looking at.
it was that the pain distracted him and prevented his seeing what he had
with the full swing of a bludgeon. It hurt a little, but the worst of
seemed to him as though one of the soldiers near him hit him on the head
was about to be decided. But Prince Andrew did not see how it ended. It
triumphantly secured the mop and still did not realize what awaited him,
the struggling men, and the fate of the red-haired gunner, who had
And really another French soldier, trailing his musket, ran up to

his bayonet and stabs him...."
Frenchman stab him? He will not get away before the Frenchman remembers
doesn't the red-haired gunner run away as he is unarmed? Why doesn't the
"What are they about?" thought Prince Andrew as he gazed at them. "Why

evidently did not realize what they were doing.
distraught yet angry expression on the faces of these two men, who
a French soldier tugged at the other. He could distinctly see the
gunner with his shako knocked awry, pulling one end of a mop while
of him--at the battery. He now saw clearly the figure of a red-haired
he did not look at them: he looked only at what was going on in front
to right and left of him soldiers continually groaned and dropped. But
of the cannon. He heard the whistle of bullets above him unceasingly and
round. Prince Andrew and the battalion were already within twenty paces
soldiers who were seizing the artillery horses and turning the guns
their guns, were running toward him. He also saw French infantry
artillerymen, some of whom were fighting, while others, having abandoned
dragging it by the staff, ran on with the battalion. In front he saw our
was immediately killed. Prince Andrew again seized the standard and,
that was swaying from its weight in Prince Andrew's hands, but he
overtook him. A sergeant of the battalion ran up and took the flag
another and soon the whole battalion ran forward shouting "Hurrah!" and
And really he only ran a few steps alone. One soldier moved and then

would follow him.
standard, he ran forward with full confidence that the whole battalion
"Hurrah!" shouted Prince Andrew, and, scarcely able to hold up the heavy

soldiers fell.
with pleasure the whistle of bullets evidently aimed at him. Several
"Here it is!" thought he, seizing the staff of the standard and hearing

"Forward, lads!" he shouted in a voice piercing as a child's.

the standard.
shame and anger choking him, had already leapt from his horse and run to
But before he had finished speaking, Prince Andrew, feeling tears of

disordered battalion and at the enemy, "what's that?"
of the feebleness of age, "Bolkonski!" he whispered, pointing to the
"Bolkonski!" he whispered, his voice trembling from a consciousness
"Oh! Oh! Oh!" groaned Kutuzov despairingly and looked around....

orders.
muskets of the nearest soldiers. The soldiers started firing without
flag let it fall from his hands. It swayed and fell, but caught on the
several soldiers fell, and a second lieutenant who was holding the
at him. After this volley the regimental commander clutched at his leg;
The French had attacked the battery and, seeing Kutuzov, were firing

Kutuzov's suite like a flock of little birds.
him for those words, bullets flew hissing across the regiment and across
pointing to the flying soldiers; but at that instant, as if to punish
"Stop those wretches!" gasped Kutuzov to the regimental commander,

pale and exchanged looks in silence.
approached Kutuzov. Of Kutuzov's suite only four remained. They were all
fleeing crowd. A mounted general separated himself from the infantry and
neither moving forward to protect the battery nor backward with the
Frenchmen running toward it. Higher up stood some Russian infantry,
of the hill amid the smoke a Russian battery that was still firing and
fugitives, Prince Andrew, trying to keep near Kutuzov, saw on the slope
artillery fire near by. Having forced his way out of the crowd of
with his suite diminished by more than half, rode toward a sound of
by a great effort got away to the left from that flood of men, Kutuzov,
in the air; a third was striking the horse Kutuzov himself rode. Having
are you hindering us?" Another in the same place turned round and fired
them it was difficult to get out again. One was shouting, "Get on! Why
The troops were running in such a dense mass that once surrounded by

A fresh wave of the flying mob caught him and bore him back with it.

it was impossible to stop them, spurred his horse and rode to the right.
"Stop them!" he shouted, and at the same moment, probably realizing that
handkerchief to his wounded cheek and pointing to the fleeing soldiers.
"The wound is not here, it is there!" said Kutuzov, pressing the

lower jaw.
"You are wounded?" he asked, hardly able to master the trembling of his

his cheek. Prince Andrew forced his way to him.
and without answering drew out a handkerchief. Blood was flowing from
he would certainly be taken prisoner. Kutuzov remained in the same place
himself, was shouting to Kutuzov that if he did not ride away at once
happening in front of him. Nesvitski with an angry face, red and unlike
with it, and looked around bewildered and unable to grasp what was
be carried back with it oneself. Bolkonski only tried not to lose touch
have been difficult to stop that crowd, it was even impossible not to
minutes before the troops had passed the Emperors. Not only would it
Confused and ever-increasing crowds were running back to where five

everyone began to run.
Andrew shouted, "Brothers! All's lost!" And at this as if at a command,
close at hand, and a voice of naive terror barely two steps from Prince
very instant a cloud of smoke spread all round, firing was heard quite
"The Apsherons must be stopped, your excellency," cried he. But at that

Prince Andrew, and striking his horse he rode up to Kutuzov.
"Here it is! The decisive moment has arrived. My turn has come," thought

column coming up to meet the Apsherons.
than five hundred paces from where Kutuzov was standing, a dense French
With the naked eye Prince Andrew saw below them to the right, not more

that?" said different voices.
"It's the enemy?... No!... Yes, see it is!... for certain.... But how is

front of us.
mile and a half away, but had suddenly and unexpectedly appeared just in
suddenly changed to one of horror. The French were supposed to be a
to snatch it from one another. The expression on all their faces
The two generals and the adjutant took hold of the field glass, trying

distance, but down the hill before him. "It's the French!"
"Look, look!" said this adjutant, looking not at the troops in the

looking at them, turned to an adjutant to ask him for a field glass.
speaking to an Austrian general. Prince Andrew, who was a little behind
the left, the firing became more distinct. Kutuzov had stopped and was
about a mile and a half off on the opposite heights. Down below, on
The fog had begun to clear and enemy troops were already dimly visible

marching along both.
inn, where two roads parted. Both of them led downhill and troops were
stopped at a solitary, deserted house that had probably once been an
When he had gone less than half a mile in the rear of the column he

carabineers.
Kutuzov accompanied by his adjutants rode at a walking pace behind the


CHAPTER XVI





remark to him, pointing to the gallant Apsherons.
The Emperor turned with a smile to one of his followers and made a

being said, thought, and felt that day by its rider.
of the nearness of the Emperor Francis' black cob, nor of all that was
Empress' Field, not understanding the significance of the firing, nor
pricking its ears at the sound of shots just as it had done on the
field of Austerlitz, enduring the heedless blows of his left foot and
carried the sovereign at reviews in Russia bore him also here on the
The Emperor's horse started at the sudden cry. This horse that had

"Glad to do our best!" shouted the soldiers.

you've had to take," cried he.
he forgot the sovereigns' presence. "Lads, it's not the first village
Suvorov's time, now passing so gallantly before the Emperors, that
of battle, and by the sight of the gallant Apsherons, his comrades in
voice, obviously so elated by the sound of firing, by the prospect
"Lads!" shouted Miloradovich in a loud, self-confident, and cheery

pace.
passed in step before the Emperors and their suites at a bold, brisk
behind the Emperor. The Apsheron men, excited by the Tsar's presence,
Miloradovich wheeled his horse sharply and stationed himself a little


     do, Sire."
     * "Indeed, Sire, we shall do everything it is possible to


gentlemen of the Tsar's suite by his poor French.
* he answered gaily, raising nevertheless ironic smiles among the
"Ma foi, sire, nous ferons ce qui sera dans notre possibilite, sire,"

"God be with you, general!" said the Emperor.

in his horse before the Emperor.
and back, galloped strenuously forward, and with a dashing salute reined
tuft of plumes in his cocked hat worn on one side with its corners front
without his greatcoat, with his Orders on his breast and an enormous
As this Apsheron battalion marched by, the red-faced Miloradovich,

one of the Apsheron regiment went forward past the Emperor.
The troops again began to move, and two battalions of the Novgorod and

the column, gave him the order to advance.
He touched his horse and having called Miloradovich, the commander of

submissive general.
head and again assuming his former tone of a dull, unreasoning, but
"However, if you command it, Your Majesty," said Kutuzov, lifting his

minute.
bowed head, seemed also to be waiting. The silence lasted for about a
hear whether he would say anything more. But Kutuzov, with respectfully
The Tsar looked intently and observantly into Kutuzov's eye waiting to

certainly should not, speak like that," their glances seemed to say.
dissatisfaction and reproach. "Old though he may be, he should not, he
In the Emperor's suite all exchanged rapid looks that expressed

clearly and distinctly.
sire, because we are not on parade and not on the Empress' Field," said
again something in his face twitched--"That is just why I do not begin,
voice, apparently to preclude the possibility of not being heard, and
"That is just why I do not begin, sire," said Kutuzov in a resounding

Francis continued to look about him and did not listen.
not to join in at least to listen to what he was saying. But the Emperor
Tsar with another glance at the Emperor Francis, as if inviting him if
a parade does not begin till all the troops are assembled," said the
"You know, Michael Ilarionovich, we are not on the Empress' Field where

if complaining of Kutuzov.
rather round shoulders and glanced at Novosiltsev who was near him, as
The Tsar heard but obviously did not like the reply; he shrugged his

"Not all the columns have formed up yet, Your Majesty."
Kutuzov's upper lip twitched unnaturally as he said the word "waiting.")
"Waiting, Your Majesty," repeated Kutuzov. (Prince Andrew noted that

quite heard.
The Emperor, frowning slightly, bent his ear forward as if he had not

respectfully.
"I am waiting, Your Majesty," answered Kutuzov, bending forward

the Emperor Francis.
Alexander hurriedly to Kutuzov, glancing courteously at the same time at
"Why aren't you beginning, Michael Ilarionovich?" said the Emperor

all these brilliant young men.
success reached Kutuzov's cheerless staff with the galloping advent of
a stuffy room, so a whiff of youthfulness, energy, and confidence of
As when a window is opened a whiff of fresh air from the fields enters

Tsar's beautiful relay horses covered with embroidered cloths.
line regiments, Russian and Austrian. Among them were grooms leading the
Emperors' suite were the picked young orderly officers of the Guard and
he could not repress as he recalled his reception at Brunn. In the
thought Prince Andrew, watching his old acquaintance with a smile
some question--"Most likely he is asking at what o'clock they started,"
preoccupied manner. He beckoned to one of his white adjutants and asked
erect on his handsome black horse, looking about him in a leisurely and
Emperor. The Emperor Francis, a rosy, long faced young man, sat very
heated horses, exchanging remarks and smiling, had stopped behind the
dressed gay young men on splendid, well-groomed, fresh, only slightly
Novosiltsev, Prince Volkonsky, Strogonov, and the others, all richly
at the faces of his suite, young and animated as his own. Czartoryski,
miles, and reining in his horse he sighed restfully and looked round
brighter and more energetic. He was slightly flushed after galloping two
At the Olmutz review he had seemed more majestic; here he seemed

youth.
expression and the same prevalent appearance of goodhearted innocent
fine gray eyes, and on his delicate lips the same capacity for varying
was still the same bewitching combination of majesty and mildness in his
Olmutz where Bolkonski had seen him for the first time abroad, but there
After his illness he looked rather thinner that day than on the field of
of the Emperor like a cloud of haze across a clear sky and vanished.
This unpleasant impression merely flitted over the young and happy face

Alexander unpleasantly, he rode up and saluted.
reasoning. With an affectation of respect which evidently struck
transformed. He put on the air of a subordinate who obeys without
Emperors with a salute. His whole appearance and manner were suddenly
soldier at the front, gave the command "Attention!" and rode up to the
followed by their suites. Kutuzov, affecting the manners of an old
was in a white uniform rode a black one. These were the two Emperors
white plumes in his hat rode a bobtailed chestnut horse, the other who
rode side by side in front, at full gallop. One in a black uniform with
what looked like a squadron of horsemen in various uniforms. Two of them
side and looked round with a frown. Along the road from Pratzen galloped
of which Kutuzov was standing began to shout, he rode a little to one
greeting was riding quickly. When the soldiers of the regiment in front
line of the advancing Russian columns. Evidently the person they were
saluting, and this sound rapidly came nearer along the whole extended
Just then at a distance behind Kutuzov was heard the sound of regiments

yawn. "Plenty of time," he repeated.
"Plenty of time, your excellency," muttered Kutuzov in the midst of a

the left-flank columns had already descended.
general who, watch in hand, was saying it was time they started as all
"All right, all right!" he said to Prince Andrew, and turned to a

on the ground.
troops were no longer moving, but stood with the butts of their muskets
with the lassitude of age, sat yawning wearily with closed eyes. The
still in the same place, his stout body resting heavily in the saddle
name to rectify this omission, Prince Andrew galloped back. Kutuzov
hidden by dense mist. Having given orders in the commander in chief's
There was really nothing to be seen in front except a barren descent
in front of him and that the enemy must be at least six miles away.
out skirmishers. He had felt perfectly sure that there were other troops
regiment was much surprised at the commander in chief's order to throw
sharpshooters in front of our columns. The colonel at the head of the
the third division and convinced himself that there really were no
Overtaking the battalions that continued to advance, he stopped

Prince Andrew galloped off to execute the order.

replying to the Austrian.
they doing? What are they doing?" he murmured to himself, still not
"And ask whether sharpshooters have been posted," he added. "What are

Hardly had Prince Andrew started than he stopped him.

village. Tell it to stop and await my orders."
"Go, my dear fellow, and see whether the third division has passed the

adjutant, he addressed Bolkonski.
was not his adjutant's fault, and still not answering the Austrian
caustic expression softened, as if admitting that what was being done
Prince Andrew, who was beside him. Seeing him, Kutuzov's malevolent and
Kutuzov turned round without answering and his eye happened to fall upon

column advanced into action.
galloped up to Kutuzov and asked in the Emperor's name had the fourth
An Austrian officer in a white uniform with green plumes in his hat

as surly as a dog."
"My dear fellow," Nesvitski whispered to Prince Andrew, "the old man is

"Yes, sir."

Kindly do as you are ordered."
"The dispositions!" exclaimed Kutuzov bitterly. "Who told you that?...

dispositions..."
"The enemy is still far away, your excellency. According to the

fine!"
"You'll make a fine thing of it, deploying in sight of the enemy! Very

Kutuzov laughed bitterly.

answered the general.
"I intended to re-form them beyond the village, your excellency,"

village streets when we are marching against the enemy?"
your excellency, my dear sir, that you must not defile through narrow
he said angrily to a general who had ridden up. "Don't you understand,
"Do order them to form into battalion columns and go round the village!"

front.
without any command being given, apparently obstructed by something in
worn and irritable. The infantry passing before him came to a halt
the village letting the troops pass by him. That morning Kutuzov seemed
behind moved infantry. The commander in chief was standing at the end of
of cavalry came up and disappeared in the sea of mist. In front and
then a gleam of bayonets; to the left beyond the village similar masses
entering the misty region with a sound of hoofs and wheels and now and
was, for something could be descried. On the right the Guards were
some wooded hills were discernible, and it was there the enemy probably
of the sun. In front, far off on the farther shore of that sea of mist,
Above the heights was the dark clear sky, and to the right the vast orb
our troops had descended and from whence came the sounds of firing.
milk-white sea. Nothing was visible in the valley to the left into which
a hoar frost now turning to dew, but in the valleys it still lay like a
In the morning all that was left of the night mist on the heights was

I shall lead the army."
Seeing them he kept thinking, "That may be the very standard with which
He could not look calmly at the standards of the passing battalions.

hand, I shall go forward and break whatever is in front of me."
he, "I shall be sent with a brigade or division, and there, standard in
concentrate. "There we shall encounter difficulties, and there," thought
could be heard. It was there Prince Andrew thought the fight would
To the left down below in the mist, the musketry fire of unseen forces

might call for his rapidity of perception and decision.
Andrew considered possible contingencies and formed new projects such as
carried out, was forgotten. Now, entering into Weyrother's plan, Prince
in our army. His own strategic plan, which obviously could not now be
our troops were known to him as far as they could be known to anyone
know, but he felt sure it would do so. The locality and the position of
his Toulon, or his bridge of Arcola. How it would come about he did not
long-awaited moment. He was firmly convinced that this was the day of
irritation, though controlledly calm as a man is at the approach of a
in chief's suite. He was in a state of suppressed excitement and
Prince Andrew was behind, among the immense number forming the commander
column himself. When he had reached the village of Pratzen he halted.
the order to march, thereby indicating that he intended to lead that
the valley. He greeted the men of the foremost regiment and gave them
Przebyszewski's and Langeron's columns which had already gone down into
column, Miloradovich's, the one that was to take the place of
At eight o'clock Kutuzov rode to Pratzen at the head of the fourth


CHAPTER XV





Russian troops moving down the valley to their left.
toward those Pratzen Heights which were being more and more denuded by
a few minutes later the chief forces of the French army moved rapidly
accompanied by adjutants, galloped off in different directions, and
with it to the marshals, and ordered the action to begin. The marshals,
action--he drew the glove from his shapely white hand, made a sign
aglow with dazzling light--as if he had only awaited this to begin the
When the sun had entirely emerged from the fog, and fields and mist were

Pratzen Heights, now at the sun floating up out of the mist.
behind him not venturing to distract his attention. He looked now at the
one sees on the face of a boy happily in love. The marshals stood
face wore that special look of confident, self-complacent happiness that
motionless, looking at the heights visible above the mist, and his cold
mood in which everything seems possible and everything succeeds. He sat
spirits, he mounted his horse and rode out into the field in that happy
dawn he had slept for a few hours, and refreshed, vigorous, and in good
Today was a great day for him--the anniversary of his coronation. Before

begin the engagement.
sufficiently weakened to be successfully attacked. But still he did not
the center of the Russian army, and that that center was already
in front of them, and that the columns moving near Pratzen constituted
indications, he saw clearly that the allies believed him to be far away
by the disorderly movement of the Russian columns, and from all
sound of wheels and footsteps heard by the outposts during the night,
the mist. From information he had received the evening before, from the
direction toward the valley and disappearing one after another into
columns, their bayonets glittering, were moving continuously in one
a hollow between two hills near the village of Pratzen, the Russian
and regarded as the key to the position. He saw over the mist that in
part were leaving these Pratzen Heights which he intended to attack
had already descended into the valley toward the ponds and lakes and
spot. His predictions were being justified. Part of the Russian force
days was still thin--moved. His gleaming eyes were fixed intently on one
firing in the valley. Not a single muscle of his face--which in those
troops were moving in the distance, and he listened to the sounds of
which seemed to rise out of the sea of mist and on which the Russian
horse a little in front of his marshals. He gazed silently at the hills
which he had worn on his Italian campaign, sat on his small gray Arab
distinguish a mounted man from one on foot. Napoleon, in the blue cloak
side, so close to our own forces that Napoleon with the naked eye could
intended to take up our position and begin the action, but were on this
the streams and hollows of Sokolnitz and Schlappanitz beyond which we
and even Napoleon himself with his staff, were not on the far side of
float on the surface of that milky sea of mist. The whole French army,
blue sky, and the sun's vast orb quivered like a huge hollow, crimson
with his marshals around him, it was quite light. Above him was a clear
below, but higher up at the village of Schlappanitz where Napoleon stood
It was nine o'clock in the morning. The fog lay unbroken like a sea down

knew till after eight o'clock.
six miles away, or whether they were near by in that sea of mist, no one
going on in front. Whether all the enemy forces were, as we supposed,
higher ground it was clearing, but nothing could be seen of what was
Below, where the fight was beginning, there was still thick fog; on the

Pratzen Heights.
into the valley. The fourth column, with which Kutuzov was, stood on the
began for the first, second, and third columns, which had gone down
surroundings unable to find their own regiments. In this way the action
the officers or adjutants who wandered about in the fog in those unknown
lazily and advanced and again halted, receiving no timely orders from
them in the thick fog, the Russians exchanged shots with the enemy
the ranks, and above all being unable to see anything in front or around
commanders, and with a consciousness of being too late spreading through
stumbled on him in the fog, hearing no encouraging word from their
Not expecting to come on the enemy down by the stream, and having

more regularly and rapidly, and the action at the Goldbach Stream began.
first irregularly at varying intervals--trata... tat--and then more and
descending. In front in the fog a shot was heard and then another, at
was dispersing on the hill lay still more densely below, where they were
an hour's delay they at last moved on, descending the hill. The fog that
blame. The troops meanwhile stood growing listless and dispirited. After
halted, the Austrian argued that not he, but the higher command, was to
Russian general. The general shouted a demand that the cavalry should be
At the front an altercation occurred between an Austrian guide and a

front of the infantry, who had to wait.
ordered to turn back to the right. Several thousand cavalry crossed in
was too far separated from our right flank and the cavalry were all
moving toward our left flank, the higher command found that our center
The cause of the confusion was that while the Austrian cavalry was

Germans.
turn into vexation and anger at the stupid arrangements and at the
And the feeling of energy with which the troops had started began to

halfway. Fine orders!" was being repeated on different sides.
"We were ordered to be at the place before nine, but we haven't got

scoundrels!"
soldier, mimicking the general who had ridden away. "I'd shoot them, the
"Tafa-lafa! But what he's jabbering no one can make out," said a

Then a general rode past shouting something angrily, not in Russian.

said the officer and rode off.
"What stupid orders! They don't themselves know what they are doing!"

get there till evening."
"Then why are you here? You should have gone on long ago, now you won't

"The Eighteenth."

"What division are you?" shouted an adjutant, riding up.

another.
"Ah, those damned Germans! They don't know their own country!" said

way," said an officer.
"I say, shall we soon be clear? They say the cavalry are blocking the

behind. And now here we stand hungry."
"Yes, I'd send them on in front, but no fear, they're crowding up

Germans' muddling! What stupid devils!"
the middle of a field without rhyme or reason. It's all those damned
"They were in a hurry enough to start us, and now here we stand in

"No, one can't hear them. They'd be firing if we had."

against the French?"
"Why have we stopped? Is the way blocked? Or have we already come up

occasioned by the sausage eaters.
Germans, and everyone was convinced that a dangerous muddle had been
it was, the disorder was readily and naturally attributed to the stupid
this consciousness of mismanagement became a general conviction, but as
alone without any allies, it might perhaps have been a long time before
and irrepressibly, as water does in a creek. Had the Russian army been
certainly is communicated very surely, and flows rapidly, imperceptibly,
a consciousness is communicated is very difficult to define, but it
of some dislocation and blunder spread through the ranks. How such
the greater part of the men had to halt and an unpleasant consciousness
an attack. But when they had marched for about an hour in the dense fog,
marched gaily, as they always do when going into action, especially to
to cheer the men but merely carried out the orders), yet the troops
humor and dissatisfied with the affair, and so did not exert themselves
the men (the commanders, as we saw at the council of war, were out of
Though none of the column commanders rode up to the ranks or talked to

Moscow!"
night I looked at the campfires and there was no end of them. A regular
"It's wonderful what a lot of our troops have gathered, lads! Last

ranks.
"There now, the Kurskies have also gone past," was being said in the

too.
to the unknown place where he was going, many more of our men were going
were moving in the same direction. Every soldier felt glad to know that
aware that in front, behind, and on all sides, other Russian columns
nowhere encountering the enemy. On the contrary, the soldiers became
avoiding gardens and enclosures, going over new and unknown ground, and
for a long time, always in the same fog, descending and ascending hills,
encounter an enemy invisible ten paces off. But the columns advanced
ground like cliffs and slopes. Anywhere, on any side, one might
not see ten paces ahead. Bushes looked like gigantic trees and level
The fog had grown so dense that though it was growing light they could

what is going on around them.
regiment, they listen intently, look about, and eagerly ask concerning
battle the soldiers excitedly try to get beyond the interests of their
and solemn, and awakening in the men an unusual curiosity. On the day of
atmosphere of an army, announcing the approach of something decisive
whence--a stern note of which all are conscious sounds in the moral
his ship is sailing, but on the day of battle--heaven knows how and
same commanders. The sailor rarely cares to know the latitude in which
the same sergeant major Ivan Mitrich, the same company dog Jack, and the
the soldier always has around him the same comrades, the same ranks,
always surrounded by the same decks, masts, and rigging of his ship, so
strange, unknown, and dangerous places he reaches, just as a sailor is
much as a sailor is by his ship. However far he has walked, whatever
A soldier on the march is hemmed in and borne along by his regiment as

they were leaving or that to which they were going.
around them, the smoke and the increasing fog, to see either the place
column moved forward without knowing where and unable, from the masses
behind, and the monotonous tramp of thousands of feet resounded. The
instructions, orders, and commissions to the baggage men who remained
and regimental commanders mounted, crossed themselves, gave final
packed the wagons and tied on the loads. The adjutants and battalion
along the ranks shouting. The train drivers and orderlies harnessed and
buttoned up their coats, buckled on their swords and pouches, and moved
into the carts, got their muskets ready, and formed rank. The officers
ran from the fires, thrust their pipes into their boots, their bags
commanding officer's quarters, the regiment began to move: the soldiers
of the advance. As soon as an Austrian officer showed himself near a
were moving in and out among the Russian troops and served as heralds
did not want or could not carry away with them. Austrian column guides
remains of sheds, chairs, tables, wheels, tubs, and everything that they
warm themselves, gathering round the fires throwing into the flames the
soldiers, munching biscuit and beating a tattoo with their feet to
dark. The officers were hurriedly drinking tea and breakfasting, the
throwing everything superfluous, made the eyes smart. It was cold and
already up and astir. The smoke of the campfires, into which they were
flank and drive it into the Bohemian mountains according to plan, were
were to be the first to descend the heights to attack the French right
on the left flank the columns of infantry, cavalry, and artillery, which
center, the reserves, and Bagration's right flank had not yet moved, but
At five in the morning it was still quite dark. The troops of the


CHAPTER XIV





NAPOLEON

I shall conclude will be worthy of my people, of you, and of myself.
French troops who are being raised in France will join us, and the peace
conclude our campaign and we can return to winter quarters, where fresh
of England, inspired by such hatred of our nation! This victory will
man be fully imbued with the thought that we must defeat these hirelings
Do not break your ranks on the plea of removing the wounded! Let every

the French infantry, so necessary to the honor of our nation.
victory, especially on this day when what is at stake is the honor of
himself to the first blows of the enemy, for there must be no doubt of
be in doubt, even for a moment, you will see your Emperor exposing
carry disorder and confusion into the enemy's ranks, but should victory
your battalions. I will keep out of fire if you with your habitual valor
the right they will expose a flank to me. Soldiers! I will myself direct
occupy is a strong one, and while they are marching to go round me on
Hollabrunn and have pursued ever since to this place. The position we
Austrian army of Ulm. They are the same battalions you broke at
Soldiers! The Russian army is advancing against you to avenge the


Napoleon's proclamation was as follows:
lit wisps of straw and ran after him, shouting, "Vive l'Empereur!"
Emperor himself rode round his bivouacs. The soldiers, on seeing him,
that while Napoleon's proclamation was being read to the troops the
The fires and shouting in the enemy's army were occasioned by the fact


"Thank God!"

thought Rostov.
"Tomorrow very likely I may be sent with some message to the Emperor,"

"I will give the order."

"Then I may reckon on it, your excellency?"

But Rostov did not reply.

"Count Ilya Rostov's son?" asked Dolgorukov.

"Oh, very well, you may stay in attendance on me."

"Count Rostov."

"What's your name?"

the first squadron?"
"Tomorrow our squadron is to be in reserve. May I ask to be attached to

"What is it?"

"Your excellency," said Rostov, "may I ask a favor?"

"Very good, very good," said Bagration. "Thank you, officer."

and especially by the sound of the bullets.
salute and unable to repress the smile of delight induced by his ride
in the evening," reported Rostov, stooping forward with his hand at the
"The picket is still on the hill, your excellency, just where it was

"Wait till tomorrow morning, we'll find out everything tomorrow."
"It's plain that they have not all gone yet, Prince," said Bagration.

retreat and leave the pickets."
"What does that prove?" he was saying as Rostov rode up. "They might

only lit fires to deceive us.
Dolgorukov was still insisting that the French had retreated and had

and with his hand at the salute rode up to the general.
Only when approaching Bagration did Rostov let his horse gallop again,

shots came.
more! Some more!" a merry voice was saying in his soul. But no more
like his own, at the firing, and went back at a footpace. "Well, some
different tones. Rostov reined in his horse, whose spirits had risen,
at intervals, and the bullets passed somewhere in the fog singing in
Rostov turned his horse and galloped back. Four more reports followed
out of hearing. Another musket missed fire but flashed in the pan.
and a bullet whizzing high up in the mist with a plaintive sound passed
suddenly appeared in the fog, there was a flash, followed by a report,
before Rostov had time to make out what the black thing was that had
"Your honor, there he is!" cried one of the hussars behind him. And

the French pickets had been standing that evening.
road, and began riding up the hill at a gallop toward the point where
easier to see people coming along it. "Follow me!" said he, crossed the
gleamed white in the mist would have been safer because it would be
and ride over the black field up the hillside. To keep to the road which
he reined in his horse, hesitating whether to ride along it or cross it
when he reached it he found it was a road. Having come out onto the road
distinctly. In the valley he saw before him something like a river, but
the enemy's fires, but heard the shouting of the French more loudly and
Having descended the hill at a trot, he no longer saw either our own or
for trees and gullies for men and continually discovering his mistakes.
him and did not stop but rode on and on, continually mistaking bushes
the hill not to go beyond the stream, but Rostov pretended not to hear
distance where no one had been before him. Bagration called to him from
riding alone with three hussars into that mysterious and dangerous misty
from which the shouting came. He felt both frightened and pleased to be
hussars, told them to follow him, and trotted downhill in the direction
Rostov spurred his horse, called to Sergeant Fedchenko and two other

"Yes, sir."

"Well, go and see," he said, after a pause.

the mist.
Bagration stopped and, before replying, tried to see Rostov's face in

Shall I go with some of my hussars to see?" replied Rostov.
"They were there this evening, but now I don't know, your excellency.

said Bagration to Rostov, "are the enemy's skirmishers still there?"
they had retreated they would have withdrawn from that too.... Officer!"
"Hardly," said Bagration. "I saw them this evening on that knoll; if

kindle fires and make a noise to deceive us."
nothing but a trick! He has retreated and ordered the rearguard to
"Believe me," said Prince Dolgorukov, addressing Bagration, "it is

saying.
him, and then joined the adjutants listening to what the generals were
and shouts in the enemy's camp. Rostov rode up to Bagration, reported to
their adjutants had come to witness the curious phenomenon of the lights
One was on a white horse. Prince Bagration and Prince Dolgorukov with
the sergeant to meet some mounted men who were riding along the line.
Rostov, still looking round toward the fires and the shouts, rode with

"Your honor, the generals!" said the sergeant, riding up to Rostov.

suddenly appeared, looming huge as an elephant.
heard, and out of the foggy darkness the figure of a sergeant of hussars
of horse's hoofs approaching at a trot along the line of hussars was
The hussar only sighed without replying and coughed angrily. The sound

hussar beside him.
"They can't be far off, probably just beyond the stream," he said to the

distinctly.
stimulating effect on him. "Vive l'Empereur! L'Empereur!" he now heard
wanted to sleep. The gay triumphant shouting of the enemy army had a
farther, probably along the line of the French camp. Rostov no longer
of several thousand men could produce. The lights spread farther and
grew still louder and merged into a general roar that only an army
pricking its ears at the noise and looking at the lights. The shouting
Rostov's horse was also getting restive: it pawed the frozen ground,

Steady!" he cried to his fidgeting horse.
"It may be he or it may be nothing," muttered the hussar. "It's dark...

"From the direction, it must be the enemy," repeated Rostov.

"Who can tell, your honor?" replied the hussar reluctantly.

"Why, don't you hear it?" Rostov asked again, after waiting for a reply.

The hussar did not reply.

him. "That must be the enemy's camp!"
"What's that? What do you make of it?" said Rostov to the hussar beside

hear was: "ahahah!" and "rrrr!"
distinguish them. The din of many voices was too great; all he could
and louder. Rostov could hear the sound of French words but could not
the French line on the hill fires flared up and the shouting grew louder
from, a fire flared up and went out again, then another, and all along
pricked their ears at these shouts. Over there, where the shouting came
of thousands of voices. His horse and the horse of the hussar near him
he heard in front of him, where the enemy was, the long-drawn shouts
down! What?..." said Rostov, waking up. At the moment he opened his eyes
seemed to him that he was being fired at. "What? What? What?... Cut them
right!" And his head once more sank to his horse's neck. All at once it
thing I was thinking of. Yes, Na-tasha, sabretache, oh, yes, yes! That's
But that's nonsense, the chief thing is not to forget the important
wished to say something, but dared not.... No, it was I who dared not.
The chief thing is that the Emperor is here. How he looked at me and
Old Guryev.... Oh, but Denisov's a fine fellow. But that's all nonsense.
mustaches... I thought about him too, just opposite Guryev's house...
hussars with mustaches. Along the Tverskaya Street rode the hussar with
Natasha... sabretache... saber them... Whom? The hussars... Ah, the
I speak to the Emperor? No, that's not it--that's tomorrow. Oh yes!
drowsiness. "But what was I thinking? I mustn't forget. How shall
the hussar. He was succumbing to irresistible, youthful, childish
head that had sunk almost to his horse's mane and pulled up beside
Rostov was riding in the act of falling asleep. Rostov lifted his
honor, there are bushes here," came the voice of an hussar, past whom
Emperor?) Natasha... take my sabretache..."--"Keep to the right, your
tasha... (Won't she be surprised when I tell her how I've seen the
now... it's not a tache... Natasha... sister, black eyes... Na...
expect it's snow... that spot... a spot--une tache," he thought. "There
white houses? He even thought something moved on that white spot. "I
a glade in the wood lit up by the moon, or some unmelted snow, or some
there was a white patch that Rostov could not at all make out: was it
facing it a black knoll that seemed as steep as a wall. On this knoll
was getting lighter. To the left he saw a sloping descent lit up, and
his horse to ride once more round his hussars. It seemed to him that it
general and ask him." He readjusted himself in the saddle and touched up
I am off duty. I'll take another turn and when I get back I'll go to the
may be my only chance of seeing the Emperor. It won't be long now before
reserve tomorrow," he thought. "I'll ask leave to go to the front, this
watchword--shaft, Olmutz. What a nuisance that our squadron will be in
"Where am I? Oh yes, in the skirmishing line... pass and

his eyes.
the Emperor. Suddenly a distant shout aroused him. He started and opened
not only kill with pleasure but whom he would slap in the face before
Rostov pictured to himself an enemy or a deceitful German, whom he would
And in order to realize vividly his love devotion to the sovereign,
him, how I would tell him the truth, how I would unmask his deceivers!"
to himself! What if he gave me a place near him? Oh, how I would guard
getting to know an officer in just such a chance way and attaching him
say: 'Go and find out what's there.' There are many stories of his
meet me and give me an order as he would to any other officer; he'll
not?... It might easily happen," thought Rostov, "that the Emperor will
of hussars, but in the distance was still the same misty darkness. "Why
and sometimes, when he came within six paces of them, the black figures
and saw close before him the head and ears of the horse he was riding,
Denisov, and now Moscow memories--and he again hurriedly opened his eyes
His eyes kept closing, and in his fancy appeared--now the Emperor, now
ought to be, now he fancied it was only something in his own eyes.
something black, now little lights seemed to glimmer where the enemy
into that foggy distance: now something gleamed gray, now there was
of him was misty darkness. Rostov could see nothing, peer as he would
campfires dimly glowing in the fog, could be seen behind him; in front
sleepiness that kept coming over him. An enormous space, with our army's
in couples and he himself rode along the line trying to master the
of Bagration's detachment. His hussars were placed along the line
That same night, Rostov was with a platoon on skirmishing duty in front


CHAPTER XIII





mist!"
value this mystic power and glory that is floating here above me in this
"All the same, I love and value nothing but triumph over them all, I

the orderlies and servants.
"Oh, go to the devil!" called out a voice, drowned by the laughter of

"Go, Tit, thresh a bit!" said the wag.

"Well?" returned the old man.

who was called Tit. He was saying, "Tit, I say, Tit!"
coachman's, was teasing Kutuzov's old cook whom Prince Andrew knew, and
were those of the orderlies who were packing up; one voice, probably a
thought, as he listened to voices in Kutuzov's courtyard. The voices
I don't know and never shall know, for the love of these men here," he
all at once for a moment of glory, of triumph over men, of love from men
dearest to me--yet dreadful and unnatural as it seems, I would give them
precious and dear as many persons are to me--father, sister, wife--those
and men's esteem? Death, wounds, the loss of family--I fear nothing. And
tell anyone, but, oh God! what am I to do if I love nothing but fame
but that and live only for that. Yes, for that alone! I shall never
be loved by them, it is not my fault that I want it and want nothing
can't, but if I want this--want glory, want to be known to men, want to
himself, "I don't know what will happen and don't want to know, and
or betrayed, well... what then?..." "Well then," Prince Andrew answered
the other voice. "If before that you are not ten times wounded, killed,
alone. Kutuzov is removed and he is appointed... "Well and then?" asked
staff, but he does everything alone. The next battle is won by him
planned by him alone. Nominally he is only an adjutant on Kutuzov's
dreaming of his triumphs. The dispositions for the next battle are
voice. Prince Andrew, however, did not answer that voice and went on
gains the victory alone. "But death and suffering?" suggested another
with his arrangements--leads his division to the decisive point, and
he takes a regiment, a division-stipulates that no one is to interfere
the justness of his views, but no one undertakes to carry them out, so
opinion to Kutuzov, to Weyrother, and to the Emperors. All are struck by
presents itself to him at last. He firmly and clearly expresses his
then that happy moment, that Toulon for which he had so long waited,
of fighting at one point, and the hesitation of all the commanders. And
can do." And his fancy pictured the battle, its loss, the concentration
I have a presentiment that for the first time I shall have to show all I
of them will have any meaning for me. Tomorrow perhaps, even certainly,
everything may be over for me! All these memories will be no more, none
mysteriously. "Yes, tomorrow, tomorrow!" he thought. "Tomorrow
The night was foggy and through the fog the moonlight gleamed

and down before it.
of the hut in which he was billeted with Nesvitski and began to walk up
for himself, and in a nervously emotional and softened mood he went out
first loved her. He thought of her pregnancy and felt sorry for her and
parting from his father and his wife; he remembered the days when he
most intimate, memories rose in his imagination: he remembered his last
And suddenly, at this thought of death, a whole series of most distant,
"Yes, it is very likely that I shall be killed tomorrow," he thought.

life," he thought, "must be risked?"
personal considerations tens of thousands of lives, and my life, my
plainly to the Emperor? Is it possible that on account of court and
not know. "But was it really not possible for Kutuzov to state his views
the others who did not approve of the plan of attack, were right--he did
impression. Whether Dolgorukov and Weyrother, or Kutuzov, Langeron, and
express his opinion as he had hoped to, left on him a vague and uneasy
The council of war, at which Prince Andrew had not been able to


midnight. Prince Andrew went out.
He moved as if to rise. The generals bowed and retired. It was past

important..." he paused, "than to have a good sleep."
and we shall all do our duty. But before a battle, there is nothing more
is past midnight--cannot now be altered," said he. "You have heard them,
"Gentlemen, the dispositions for tomorrow--or rather for today, for it

Kutuzov here woke up, coughed heavily, and looked round at the generals.

opportunity to express his doubts.
"How is that?..." began Prince Andrew, who had for long been waiting an

arrangements to the minutest detail remain the same."
Thuerassa, he merely saves us a great deal of trouble and all our
smiled ironically.) "But even if he also took up a position in the
is the only thing we need fear, or he is changing his position." (He
his camp," said he. "What does that mean? Either he is retreating, which
"The enemy has quenched his fires and a continual noise is heard from

had also convinced the sovereign Emperors of.
have to prove to them what he had not merely convinced himself of, but
strange and ridiculous to meet objections from Russian generals and to
Weyrother again gave that smile which seemed to say that to him it was

"Ma foi!" said he, "tomorrow we shall see all that on the battlefield."

rather than of what the generals were disputing about.
But Miloradovich was at that moment evidently thinking of anything

to Miloradovich who was near him.
Langeron, with a subtly ironical smile, again glancing round for support
"In that case he is inviting his doom by awaiting our attack," said

case.
of a doctor to whom an old wife wishes to explain the treatment of a
"He has forty thousand men at most," replied Weyrother, with the smile

"So you think he is powerless?" said Langeron.

"If he could attack us, he would have done so today," said he.

be they what they might.
contemptuous smile, evidently prepared beforehand to meet all objections
plan perfectly worthless. Weyrother met all objections with a firm and
attack instead of being attacked, and so render the whole of this
as author of the military plan, argued that Bonaparte might easily
Langeron, trying as virulently as possible to sting Weyrother's vanity

let his head sink still lower.
you are still at that silly business!" quickly closed his eye again, and
is interrupted. He listened to what Langeron said, as if remarking, "So
his eye as a miller wakes up when the soporific drone of the mill wheel
When the monotonous sound of Weyrother's voice ceased, Kutuzov opened

military matters.
had to do, not with fools, but with men who could teach him something in
much self-confidence as if he were addressing school children--that he
aim was to show General Weyrother--who had read his dispositions with as
Langeron's objections were valid but it was obvious that their chief
whereas it was perhaps not known, since the enemy was in movement.
such a plan in which the enemy's position was assumed to be known,
anyone in particular, began to say how difficult it was to carry out
brought his snuffbox to rest and, without looking at Weyrother or at
When the reading which lasted more than an hour was over, Langeron again

noted them down.
and the difficult names of villages. Weyrother complied and Dohkturov
asked Weyrother several times to repeat words he had not clearly heard
conscientiously studied the dispositions and the unfamiliar locality. He
an assiduous and modest mien, and stooping over the outspread map
attention. Dohkturov, a little man, sat opposite Weyrother, with
hand to his ear toward Weyrother, with the air of a man absorbed in
Przebyszewski, with respectful but dignified politeness, held his

be heard.
"A geography lesson!" he muttered as if to himself, but loud enough to

drooped his eyes sadly and again took to twirling his snuffbox.
explanation, but meeting the latter's impressive but meaningless gaze
expression of perplexity, turned round to Miloradovich as if seeking an
good as to look at the map and listen." Langeron lifted his eyes with an
elbows, as if to say: "You can tell me your views later, but now be so
Austrian general, continuing to read, frowned angrily and jerked his
thin lips interrupted Weyrother, wishing to say something. But the
his head, and with inimical politeness lurking in the corners of his
longest sentences, he stopped the rotary motion of the snuffbox, raised
a gold snuffbox on which was a portrait. In the middle of one of the
gazed at his delicate fingers which rapidly twirled by its corners
his typically southern French face during the whole time of the reading,
to Weyrother sat Count Langeron who, with a subtle smile that never left
agreed or disagreed and was satisfied or not with the arrangements. Next
generals. But one could not tell from that significant look whether he
reading. Then Miloradovich looked round significantly at the other
only turned away his eyes when the Austrian chief of staff finished
raised. He remained stubbornly silent, gazing at Weyrother's face, and
elbows turned outwards, his hands on his knees, and his shoulders
twisted upwards, sat the ruddy Miloradovich in a military pose, his
with his glistening wide-open eyes fixed upon him and his mustache
or even to wish to be thought to listen. Exactly opposite Weyrother,
the wall, his eyes fixed on a burning candle, and seemed not to listen
The tall, fair-haired General Buxhowden stood, leaning his back against
The generals seemed to listen reluctantly to the difficult dispositions.

column marches..." and so on, read Weyrother.
The first column marches... The second column marches... The third
which cover the enemy's front. For this object it is necessary that...
Thuerassa forest, avoiding the defiles of Schlappanitz and Bellowitz
his flank and pursue him over the plain between Schlappanitz and the
the villages of Sokolnitz and Kobelnitz, whereby we can both fall on
advantageous to attack the enemy's latter wing especially if we occupy
on the other hand, with our left wing by far outflank his right, it is
along Kobelnitz and Sokolnitz behind the ponds that are there, while we,
"As the enemy's left wing rests on wooded hills and his right extends

follows:
The dispositions were very complicated and difficult. They began as

Sokolnitz, November 30, 1805."
"Dispositions for an attack on the enemy position behind Kobelnitz and

impending battle, under a heading which he also read out:
a loud, monotonous voice began to read out the dispositions for the
having convinced himself that he was asleep, took up a paper and in
the gesture of a man too busy to lose a moment, glanced at Kutuzov and,
irresistible human need for sleep. He really was asleep. Weyrother, with
the dispositions or anything else--he was engaged in satisfying the
by a far more serious matter than a desire to show his contempt for
followed proved that the commander in chief at that moment was absorbed
pretending to sleep, the sounds his nose emitted during the reading that
If at first the members of the council thought that Kutuzov was

head he let it droop and again closed his eye.
"Yes, yes, if you please! It is already late," said he, and nodding his

of Weyrother's voice, he opened his one eye with an effort.
with his podgy old hands resting symmetrically on its arms. At the sound
his collar as if escaping, was sitting almost asleep in a low chair,
Kutuzov, with his uniform unbuttoned so that his fat neck bulged over

enormous map of the environs of Brunn was spread out.
hurriedly rising from his seat and going up to the table on which an
"Since Prince Bagration is not coming, we may begin," said Weyrother,

he remained in the room.
permission previously given him by Kutuzov to be present at the council,
to inform the commander in chief of this and, availing himself of
the news that the prince could not attend. Prince Andrew came in
Bagration to begin the council. At last Bagration's orderly came with
of the council of war. They were drinking tea, and only awaited Prince
chief's office were gathered Kutuzov himself, Weyrother, and the members
Ostralitz. In the large drawing room which had become the commander in
Kutuzov was occupying a nobleman's castle of modest dimensions near

self-confident.
weary, and distracted air, though at the same time he was haughty and
questions put to him. He was bespattered with mud and had a pitiful,
without looking at the man he was addressing, and did not reply to
commander in chief. He interrupted him, talked rapidly and indistinctly,
He was evidently so busy that he even forgot to be polite to the

Kutuzov's.
the dispositions in German, and now, much exhausted, he arrived at
to report and explain, and to his headquarters where he had dictated
reconnoiter personally, and twice to the Emperors, Russian and Austrian,
to. Weyrother had been twice that evening to the enemy's picket line to
headlong speed with no time to consider what this movement might lead
pulling it or being pushed by it he did not know, but rushed along at
like a horse running downhill harnessed to a heavy cart. Whether he was
at the head of a movement that had already become unrestrainable. He was
president of the council of war. Weyrother evidently felt himself to be
and drowsy Kutuzov, who reluctantly played the part of chairman and
eagerness and briskness presented a marked contrast to the dissatisfied
Weyrother, who was in full control of the proposed battle, by his

at the appointed time.
the exception of Prince Bagration, who declined to come, were all there
commanders of columns were summoned to the commander in chief's and with
to Kutuzov's quarters where the council of war was to be held. All the
Shortly after nine o'clock that evening, Weyrother drove with his plans


CHAPTER XII





yourself!' Yes... That was the answer I got!"
general, I am engaged with rice and cutlets, look after military matters
him to tell the Emperor. What do you think he replied? 'But, my dear
think the battle will be lost, and so I told Count Tolstoy and asked
Kutuzov looked sternly at his adjutant and, after a pause, replied: "I

battle.
who was sitting silently beside him, what he thought of tomorrow's
On the way home, Prince Andrew could not refrain from asking Kutuzov,

shaking hands with Dolgorukov and Bilibin.
wish you good luck and success, gentlemen!" he added and went out after
"However, I think General Kutuzov has come out," said Prince Andrew. "I

Count Arakcheev, if his nerves were not too weak."
two Russians, Miloradovich, and Dokhturov, and there would be a third,
"Be quiet, backbiter!" said Dolgorukov. "It is not true; there are now

like all those Polish names."
Lichtenstein, le Prince, de Hohenlohe, and finally Prishprish, and so on
are: Herr General Wimpfen, le Comte de Langeron, le Prince de
there is not a single Russian in command of a column! The commanders
defeat, the glory of our Russian arms is secure. Except your Kutuzov,
was evidently ready with a joke. "Whether tomorrow brings victory or
then, had listened with an amused smile to their conversation and now
"Whatever are you bothering about, gentlemen?" said Bilibin, who, till

"I will do so," said Prince Andrew, moving away from the map.

say all this there," remarked Dolgorukov.
"There will be a council of war at Kutuzov's tonight, though; you can

map, but at Prince Andrew's face.
Dolgorukov ceased to listen to him and gazed absent-mindedly not at the
the defects of the latter and the merits of his own plan, Prince
had already been approved. As soon as Prince Andrew began to demonstrate
been as good as Weyrother's, but for the disadvantage that Weyrother's
Prince Andrew began to reply and to state his own plan, which might have

plan of a flanking movement.
And Prince Dolgorukov rapidly but indistinctly explained Weyrother's

is standing before Brunn..."
spread a map on the table. "All eventualities have been foreseen. If he
"Oh, that is all the same," Dolgorukov said quickly, and getting up he

formed.
He wished to explain to Dolgorukov a plan of attack he had himself

situated," said Prince Andrew.
outposts today and it is impossible to say where his chief forces are
"But in what position are we going to attack him? I have been at the

of old Cunctators."
energy of young men often shows the way better than all the experience
position to be attacked, but yourself to attack. Believe me in war the
No, we mustn't forget Suvorov and his rule--not to put yourself in a
to escape, or to trick us, now that we certainly have him in our hands!
a nice set of fellows if we were to wait about and so give him a chance
"Despite my great respect for old Kutuzov," he continued, "we should be

round at Bilibin with a smile.
the sort of man he is, and nothing more," replied Dolgorukov, looking
'Your Majesty,' but who, to his chagrin, got no title from me! That's
"He is a man in a gray overcoat, very anxious that I should call him

"But tell me, what is he like, eh?" said Prince Andrew again.

general battle. His hour has come! Mark my words!"
to his method of conducting war? Believe me, he is afraid, afraid of a
negotiate, and above all why retreat, when to retreat is so contrary
"If he weren't afraid of a battle why did he ask for that interview? Why
conclusion which he had arrived at from his interview with Napoleon.
general engagement," repeated Dolgorukov, evidently prizing this general
"Yes, I saw him, and am convinced that he fears nothing so much as a

like? How did he impress you?"
"Yes, you have seen him?" said Prince Andrew. "Well, what is Bonaparte

fears nothing so much as a general battle is impossible."
talks sense, but to temporize and wait for something now when Bonaparte
"But they heard him at the council of war and will hear him when he

"I won't say he is out of sorts, but I fancy he would like to be heard."

Out of sorts?"
at tea with Bilibin. "The fete is for tomorrow. How is your old fellow?
"Well, how d'you do, my dear fellow?" said Dolgorukov, who was sitting

not know: he therefore wished to speak to Dolgorukov.
everyone adopted toward him the tone of men who know something others do
dissatisfied with him, and also that at the Emperor's headquarters
dissatisfied about something and that at headquarters they were
coming action from Dolgorukov. He felt that Kutuzov was upset and
Bolkonski took the opportunity to go in to get some details of the

marshal of the court, Count Tolstoy.
after staying but a short time with the Tsar went to see the grand
At six in the evening, Kutuzov went to the Emperor's headquarters and

commander in chief.
Prince Andrew was on duty that day and in constant attendance on the

hand on the dial of human history.
battle of the three Emperors--that is to say, a slow movement of the
enthusiasm--was only the loss of the battle of Austerlitz, the so-called
remorse, humiliations, sufferings, outbursts of pride, fear, and
activities of 160,000 Russians and French--all their passions, desires,
hands which show the time, so the result of all the complicated human
wheels and pulleys is merely a slow and regular movement of the
Just as in a clock, the result of the complicated motion of innumerable

in the common motion the result and aim of which are beyond its ken.
catches it and obeying the impulse that wheel begins to creak and joins
to remain so for a hundred years; but the moment comes when the lever
neighboring wheel is as quiet and motionless as though it were prepared
the revolving pulleys whirr with the rapidity of their movement, but a
reached. Wheels creak on their axles as the cogs engage one another and
to them are the parts of the mechanism which the impulse has not yet
indifferently quiescent till the moment when motion is transmitted
machine, an impulse once given leads to the final result; and just as
Just as in the mechanism of a clock, so in the mechanism of the military

as a result of all that activity.
play, figures to pop out, and the hands to advance with regular motion
to revolve faster and faster, levers and cogwheels to work, chimes to
slowly moved, another was set in motion, and a third, and wheels began
the first movement of the main wheel of a large tower clock. One wheel
in the morning and had started the whole movement that followed was like
The concentrated activity which had begun at the Emperor's headquarters

and the army swayed and started in one enormous mass six miles long.
thousand allied troops rose from their bivouacs to the hum of voices,
and in the night from the nineteenth to the twentieth, the whole eighty
evening, the adjutants had spread it to all ends and parts of the army,
Kutuzov's headquarters and the staffs of the commanders of columns. By
headquarters. But on the afternoon of that day, this activity reached
to and fro, and dispatching of adjutants--was confined to the Emperor's
Till midday on the nineteenth, the activity--the eager talk, running

of the twentieth, when the memorable battle of Austerlitz was fought.
great, excitedly bustling activity began which lasted till the morning
retreated. In the highest army circles from midday on the nineteenth, a
days' march and the enemy's outposts after a brief interchange of shots
On the eighteenth and nineteenth of November, the army advanced two

remained alone with him for a long time.
Toward evening Dolgorukov came back, went straight to the Tsar, and

actuated by a real desire for peace.
with Napoleon if, contrary to expectations, these negotiations were
Dolgorukov, the victor at Wischau, was sent with Savary to negotiate
personal interview was refused, and instead of the Sovereign, Prince
a meeting with Napoleon. To the joy and pride of the whole army, a
It was rumored that Savary had been sent to propose to Alexander

Prince Dolgorukov to the advanced post of the French army.
he was admitted to the Emperor, and an hour later he rode off with
Emperor had only just fallen asleep and so Savary had to wait. At midday
brought into Wischau from our outposts. This officer was Savary. The
a flag of truce, demanding an audience with the Russian Emperor, was
At daybreak on the seventeenth, a French officer who had come with

the sight of the killed and wounded.
indisposition was the strong impression made on his sensitive mind by
had slept badly that night, those around him reported. The cause of this
near by the news spread that the Emperor was unwell. He ate nothing and
was repeatedly summoned to see him. At headquarters and among the troops
The next day the Emperor stopped at Wischau, and Villier, his physician,


CHAPTER XI





Russian arms.
love, though less ecstatically, with their Tsar and the glory of the
of Austerlitz: nine tenths of the men in the Russian army were then in
experience that feeling during those memorable days preceding the battle
arms and the hope of future triumph. And he was not the only man to
He really was in love with the Tsar and the glory of the Russian
did not even dare to dream of that), but simply to die before his eyes.
what happiness it would be to die--not in saving the Emperor's life (he
And Rostov got up and went wandering among the campfires, dreaming of

"No, you don't understand!"

"I believe it, I believe it, fwiend, and I share and appwove..."

beautiful feeling, such a..."
"Denisov, don't make fun of it!" cried Rostov. "It is such a lofty,

with the Tsar," he said.
"As there's no one to fall in love with on campaign, he's fallen in love

patted his favorite, Rostov, on the shoulder.
Late that night, when all had separated, Denisov with his short hand

The hussars crowded round and responded heartily with loud shouts.

enemies! Hurrah!" he exclaimed in his dashing, old, hussar's baritone.
"Lads! here's to our Sovereign, the Emperor, and victory over our

of the campfire, waving his uplifted arm.
showing under his open shirt, he stood in a majestic pose in the light
soldiers' bonfires and with his long gray mustache, his white chest
others and, in shirt sleeves and breeches, went glass in hand to the
When the officers had emptied and smashed their glasses, Kirsten filled

less sincerely than the twenty-year-old Rostov.
And the old cavalry captain, Kirsten, shouted enthusiastically and no

"Hurrah!" rang the enthusiastic voices of the officers.

you too! To the health of Alexander the First! Hurrah!"
it right, I have drunk a good deal--but that is how I feel, and so do
all die for him gladly! Is it not so, gentlemen? Perhaps I am not saying
Schon Grabern, what shall we not do now when he is at the front? We will
"If we fought before," he said, "not letting the French pass, as at

health and to the certain defeat of the French!"
our Sovereign, that good, enchanting, and great man! Let us drink to his
Emperor,' as they say at official dinners," said he, "but the health of
of the feast proposed the Emperor's health. "Not 'our Sovereign, the
the rank of major, and Rostov, who had already drunk enough, at the end
merrily than on the previous night. Denisov celebrated his promotion to
The campfires crackled and the soldiers' songs resounded even more
rewards were promised, and the men received a double ration of vodka.
the least firing. The Emperor's gratitude was announced to the vanguard,
of the enemy's lines, which all day long had yielded ground to us at
The troops of the vanguard were stationed before Wischau, within sight

terrible thing! Quelle terrible chose que la guerre!"
riding away, say to Czartoryski: "What a terrible thing war is: what a
Rostov saw tears filling the Emperor's eyes and heard him, as he was

apparently suffering more than the dying soldier, and he rode away.
"Gently, gently! Can't you do it more gently?" said the Emperor

a stretcher that had been brought. The soldier groaned.
adjutant, dismounting, lifted the soldier under the arms to place him on
the well-trained horse looked round unconcerned and did not stir. An
foot began convulsively tapping the horse's side with the spur, and how
shoulders shuddered as if a cold shiver had run down them, how his left
to the Emperor shocked Rostov. Rostov saw how the Emperor's rather round
wounded soldier was so dirty, coarse, and revolting that his proximity
at a soldier who lay prone, with blood on his uncovered head. The
to one side he gracefully held a gold lorgnette to his eyes and looked
different one from that which he had ridden at the review, and bending
of officers and courtiers, was riding a bobtailed chestnut mare, a
had not been time to move. The Emperor, surrounded by his suite
Emperor's arrival, lay several killed and wounded soldiers whom there
market place, where there had been some rather heavy firing before the
itself, a petty German town, Rostov saw the Emperor again. In the
passed, the Pavlograd division was ordered to advance. In Wischau
retreating against their will. A few minutes after the Emperor had
the battlefield, believed that the French had been defeated and were
Emperor and the whole army, especially while the smoke hung over
represented as a brilliant victory over the French, and so the
This battle, which consisted in the capture of a French squadron, was

him with news of the successful result of the action.
the vanguard. Before he came up with the hussars, several adjutants met
o'clock left the third column with which he had been and galloped toward
battle and, in spite of the remonstrances of his courtiers, at twelve
The younger Emperor could not restrain his wish to be present at the

galloped on.
raised his eyebrows, abruptly touched his horse with his left foot, and
face. A gentle, mild light poured from them. Then all at once he
any rate his light-blue eyes gazed for about two seconds into Rostov's
Rostov's soul (it seemed to Rostov that he understood everything), at
seconds. Whether or no the Emperor understood what was going on in
Emperor's eyes met Rostov's and rested on them for not more than two
of the majestic Emperor. Casually, while surveying the squadron, the
the liveliness of a fourteen-year-old boy, and yet it was the face
shone with such gaiety and youth, such innocent youth, that it suggested
even more beautiful than it had been three days before at the review. It
The Emperor drew level with Rostov and halted. Alexander's face was

which had said: "The Pavlograd hussars?"
"The reserves, sire!" replied a voice, a very human one compared to that

"The Pavlograd hussars?" he inquired.

Emperor's voice.
Rostov's feeling, there was a deathly stillness amid which was heard the
majestic voice that was yet so simple! And as if in accord with
enveloped in those beams, he heard his voice, that kindly, calm, and
beams of mild and majestic light around, and already he felt himself
festive around him. Nearer and nearer to Rostov came that sun shedding
near everything grew brighter, more joyful, more significant, and more
sound of the hoofs of the approaching cavalcade, but because as he drew
was ecstatically conscious of his approach. He felt it not only from the
meeting arrives. Not daring to look round and without looking round, he
day he had lost. He was happy as a lover when the longed-for moment of
the Emperor. He felt that this nearness by itself made up to him for the
himself had vanished. He was filled with happiness at his nearness to
amid people of whom he was weary had gone, instantly every thought of
Instantly his regret at not having been in action and his dejected mood
Rostov did not know or remember how he ran to his place and mounted.

was in his place, waiting.
him several riders with white plumes in their hats. In a moment everyone
All began to run and bustle, and Rostov saw coming up the road behind

"The Emperor! The Emperor!" was suddenly heard among the hussars.

him go on.
"Alley! Alley!" said the Cossack, touching the prisoner's arm to make

Rostov smilingly reassured the dragoon and gave him money.

Rostov when the animal was handed over to the hussar.
"But don't hurt my little horse!" said the Alsatian good-naturedly to

richest of the officers now that he had received his money, bought it.
The Cossacks sold the horse for two gold pieces, and Rostov, being the

freshness of atmosphere of the French army, which was so alien to us.
and zeal in the service. He brought with him into our rearguard all the
himself before his own officers, insisted on his soldierly discipline
he excused himself for having been taken prisoner and now, imagining
animal. It was plain that he did not quite grasp where he was. Now
every word he added: "But don't hurt my little horse!" and stroked the
some horsecloths, though he had told him the Russians were there. And at
taken, it was not his fault but the corporal's who had sent him to seize
addressing first one, then another. He said he would not have been
he heard some French spoken he at once began speaking to the officers,
accent. He was breathless with agitation, his face was red, and when
The French dragoon was a young Alsatian who spoke French with a German
The officers got up and stood round the Cossacks and their prisoner.

"If you like, your honor!"

"Sell us that horse!" Denisov called out to the Cossacks.

taken from the prisoner.
One of them was leading by the bridle a fine large French horse he had

two Cossacks.
indicating a captive French dragoon who was being brought in on foot by
"There! They are bringing another!" cried one of the officers,

The officers gathered round Denisov's canteen, eating and talking.

who had settled down by the roadside with a flask and some food.
"Come here, Wostov. Let's dwink to dwown our gwief!" shouted Denisov,

happy day in inactivity, was all the more depressed.
vainly suffered all the dread that precedes a battle and had spent that
adjutants, as they passed Rostov going or coming. And Nicholas, who had
the joyful expression on the faces of soldiers, officers, generals, and
not only by the tales of those who had taken part in it, but also by
autumn day was in keeping with the news of victory which was conveyed,
and sunny after a sharp night frost, and the cheerful glitter of that
Wischau and the capture of a whole French squadron. The day was bright
returning spoke of a brilliant victory, of the occupation of the town of
though not big, had been a successful engagement. The men and officers
convoyed by a sotnya of Cossacks. Evidently the affair was over and,
at last he saw how a whole detachment of French cavalry was brought in,
and saw wounded being brought back (there were not many of them), and
At nine in the morning, he heard firing in front and shouts of hurrah,
reserve and Nicholas Rostov spent that day in a dull and wretched mood.
hussar in this battle, had been wasted. Their squadron remained in
conquer that fear, all his dreams of distinguishing himself as a true
which he had experienced as previously, all the inner struggle to
Dolgorukov ride past with their adjutants. All the fear before action
and artillery pass by and go forward and then Generals Bagration and
the first and second squadrons of hussars and infantry battalions
of a mile was stopped on the highroad. Rostov saw the Cossacks and then
as arranged, and after going behind other columns for about two thirds
moved from the place where it had spent the night, advancing into action
Nicholas Rostov served and which was in Prince Bagration's detachment,
At dawn on the sixteenth of November, Denisov's squadron, in which


CHAPTER X





again and remained for a while with the Ismaylov regiment.
Austerlitz, Boris was unable to see either Prince Andrew or Dolgorukov
Next day, the army began its campaign, and up to the very battle of

could not suppress, as they passed out of the palace.
as he who decide the fate of nations," added Bolkonski with a sigh he
Minister of Foreign Affairs, Prince Adam Czartoryski.... It is such men
"He is one of the most remarkable, but to me most unpleasant of men--the

"Who was that?" asked Boris.

away and went down the side of the corridor.
neither: a look of animosity appeared on his face and the other turned
expecting him to bow or to step out of his way. Prince Andrew did
Andrew with cool intensity, walking straight toward him and evidently
man nodded to Dolgorukov as to an intimate friend and stared at Prince
gave him a peculiar vivacity and shiftiness of expression. This short
clever face and sharply projecting jaw which, without spoiling his face,
by which Dolgorukov had entered--a short man in civilian clothes with a
into the corridor and met--coming out of the door of the Emperor's room
obedient, and insignificant atom. They followed Prince Dolgorukov out
movements of the mass of which in his regiment he felt himself a tiny,
he was in contact with the springs that set in motion the enormous
as he felt himself to be at that moment. He was conscious that here
Boris was excited by the thought of being so close to the higher powers

time!"
good-natured, sincere, and animated levity. "But you see... another
man." Again he pressed the hand of the latter with an expression of
very glad to do all in my power both for you and for this dear young
pressing the hands of Prince Andrew and Boris. "You know I should be
"Oh, what a nuisance," said Dolgorukov, getting up hurriedly and

Emperor.
Andrew could finish, an aide-de-camp came in to summon Dolgorukov to the
petitioner on behalf of this young man. You see..." but before Prince
"Delightful!" said Bolkonski. "But I have come to you, Prince, as a

Bonaparte's.
immediately dropped his own beside it and picked it up without touching
Markov, probably expecting Markov to pick it up for him, and how Markov
purposely dropped a handkerchief in front of him and stood looking at
Andrew, told how Bonaparte wishing to test Markov, our ambassador,
And the talkative Dolgorukov, turning now to Boris, now to Prince

You know the story of the handkerchief? It is delightful!"
Count Markov? Count Markov was the only man who knew how to handle him.
adroitness and Italian play-acting! Do you know the tale about him and
more cunning or subtle diplomatist--you know, a combination of French
present Emperor--more than once in Paris, and tells me he never met a
"Oh yes, very much! My brother knows him, he's dined with him--the

"Yes, but he will dislike it extremely," said Bolkonski.

francais," said Dolgorukov, with grave satisfaction. "Good, wasn't it?"
"To the Head of the French Government... Au chef du gouvernement

"What was it?"

He is a wise and clever fellow."
"All the same, it was Bilibin who found a suitable form for the address.

"Only that?" said Bolkonski.

Dolgorukov laughed merrily.

'Usurper and Enemy of Mankind.'"
Bilibin--he's a very clever fellow. He suggested addressing him as
"That's just it," interrupted Dolgorukov quickly, laughing. "You know

Bonaparte, there is a difference," remarked Bolkonski.
"But between not recognizing him as Emperor and calling him General

'Emperor,' it seemed to me it should be to 'General Bonaparte.'"
think how to address the reply! If not as 'Consul' and of course not as
he continued, with a sudden, good-natured laugh, "was that we could not
tell you he is in our hands, that's certain! But what was most amusing,"
"What can he say? Tra-di-ri-di-ra and so on... merely to gain time. I

"Is that so? And what did he say?" inquired Bolkonski.

today for the Emperor." Dolgorukov smiled significantly.
decidedly lost bearings, you know that a letter was received from him
"And do you know, my dear fellow, it seems to me that Bonaparte has

"So the attack is definitely resolved on?" asked Bolkonski.

more could be wished for?"
devised. This combination of Austrian precision with Russian valor--what
dear fellow, no conditions better than our present ones could have been
every eventuality, every possibility even to the smallest detail! No, my
what minuteness, what knowledge of the locality, what foresight for
unjust to the Austrians and especially to Weyrother. What exactitude,
fellow," he said abruptly and eagerly, "I must confess to having been
the one that will result from it will be as victorious! However, dear
"Ah, my dear fellow, what a battle we have gained! God grant that

his mind at that moment, addressed Prince Andrew in French.
and, evidently unable to suppress the thoughts which were uppermost in
Dolgorukov politely and firmly pressing his hand said nothing to Boris
that had been gained. Prince Andrew introduced his protege, but Prince
from the council, tired and exhausted but eager and proud of the victory
Dolgorukov, one of the warmest advocates of an attack, had just returned

was undertaking nothing.
shown in every detail on the maps, and Bonaparte, evidently weakened,
the French had now to be fought; the adjacent locality was known and
Austrian army should maneuver the previous year on the very fields where
the Austrian General Weyrother: a lucky accident had ordained that the
the operations would take place was familiar in all its details to
Emperors' presence were eager for action. The strategic position where
Napoleon's, were concentrated in one place, the troops inspired by the
were on our side. Our enormous forces, undoubtedly superior to
longer seemed to be in the future but in the past. All the advantages
coming battle and the victory that would certainly result from it--no
advantages of attacking that what had been discussed at the council--the
silenced and their arguments confuted by such conclusive evidence of the
waiting for something else before advancing had been so completely
young had triumphed. The voices of those who counseled delay and advised
still under the spell of the day's council, at which the party of the
arrived at the palace to find Dolgorukov. Everyone at headquarters was
The council of war was just over when Prince Andrew accompanied by Boris
had been decided to advance immediately and give battle to Bonaparte.
to the views of the old generals Kutuzov and Prince Schwartzenberg, it
the Hofkriegsrath and both Emperors took part. At that council, contrary
That same day a council of war had been held in which all the members of

occupied by the Emperors and their retinues.
It was late in the evening when they entered the palace at Olmutz

him to Dolgorukov.
which attracted him. He very readily took up Boris' cause and went with
himself, he kept in touch with the circle which confers success and
of this kind for another, which from pride he would never accept for
man and help him to worldly success. Under cover of obtaining help
Prince Andrew always became specially keen when he had to guide a young

a place for you somewhere nearer the sun."
about you. We shall see whether he cannot attach you to himself or find
Dolgorukov; I have to go there anyhow and I have already spoken to him
nothing. Everything is now centered round the Emperor. So we will go to
fact is that now Kutuzov with his staff and all of us count for
excellent fellow, Prince Dolgorukov; and though you may not know it, the
this is what we'll do: I have a good friend, an adjutant general and an
There will soon be a battalion of us aides-de-camp and adjutants! But
the unwritten code," thought Boris), "but nothing more would come of it.
pleasant things, ask you to dinner" ("That would not be bad as regards
"It's no use your going to the commander in chief. He would say a lot of
Andrew when they had gone into the large room where the clavichord was.
"You see, my dear fellow, I have been thinking about you," said Prince

chief's room.
waited impatiently for Prince Andrew's return from the commander in
say to the adjutant that Boris felt uncomfortable. He turned away and
presumptuous lieutenant who had prevented his finishing what he had to
of the unwritten code of subordination--looked so fixedly at the
gentleman--evidently not sharing Boris' conception of the advantages
While Prince Andrew went to report about the purple-faced general, that

disposal."
"Only let me report this gentleman's business, and I shall be at your
"All right, all right. We'll talk it over," replied Prince Andrew.

won't be in action," he added as if in apology.
Prince Kuragin about me. I only wanted to ask because I fear the Guards
blushing--"of asking the commander in chief. He has had a letter from
"Yes, I was thinking"--for some reason Boris could not help

thinking about you."
"Well, my dear fellow, so you still want to be an adjutant? I have been

Weyrother's name, or even the term "dispositions."
as something generally known. But it was the first time he had heard
Boris smiled, as if he understood what Prince Andrew was alluding to

When Germans start being accurate, there's no end to it!"
with Germans all day. We went with Weyrother to survey the dispositions.
"I am very sorry you did not find me in yesterday. I was fussing about

Guards. Prince Andrew came up to him and took his hand.
who at the front had the power to annihilate him, a lieutenant of the
been recommended to Prince Andrew he had already risen above the general
code, but under this unwritten law. He felt now that merely by having
ever was Boris resolved to serve in future not according to the written
his own pleasure, chose to chat with Lieutenant Drubetskoy. More than
purple-faced general wait respectfully while Captain Prince Andrew, for
another, more important, subordination, which made this tight-laced,
military code, which he and the others knew in the regiment, there was
in the army, besides the subordination and discipline prescribed in the
At that moment Boris clearly realized what he had before surmised, that

smile.
him to hear something more, nodded and turned to him with a cheerful
Andrew, paying no more heed to the general who ran after him imploring
when he wished to speak contemptuously, and noticing Boris, Prince
general, in Russian, speaking with the French intonation he affected
"Very well, then, be so good as to wait," said Prince Andrew to the

reporting something.
on tiptoe, with a soldier's obsequious expression on his purple face,
to an old Russian general with decorations, who stood very erect, almost
were not my duty I would not talk to you for a moment"), was listening
that peculiar expression of polite weariness which plainly says, "If it
When he entered, Prince Andrew, his eyes drooping contemptuously (with

the reception room, where he found some ten officers and generals.
reception room if he wished to see him. Boris thanked him and went to
was on duty and that he should go through the door on the left into the
and whom Boris addressed turned round crossly and told him Bolkonski
gentlemen changed his position on seeing Boris. The one who was writing
the clavichord, sang the tune. Bolkonski was not there. None of these
playing a Viennese waltz on the clavichord, while a fourth, lying on
laughing with an officer who had sat down beside him. A third was
the red, stout Nesvitski, lay on a bed with his arms under his head,
sitting at the table in a Persian dressing gown, writing. Another,
table, chairs, and a clavichord. One adjutant, nearest the door, was
but in which five beds now stood, and furniture of various kinds: a
Boris was shown into a large hall probably formerly used for dancing,
house occupied by Kutuzov, asked for Bolkonski. Prince Andrew was in and
day, November 15, after dinner he again went to Olmutz and, entering the
heartily sick of them. In spite of this, or rather because of it, next
many officers like him were always coming there and that everybody was
orderlies looked at him as if they wished to impress on him that a great
Kutuzov, where he inquired for Bolkonski, all the adjutants and even the
aware of his existence. At the quarters of the commander in chief,
Guards, that they not only did not wish to, but simply could not, be
men, seemed so immeasurably above him, an insignificant officer of the
with their plumes, ribbons, and medals, both courtiers and military
exalted personages passing in the streets in their elegant carriages
He knew no one, and despite his smart Guardsman's uniform, all these

courts only strengthened his desire to belong to that higher world.
and the two Emperors were living with their suites, households, and
the town where the headquarters and the diplomatic corps were stationed
He did not find Prince Andrew in Olmutz that day, but the appearance of

reflected.
and must not miss opportunities, but must avail myself of them!" he
lackey, but I who have nothing but my brains have to make a career
time, to talk about not wishing to cringe to anybody and not be anyone's
very well for Rostov, whose father sends him ten thousand rubles at a
a position in the army which seemed to him most attractive. "It is all
post he could--preferably that of adjutant to some important personage,
wishing to profit by his friendliness and obtain for himself the best
comrade Berg's best wishes for success, rode to Olmutz to see Bolkonski,
The day after the review, Boris, in his best uniform and with his


CHAPTER IX





would have made them.
All were then more confident of victory than the winning of two battles

Rostov and most of the officers after the review.
they could not fail to vanquish anyone, be it whom it might: so thought
enemy under the Emperor's command. Commanded by the Emperor himself
They all had but one wish: to advance as soon as possible against the

every word and movement was described with ecstasy.
But the talk in every group was chiefly about the Emperor Alexander. His

arrived and Prussia took our side.
and how badly the latter would fare now, especially if the Essen corps
the Austrians and their uniforms, about their lines, about Bonaparte,
Kutuzov's, collected in groups and began to talk about the awards, about
When the review was over, the newly arrived officers, and also

this instant!" thought Rostov.
"My God, how happy I should be if he ordered me to leap into the fire

"Fine fellows, the Pavlograds!" remarked the Emperor.

blissful face "like a vewy devil," as Denisov expressed it.
himself one with his horse, rode past the Emperor with a frowning but
Rostov himself, his legs well back and his stomach drawn in and feeling

action, as if flying through the air without touching the ground.
upon him, passed splendidly, lifting his feet with a high and graceful
tail extended, Bedouin, as if also conscious of the Emperor's eye
animal went when excited. Bending his foaming muzzle to his chest, his
Bedouin twice and successfully put him to the showy trot in which the
Before he reached him, Rostov, who was a splendid horseman, spurred

and in full view of the Emperor.
from Denisov, rode past too, at the rear of his squadron--that is, alone
a ceremonial march past him, and Rostov on Bedouin, recently purchased
When the Emperor had passed nearly all the regiments, the troops began

and affronts matter? I love and forgive everybody now."
love, such rapture, and such self-sacrifice, what do any of our quarrels
worth thinking or speaking of it at such a moment? At a time of such
not to challenge Bolkonski. "Of course not!" he now thought. "Is it
yesterday and the question presented itself whether he ought or ought
his horse indolently and carelessly. Rostov recalled their quarrel of
Among the gentlemen of the suite, Rostov noticed Bolkonski, sitting

that surrounded the Emperors.
last only his white plumes were visible to Rostov from amid the suites
Farther and farther he rode away, stopping at other regiments, till at
moved off accompanied by an irregularly swaying sea of aides-de-camp.
mare he rode, his hand in a white glove gathered up the reins, and he
pointed boot then fashionable, touched the groin of the bobtailed bay
That hesitation lasted only an instant. The Tsar's foot, in the narrow

the Tsar did.
indecision appeared to him majestic and enchanting, like everything else
"How can the Emperor be undecided?" thought Rostov, but then even this

The Tsar stopped a few minutes in front of the hussars as if undecided.

only to express his rapture fully.
might, feeling that he would like to injure himself by that shout, if
Rostov too, bending over his saddle, shouted "Hurrah!" with all his

soldiers, straining their lungs, shouted "Hurrah!"
The Tsar said something more which Rostov did not hear, and the

"Oh, to die, to die for him," thought Rostov.

"You have earned the St. George's standards and will be worthy of them."

voice from heaven. How gladly would he have died at once for his Tsar!
thank you with my whole heart." To Rostov every word sounded like a
The Tsar addressed the officers also: "I thank you all, gentlemen, I

Rostov. "I should die of happiness!"
"Oh God, what would happen to me if the Emperor spoke to me?" thought

called the colonel of the regiment and said a few words to him.
some way and knowing that this was impossible was ready to cry. The Tsar
stronger flow of love for his sovereign. He longed to show that love in
Seeing that smile, Rostov involuntarily smiled himself and felt a still

to the Austrian Emperor and smiled.
Stopping in front of the Pavlograds, the Tsar said something in French

movement of the Tsar's seemed to him enchanting.
ecstasy such as he had never before known. Every trait and every
handsome, happy young face, he experienced a feeling tenderness and
paces, and Nicholas could clearly distinguish every detail of his
recognized the Tsar and watched his approach. When he was within twenty
Rostov was not far from the trumpeters, and with his keen sight had

attention.
pleasant face and resonant though not loud voice, attracted everyone's
Guards, wearing a cocked hat with its peaks front and back, with his
The handsome young Emperor Alexander, in the uniform of the Horse

whole mass of men was concentrated.
Emperors. Upon them the undivided, tensely passionate attention of that
symmetrically and above all freely, and in front of them two men--the
stone, hundreds of riders composing the suites moved carelessly but
amid the square masses of troops standing motionless as if turned to
already passed. Through the terrible and deafening roar of those voices,
its thunder joining the roar of the whole line along which he had
seemed like a lifeless body, but as soon as he came up it became alive,
Till the Tsar reached it, each regiment in its silence and immobility

ever stronger and fuller and merging into a deafening roar.
"Hurrah!"... Then the general march, and again "Hurrah! Hurrah!" growing
another greeting the Tsar with the strains of the march, and then
"Hurrah! Hurrah! Hurrah!" thundered from all sides, one regiment after

not but tremble and his heart stand still at the imminence of that word.
commit crime, die, or perform deeds of highest heroism, and so he could
himself an insignificant atom in it) would go through fire and water,
He felt that at a single word from that man all this vast mass (and he

triumph.
might, and a passionate attraction to him who was the cause of this
that army: a feeling of self-forgetfulness, a proud consciousness of
approached first, experienced the same feeling as every other man in
Rostov, standing in the front lines of Kutuzov's army which the Tsar

immensity of the power they constituted.
joyfully that the men themselves were awed by their multitude and the
first regiment roared "Hurrah!" so deafeningly, continuously, and
Alexander was clearly heard. He gave the words of greeting, and the
music. Amid these sounds, only the youthful kindly voice of the Emperor
itself, rejoicing at the Emperors' approach, had naturally burst into
seemed as though not the trumpeters were playing, but as if the army
trumpets of the first cavalry regiment played the general march. It
was the Emperors' suites. The Emperors rode up to the flank, and the
In the deathlike stillness only the tramp of horses was heard. This

others from various sides and all became silent.
front!" Then, like the crowing of cocks at sunrise, this was repeated by
joy at the approach of the Emperors. One voice was heard shouting: "Eyes
looked as if by that slight motion the army itself was expressing its
lances and the unfolded standards fluttered against their staffs. It
of wind blowing over the army slightly stirred the streamers on the
approaching. And at that moment, though the day was still, a light gust
From the direction of Olmutz in front of them, a group was seen

swept over all the troops.
coming!" Alarmed voices were heard, and a stir of final preparation
Like wind over leaves ran an excited whisper: "They're coming! They're

command, and in a like order.
and the Austrian troops. But they all stood in the same lines, under one
recently arrived from Russia, both Guards and regiments of the line;
army (with the Pavlograds on the right flank of the front); those
three parts of that army were sharply distinguished: Kutuzov's fighting
A space like a street was left between each two lines of troops. The

in front, behind it the artillery, and behind that again the infantry.
the vast field. The whole army was extended in three lines: the cavalry
o'clock all had been brought into due order. The ranks were drawn up on
From early morning strenuous activities and efforts had begun and by ten

enormous whole.
yet at the same time was conscious of his strength as a part of that
insignificance, aware of being but a drop in that ocean of men, and
solemn affair. Every general and every soldier was conscious of his own
smooth--felt that no small matter was happening, but an important and
till its coat shone like satin and every hair of its wetted mane lay
his weapons clean and polished to the utmost, and every horse groomed
officers, but every soldier with his freshly washed and shaven face and
wearing scarves and all their decorations, not only the elegant, pomaded
in to the utmost, their red necks squeezed into their stiff collars, and
generals in full parade uniforms, with their thin or thick waists drawn
infantry and cavalry and took up its appointed position. Not only the
the smell of linstocks, came the artillery which crawled between the
polished shining cannon that quivered on the gun carriages and with
or gray horses; then again, spreading out with the brazen clatter of the
uniforms, with smartly dressed bandsmen in front mounted on black, roan,
hoofs and the jingling of showy cavalry in blue, red, and green braided
infantry in different uniforms; now was heard the rhythmic beat of
formed up at intervals, and wheeled round other similar masses of
moved and halted at the officers' command, turned with banners flying,
on the field before the fortress. Now thousands of feet and bayonets
From early morning the smart clean troops were on the move, forming up

inspected the allied army of eighty thousand men.
Russian with his heir the Tsarevich, and the Austrian with the Archduke,
and those who had been campaigning under Kutuzov. The two Emperors, the
Austrian and Russian troops, both those freshly arrived from Russia
The day after Rostov had been to see Boris, a review was held of the


CHAPTER VIII





adjutant whom he so hated.
there was none he would so much like to have for a friend as that very
his pistol, and then he felt with surprise that of all the men he knew
seeing the fright of that small and frail but proud man when covered by
him all the way. He thought angrily of the pleasure he would have at
adjutant, or really let the matter drop, was the question that worried
home. Should he go to headquarters next day and challenge that affected
ordered his horse at once and, coldly taking leave of Boris, rode
have said. And he was still more angry at having omitted to say it. He
Only when Prince Andrew was gone did Rostov think of what he ought to

both he went out.
Drubetskoy. Au revoir!" exclaimed Prince Andrew, and with a bow to them
drop. Well then, on Friday after the review I shall expect you,
insulted, and as a man older than you, my advice is to let the matter
forget that I do not regard either myself or you as having been at all
he added rising, "you know my name and where to find me, but don't
all to blame that my face has the misfortune to displease you. However,"
besides, Drubetskoy, who says he is an old friend of yours, is not at
we shall all have to take part in a greater and more serious duel, and
but admit that the time and place are very badly chosen. In a day or two
it would be very easy to do so if you haven't sufficient self-respect,
authority, "you wish to insult me, and I am ready to agree with you that
"And I will tell you this," Prince Andrew interrupted in a tone of quiet

don't want to. I am speaking of the staff in general."
"I am not talking about you," he said, "I don't know you and, frankly, I

self-possession mingled at that moment in Rostov's soul.
A strange feeling of exasperation and yet of respect for this man's

particularly amiable smile.
"Of whom you imagine me to be one?" said Prince Andrew, with a quiet and

staff who get rewards without doing anything!"
stories have some weight, not like the stories of those fellows on the
stories are the stories of men who have been under the enemy's fire! Our
furious, now at Boris, now at Bolkonski. "Yes, many stories! But our
"Yes, stories!" repeated Rostov loudly, looking with eyes suddenly grown

told about that affair!"
slightly contemptuous smile, he said: "Yes, there are many stories now
Bolkonski noticed the hussar's state of mind, and it amused him. With a

aide-de-camp.
"I was there," said Rostov angrily, as if intending to insult the

talking of the Schon Grabern affair? Were you there?"
anger he did not condescend to notice, and said: "I think you were
whose state of unconquerable childish embarrassment now changing to
And, having glanced round the room, Prince Andrew turned to Rostov,

after the review and we will do what is possible."
will talk of it later" (and he looked round at Rostov). "Come to me
"As to your business," Prince Andrew continued, addressing Boris, "we

gaily.
give no opinion on such an important government order, and Berg laughed
doubled. To this Prince Andrew answered with a smile that he could
rumored, the allowance of forage money to captains of companies would be
Berg took the opportunity to ask, with great politeness, whether, as was

say more in the presence of a stranger.
"We shall probably advance," replied Bolkonski, evidently reluctant to

indiscretion, one might ask about our plans.
Boris inquired what news there might be on the staff, and what, without
was evidently one, Rostov felt confused, blushed, and became silent.
regarded all these little adjutants on the staff of whom the newcomer
the contempt with which Rostov, from his fighting army point of view,
In spite of Prince Andrew's disagreeable, ironical tone, in spite of

of the hussar of the line.
stranger. Glancing, however, at Boris, he saw that he too seemed ashamed
Rostov flushed up on noticing this, but he did not care, this was a mere
on the sofa: he felt it unpleasant to have dropped in on bad company.
looked at Rostov, bowed slightly and wearily, and sat down languidly
he gave Boris a pleasant smile, frowned as with half-closed eyes he
his military exploits (Prince Andrew could not endure that sort of man),
find him alone. When he came in and saw an hussar of the line recounting
papers from Kutuzov to the Tsarevich, he looked in on Boris, hoping to
before, he wished to do what the young man wanted. Having been sent with
being well disposed toward Boris, who had managed to please him the day
to help young men, was flattered by being asked for his assistance and
whom Boris was expecting, entered the room. Prince Andrew, who liked
what a strange frenzy one experiences during an attack," Prince Andrew,
In the middle of his story, just as he was saying: "You cannot imagine

told them all that.
saber had tasted flesh and he had fallen exhausted, and so on. And so he
a storm at the square, cut his way in, slashed right and left, how his
of how beside himself and all aflame with excitement, he had flown like
and young people are rarely capable of it. His hearers expected a story
will to tell only what happened. It is very difficult to tell the truth,
it really happened, it would have been necessary to make an effort of
he could from a Frenchman into the wood. Besides, to tell everything as
that he fell off his horse and sprained his arm and then ran as hard as
to him. He could not tell them simply that everyone went at a trot and
generally happens to the narrators of cavalry attacks had not happened
worse, would have thought that Rostov was himself to blame since what
just such a story--they would either not have believed him or, still
formed a definite idea of what an attack was and were expecting to hear
hearers--who like himself had often heard stories of attacks and had
inevitably he lapsed into falsehood. If he had told the truth to his
everything just as it happened, but imperceptibly, involuntarily, and
account have told a deliberate lie. He began his story meaning to tell
it really was. Rostov was a truthful young man and would on no
have heard it described by others, and as sounds well, but not at all as
do describe it, that is, as they would like it to have been, as they
Grabern affair, just as those who have taken part in a battle generally
as he went on became more and more animated. He told them of his Schon
he got his wound. This pleased Rostov and he began talking about it, and
skillfully changed the subject. He asked him to tell them how and where
But Boris noticed that he was preparing to make fun of Berg, and

"Yes, that was fine," said Rostov, smiling.

his pipe and emitting rings of smoke.
keeping one's head means. That's the way, Count," said Berg, lighting
next day it was not even mentioned in the Orders of the Day. That's what
shouted. Still I remained silent. And what do you think, Count? The
so I kept silent; was not that best, Count?... 'Hey, are you dumb?' he
Siberia!'" said Berg with a sagacious smile. "I knew I was in the right
rather of death, as the saying is. 'Albanians!' and 'devils!' and 'To
is, stormed and stormed and stormed! It was not a matter of life but
self-complacency than his did.) "Well, he stormed at me, as the saying
would have been difficult for a face to express greater respect and
how he presented himself, with his hand to his cap, and really it
my conscience was at ease. I came forward...." (Berg stood up and showed
Prayer. So, Count, there never is any negligence in my company, and so
Orders by heart and know the Regulations as well as I do the Lord's
I was right. Without boasting, you know, I may say that I know the Army
"Would you believe it, Count, I was not at all alarmed, because I knew

commander.
favorite expression when he was in a rage) and called for the company
a violent passion, shouting: "Arnauts!" ("Arnauts" was the Tsarevich's
pleasant smile Berg related how the Grand Duke had ridden up to him in
the regiments and was annoyed at the irregularity of a movement. With a
had managed to deal with the Grand Duke when the latter made a tour of
of the Grand Duke's quick temper he related with gusto how in Galicia he
subject did not relate to himself, but in connection with the stories
of his kindness and irascibility. Berg, as usual, kept silent when the
sayings and doings of their commander, the Grand Duke, and told stories
had been made much of in Russia, Poland, and abroad. They spoke of the
became animated. The Guardsmen told Rostov of their march and how they
and over the bottle of wine conversation between the three officers
Again Rostov looked intently into Boris' eyes and sighed. Berg returned,

"He is a very, very nice, honest, and pleasant fellow," answered Boris.

Rostov, with a contemptuous smile.
"Well, send for him... and how do you get on with that German?" asked

I can't."
"Shouldn't we now send for Berg?" asked Boris. "He would drink with you.

Old Gabriel brought in the wine.

trying in vain to find the answer to some question.
He looked intently and inquiringly into his friend's eyes, evidently

"Oh, that's it!" said Rostov, evidently thinking of something else.

make as successful a career of it as possible."
"Because when once a man starts on military service, he should try to

"Why?"

much like to be an adjutant and not remain at the front."
"Well, as you see. So far everything's all right, but I confess I should

Come, how are you?" asked Rostov.
"And you're still the same diplomatist! But that's not the point...

head.
"You are still the same dreamer, I see," remarked Boris, shaking his

"It's a lackey's job!"

"Why not?" inquired Boris.

"I want nothing, and I won't be anyone's adjutant."

address. "This letter would be of great use to you."
"Why 'What the devil'?" said Boris, picking it up and reading the

for!"
"It is some letter of recommendation... what the devil do I want it

"Why have you thrown that away?" asked Boris.

the table.
"What nonsense! Much I need it!" said Rostov, throwing the letter under

it to its destination and make use of it.
obtained through an acquaintance and sent to her son, asking him to take
to Bagration which the old countess at Anna Mikhaylovna's advice had
In the letter from his parents was enclosed a letter of recommendation

have you sent Gabriel for some wine? All right let's have some!"
a fright! Oh, what a pig I am!" he repeated, flushing suddenly. "Well,
"Oh, what a pig I am, not to have written and to have given them such

"Why?"

"Oh dear, what a beast I am!" muttered Rostov, as he read the letter.

noticed, left the room with a pleasant smile.
assured himself from the way Rostov looked at it that his coat had been
upwards, in the way affected by the Emperor Alexander, and, having
stood before a looking glass and brushed the hair on his temples
Berg put on the cleanest of coats, without a spot or speck of dust,

"Go across to our hosts: they invited you," added Boris.

and speaking in a muffled and guttural voice.
"Oh, don't mention it, Count! I quite understand," said Berg, getting up

old acquaintance."
"Don't be hurt, my dear fellow; you know I speak from my heart as to an
face, evidently wishing to soften the rudeness of his words, he added,
immediately seizing him by the shoulder and looking amiably into his
your way! Do go somewhere, anywhere... to the devil!" he exclaimed, and
over with, and I happen to be there, I'll go at once, to be out of
home and meet one of your own people whom you want to talk everything
"I say, Berg, my dear fellow," said Rostov, "when you get a letter from

can tell you for myself..."
that sank into the sofa. "As for us, Count, we get along on our pay. I
"Well, they've sent you a tidy sum," said Berg, eying the heavy purse

letter.
glanced angrily at Berg, then, meeting his eyes, hid his face behind the
arms on the table and began to read. After reading a few lines, he
Rostov took the letter and, throwing the money on the sofa, put both

"Yes, and I have some money and a letter to give you," he added.

for wine.
He went to his bed, drew a purse from under the clean pillow, and sent

"If you really want it," said he.

Boris made a grimace.

"Oh, you Guards!" said Rostov. "I say, send for some wine."

and advantages of service under members of the Imperial family.
hussar revels and life in the fighting line, the other of the pleasures
And the two friends told each other of their doings, the one of his

officers."
I can't tell you. And the Tsarevich was very gracious to all our
advantage. What receptions we had in Poland! What dinners and balls!
with our regiment all the time, so that we had every comfort and every
splendid march. You know, of course, that His Imperial Highness rode
"Indeed? Yes, yes!" said Boris, with a smile. "And we too have had a

"As you see," he said.

glanced at Berg with a smile.
fastened to the cording of his uniform and, indicating a bandaged arm,
Without answering, Rostov shook the soldier's Cross of St. George

under fire already?" asked Boris.
think he would get it to you so quickly.... Well, how are you? Been
Bolkonski--an adjutant of Kutuzov's, who's a friend of mine. I did not
expect you today," he added. "I only sent you the note yesterday by
"Why do you shout so? You'll frighten them!" said Boris. "I did not

"Eh, is she pretty?" he asked with a wink.

voice, popped her head in at the door.
mud-bespattered breeches. The German landlady, hearing Rostov's loud
and with baritone notes in his voice, new to Boris, pointing to his own
not like us sinners of the line," cried Rostov, with martial swagger
"Oh, you damned dandies! Clean and fresh as if you'd been to a fete,

were in a hurry to show the changes that had taken place in them.
those first steps. Both had changed greatly since they last met and both
the other, quite a new reflection of the society in which they had taken
men take their first steps on life's road, each saw immense changes in
They had not met for nearly half a year and, being at the age when young

kissed him three times.
notwithstanding this, Boris embraced him in a quiet, friendly way and
him, push him, do anything but kiss him--a thing everybody did. But
wished to do something special on meeting his friend. He wanted to pinch
different from that of its elders which is often insincere, Nicholas
that dread of beaten tracks, and wish to express itself in a manner
friend, but Nicholas avoided him. With that peculiar feeling of youth,
replace some chessmen that were falling. He was about to embrace his
Boris rose to meet Rostov, but in doing so did not omit to steady and

"Dear me, how you have changed!"

nurse's French, at which he and Boris used to laugh long ago.
petisenfans, allay cushay dormir!" he exclaimed, imitating his Russian
"Here he is at last!" shouted Rostov. "And Berg too! Oh, you

At that moment the door opened.

hand.
"We'll try to," replied Berg, touching a pawn and then removing his

"Well, how are you going to get out of that?" he remarked.

only of whatever he was engaged on.
opponent's face, evidently thinking about the game as he always thought
his delicate white fingers while awaiting Berg's move, and watched his
characteristic of him, was building a little pyramid of chessmen with
Berg held a smoking pipe between his knees. Boris, in the accurate way
round table in the clean quarters allotted to them, playing chess.
after yesterday's march, were sitting, clean and neatly dressed, at a
a post on the commander in chief's staff. Berg and Boris, having rested
acquainted with Prince Andrew Bolkonski, through whom he hoped to obtain
a letter of recommendation he had brought from Pierre had become
acquaintance of many persons who might prove useful to him, and by
matters very satisfactorily. Boris, during the campaign, had made the
his superiors by his promptitude and accuracy and had arranged his money
obtained his captaincy during the campaign, had gained the confidence of
with Berg who was already in command of a company. Berg, who had
proper posts. Boris had been quartered, and had marched all the way,
which the Guards prided themselves), the officers on foot and at their
Duke's orders the men had marched all the way in step (a practice on
had entered and left the town with their bands playing, and by the Grand
excellent dinners for the officers at every halting place. The regiments
knapsacks conveyed on carts, and the Austrian authorities had provided
their cleanliness and discipline. They had come by easy stages, their
The Guards had made their whole march as if on a pleasure trip, parading

had been under fire.
comrades of the Guards by his appearance--that of a fighting hussar who
rode up to the camp he thought how he would impress Boris and all his
crumpled hussar cap stuck jauntily back on one side of his head. As he
was one he had bought from a Cossack during the campaign, and he wore a
and an officer's saber with a sword knot. The Don horse he was riding
cross, equally shabby cadet's riding breeches lined with worn leather,
uniform. He had on a shabby cadet jacket, decorated with a soldier's
camp to find his old playmate. Rostov had not yet had time to get his
there, drank a bottle of wine, and then set off alone to the Guards'
receiving Boris' letter he rode with a fellow officer to Olmutz, dined
Bedouin, was in debt all round, to his comrades and the sutlers. On
just celebrated his promotion to a cornetcy and bought Denisov's horse,
opened a restaurant there with girls as waitresses. Rostov, who had
Olmutz to visit a certain Caroline the Hungarian, who had recently
awards they had received for the campaign, and made expeditions to
of tempting wares. The Pavlograds held feast after feast, celebrating
with well-provisioned sutlers and Austrian Jews offering all sorts
their active service, were stationed near Olmutz and the camp swarmed
Rostov was particularly in need of money now that the troops, after
and that he wanted to see him as he had a letter and money for him.
the Ismaylov regiment was quartered for the night ten miles from Olmutz
That day Nicholas Rostov received a letter from Boris, telling him that

to the review, reaching the field at Olmutz by ten o'clock.
the night ten miles from Olmutz and next morning were to come straight
Russian and the Austrian. The Guards, just arrived from Russia, spent
Olmutz, was preparing to be reviewed next day by the two Emperors--the
On the twelfth of November, Kutuzov's active army, in camp before


CHAPTER VII





things the old count sent to his son.
finally there were six thousand rubles for his outfit and various other
from the old count, the countess, Petya, Vera, Natasha, and Sonya, and
Boris and Boris was to forward them to Nicholas. The letters were
decided to send the letters and money by the Grand Duke's courier to
which was presumably somewhere in the same neighborhood. And so it was
there was no reason why it should not reach the Pavlograd regiment,
and that if a letter reached the Grand Duke in command of the Guards
supposed that The Russian Guards, Abroad, was quite a definite address,
Duke Constantine Pavlovich, who commanded the Guards. The Rostovs
and her son. She had opportunities of sending her letters to the Grand
authorities to secure advantageous means of communication for herself
practical woman that she was, had even managed by favor with army
of the newly commissioned officer were collected. Anna Mikhaylovna,
count, money and all things necessary for the uniform and equipment
while under the supervision of the countess and the solicitude of the
letters to Nicholas from all the household were written and copied out,
For more than a week preparations were being made, rough drafts of

high--I always said...."
everybody! Not forgetting anyone. I always said when he was only so
sufferings. What a heart! How like him it is! And how he has remembered
I dare say, is braver than any of them. He says nothing about his
himself.... Not a word! About some Denisov or other, though he himself,
descriptive part of the letter. "And what a soul! Not a word about
"What a style! How charmingly he describes!" said she, reading the

letter, he now was.
this strong, brave man, this model son and officer that, judging by this
speak, so now she could not believe that that little creature could be
somewhere under her heart would ever cry, suck her breast, and begin to
years before, it seemed impossible that the little creature who lived
millions of human beings who grew up in the same way. As twenty
had seemed as extraordinary to her as if there had never existed the
countess. Her son's growth toward manhood, at each of its stages,
imperceptibly from the cradle to manhood, did not exist for the
The universal experience of ages, showing that children do grow
doing some kind of man's work of his own, without help or guidance.
be away in a foreign land amid strange surroundings, a manly warrior
first learned to say "pear" and then "granny," that this son should now
she used to have quarrels with the too indulgent count, that son who had
tiny limbs she had felt twenty years ago within her, that son about whom
joyful it seemed, that her son, the scarcely perceptible motion of whose
proofs of Nikolenka's virtues. How strange, how extraordinary, how
each time with fresh pleasure and each time discovered in it fresh
Dmitri, and several acquaintances, and the countess reread the letter
did not let it out of her hands. The tutors came, and the nurses, and
considered worthy to hear it had to come to the countess, for she
Nicholas' letter was read over hundreds of times, and those who were

countess.
at her reproachfully. "And who is it she takes after?" thought the
This was quite true, but the count, the countess, and Natasha looked

glad and not cry."
"Why are you crying, Mamma?" asked Vera. "From all he says one should be

smiling, plumped down on the floor. The countess was crying.
full speed with her dress puffed out like a balloon, and, flushed and
turned upon her, ran away into the dancing hall, whirled round it at
blushed so that tears came into her eyes and, unable to bear the looks
loved and thought of just the same as ever." When she heard this Sonya
and his old nurse, and asked them to kiss for him "dear Sonya, whom he
Besides that, he sent greetings to Monsieur Schelling, Madame Schoss,
asking for their blessing, and that he kissed Vera, Natasha, and Petya.
promotion, Nicholas said that he kissed his father's and mother's hands
the campaign and the two battles in which he had taken part, and his
and the reading of the letter began. After a brief description of
the bald head. Vera, Natasha, Sonya, and Petya now entered the room,
and in order to press them again to her lips, she slightly pushed away
bald head, over which she again looked at the letter and the portrait,
When she saw the count, she stretched out her arms to him, embraced his

in the other the letter, and pressing them alternately to her lips.
countess, who sat holding in one hand the snuffbox with its portrait and
"It is done!" she said to the count, pointing triumphantly to the

public to appreciate his skill.
a surgeon who has just performed a difficult operation and admits the
Anna Mikhaylovna opened the door. Her face wore the proud expression of
then both voices together with glad intonations, and then footsteps.
Mikhaylovna's voice alone in a long speech, then a cry, then silence,
At first he heard the sound of indifferent voices, then Anna

The count put his ear to the keyhole and listened.

later." And she went in, closing the door behind her.
"Don't come in," she said to the old count who was following her. "Come

tiptoe to the countess' door and paused.
kept coming into her eyes. Anna Mikhaylovna, with the letter, came on
miniature portrait of her son on the lid of a snuffbox, while the tears
On retiring to her own room, she sat in an armchair, her eyes fixed on a
The countess had been prepared by Anna Mikhaylovna's hints at dinner.

the air of an old brigadier.
"Not more stupid than you, madam," said the nine-year-old Petya, with

"Petya, you're a stupid!" said Natasha.

Italian singing master), "that's why she's ashamed!"
Bezukhov) "and now she's in love with that singer" (he meant Natasha's
spectacles" (that was how Petya described his namesake, the new Count
previous remark. "It's because she was in love with that fat one in
"And I know why she'd be ashamed," said Petya, offended by Natasha's

"Well, I don't know. It's awkward and would make me ashamed."

"Why should you be ashamed?"

"And I should be ashamed to write to Boris. I'm not going to."

"No."

Sonya smiled.

"And you won't feel ashamed to write to him?"

blushing.
"I don't know. I think if he writes, I will write too," she said,

himself?
and, as it might seem, of the obligations to her he had taken on
officer and a wounded hero, would it be right to remind him of herself
whether she ought to write, tormented her. Now that he was already an
Sonya became thoughtful. The question of how to write to Nicholas, and

"Shall you write to him?" she asked.

like it. She believed it could be, but did not understand it.
love as Sonya was speaking of. But Natasha had not yet felt anything
nothing. She felt that Sonya was speaking the truth, that there was such
Natasha looked at Sonya with wondering and inquisitive eyes, and said

long as I live."
whatever may happen to him or to me, shall never cease to love him as
out of the question, "I am in love with your brother once for all and,
say and as if she were saying it to someone else, with whom joking was
friend as if she did not consider her worthy to hear what she meant to
"Oh, Natasha!" said Sonya, looking ecstatically and earnestly at her

No!" (She shut her eyes.) "No! there's nothing at all."
remember Nikolenka. Him--I just shut my eyes and remember, but Boris...
"It's not that I don't remember--I know what he is like, but not as I

"What! You don't remember Boris?" asked Sonya in surprise.

Boris. I don't remember him a bit."
Nikolenka too, I remember him well," she said. "But I don't remember
evidently wishing to give her words a very definite meaning. "I remember
remember everything?" said Natasha, with an expressive gesture,
"No, Sonya, but do you remember so that you remember him perfectly,

"Do I remember Nicholas?"

Sonya smiled.

"Do you remember him?" Natasha suddenly asked, after a moment's silence.

"I'm not a goose, but they are who cry about trifles," said Petya.

"Hold your tongue, Petya, what a goose you are!"

many that there'd have been a heap of them."
Frenchmen," he said. "What nasty brutes they are! I'd have killed so
"If I'd been in Nikolenka's place I would have killed even more of those

Petya paced the room in silence for a time.

you. Let us go to Mamma."
"Thank God!" said Sonya, crossing herself. "But perhaps she deceived

"No, but she said that it was all over and that he's now an officer."

"You haven't read the letter?" asked Sonya.

Natasha smiled through her tears.

blubberers and understand nothing."
glad indeed, that my brother has distinguished himself so. You are all
pacing the room with large, resolute strides. "Now I'm very glad, very
"There now! It's true that all you women are crybabies," remarked Petya,

wrote himself," said she through her tears.
"A little wound, but he has been made an officer; he is well now, he

She rushed to Sonya, hugged her, and began to cry.

on Sonya, felt for the first time the sorrowful side of the news.
Natasha, seeing the impression the news of her brother's wound produced

"Nicholas!" was all Sonya said, instantly turning white.

"Nikolenka... wounded... a letter," she announced in gleeful triumph.

tell anyone!" and she ran off at once to Sonya.
"No, on my true word of honor," said Natasha, crossing herself, "I won't

on condition that she should tell no one.
Anna Mikhaylovna, in a few words, told her the contents of the letter,

once."
"I will, I will, only tell me! You won't? Then I will go and tell at

"But for God's sake, be careful, you know how it may affect your mamma."

confirmation in Anna Mikhaylovna's face.
"A letter from Nikolenka! I'm sure of it!" exclaimed Natasha, reading

"You are a little slyboots," she said.

Anna Mikhaylovna shook her head.

something."
"No, dearest, sweet one, honey, I won't give up--I know you know

"Nothing, my dear."

"Auntie, darling, do tell me what it is!"

her neck as soon as she overtook her in the sitting room.
head long after Anna Mikhaylovna and, dashing at her, flung herself on
chair regardless of her governess' remarks. After dinner, she rushed
but she was too excited to eat anything and kept wriggling about on her
relating to Nikolenka, did not venture to ask any questions at dinner,
she was, Natasha, who knew how sensitive her mother was to anything
brother, and that Anna Mikhaylovna was preparing them for it. Bold as
father and Anna Mikhaylovna, that it had something to do with her
of the meal and was certain that there was some secret between her
intonation, look, and expression, pricked up her ears from the beginning
family, was the most gifted with a capacity to feel any shades of
conversation to insignificant matters. Natasha, who, of the whole
count and at Anna Mikhaylovna, the latter very adroitly turned the
began to make the countess anxious and she glanced uneasily at the
likely be getting a letter from him that day. Each time that these hints
him, though she knew that already, and remarked that they might very
about Nikolenka, twice asked when the last letter had been received from
At dinner Anna Mikhaylovna talked the whole time about the war news and

would inform her.
teatime she would prepare the countess, and after tea, with God's help,
own eyes she comforted the count, and decided that at dinner and till
the tears from his eyes and from the letter, then having dried her
Anna Mikhaylovna sat down beside him, with her own handkerchief wiped

little countess!"
the countess... promoted to be an officer... thank God... How tell the
"Nikolenka... a letter... wa... a... s... wounded... my darling boy...

The count sobbed yet more.

sympathize in any way.
"My dear friend?" said she, in a tone of pathetic inquiry, prepared to

living with the Rostovs.
Anna Mikhaylovna, though her circumstances had improved, was still

time.
found the count with it in his hand, sobbing and laughing at the same
on hearing of the arrival of the letter went softly into the room and
Anna Mikhaylovna, who always knew everything that passed in the house,

letter.
haste, trying to escape notice, closed the door, and began to read the
handwriting. On receiving it, he ran on tiptoe to his study in alarm and
midwinter was the count at last handed a letter addressed in his son's
It was long since the Rostovs had news of Nicholas. Not till


CHAPTER VI





Princess Mary.
so far forget herself! Perhaps I might have done the same!..." thought
helpless! And, oh God, how passionately she must love him if she could
happy when she is his wife. She is so unfortunate, a stranger, alone,
will give her the means; I will ask my father and Andrew. I shall be so
will do all I can to arrange the match between them. If he is not rich I
happiness, she loves him so passionately, and so passionately repents. I
and self-sacrifice. And cost what it may, I will arrange poor Amelie's
is to be happy with another kind of happiness, the happiness of love
"My vocation is a different one," thought Princess Mary. "My vocation

Prince Vasili.
prince. "Very, very glad to have seen you," repeated he, embracing
you. Very glad! Go back to your rooms, Princess. Go!" said the old
"Well, so that's finished, my dear fellow! I am very glad to have seen

the honor, but I shall never be your son's wife."
"Prince, what I have said is all there is in my heart. I thank you for

long. Say 'perhaps.'"
this heart, so kind and generous? Say 'perhaps'... The future is so
forget. But, my dear, will you not give us a little hope of touching
"My dear, I must tell you that this is a moment I shall never, never

Prince Vasili rose.

that she winced and uttered a cry.
bending his forehead to hers just touched it, and pressed her hand so
frowning and taking his daughter's hand; he did not kiss her, but only
"Humbug! Nonsense! Humbug, humbug, humbug!" cried Prince Bolkonski,

Prince Vasili and at her father with her beautiful eyes.
from yours. I don't wish to marry," she answered positively, glancing at
"My desire is never to leave you, Father, never to separate my life

to Prince Vasili and answering his imploring look. "Yes, or no?"
Yes, my opinion, and only my opinion," added Prince Bolkonski, turning
shouted, "and then I shall reserve the right to state my opinion also.
wish or not to be Prince Anatole Kuragin's wife? Reply: yes or no," he
proposition to you in his pupil's--I mean, his son's--name. Do you
"Fr... fr..." snorted Prince Bolkonski. "The prince is making a

He drew back and a real tear appeared in his eye.

dear, good, gentle Marie, whom I have always loved as a daughter!"
Then, sighing, he added: "My son's fate is in your hands. Decide, my
"Ah, my dear, my dear!" he began, rising and taking her by both hands.

pinch of snuff.
at his own sensibility, when Princess Mary entered. He hurriedly took a
as if stirred to his heart's core and himself regretting and laughing
his hand, was sitting there with a smile of deep emotion on his face,
Prince Vasili, with one leg thrown high over the other and a snuffbox in

yourself, my dear. I will go to my father," she said, and went out.
"I quite understand," answered Princess Mary, with a sad smile. "Calm

carried away by passion. Oh, only my poor mother..."
"But you despise me. You who are so pure can never understand being so

do all I can for your happiness."
"Why? I love you more than ever," said Princess Mary, "and I will try to

Bourienne.
"No, Princess, I have lost your affection forever!" said Mademoiselle

pretty face.
looking with tender affection and pity at Mademoiselle Bourienne's
princess' beautiful eyes with all their former calm radiance were
Mademoiselle Bourienne in her arms and gently stroking her hair. The
Princess Mary was sitting on the sofa in her room, holding the weeping
he added that Prince Vasili was also there. When Tikhon came to her
An hour later, Tikhon came to call Princess Mary to the old prince;

that led to his own apartments.
this strange incident, and then shrugging his shoulders went to the door
Princess Mary with a gay smile, as if inviting her to join in a laugh at
Mademoiselle Bourienne gave a scream and ran away. Anatole bowed to
Mary looked at them in silence. She could not understand it. At last
"Who's that? Why? Wait a moment!" Anatole's face seemed to say. Princess

Bourienne who had not yet seen her.
Mary, but did not at once take his arm from the waist of Mademoiselle
a horrified expression on his handsome face, Anatole looked at Princess
Anatole embracing the Frenchwoman and whispering something to her. With
Bourienne aroused her. She raised her eyes, and two steps away saw
anything, when suddenly the well-known whispering of Mademoiselle
going straight on through the conservatory, neither seeing nor hearing
still it was terrible, and she could not help thinking of it. She was
about Mademoiselle Bourienne was dreadful. It was untrue to be sure, but
Her fate was decided and happily decided. But what her father had said

princess, as if lost in a fog, had already staggered out of the study.
it over. Go! Yes or no, yes or no, yes or no!" he still shouted when the
you will pray over it. Well, pray if you like, but you had better think
and come back in an hour and tell me in his presence: yes or no. I know
anybody; but you are free to choose.... Go to your room, think it over,
"There's no need to talk! He receives his orders and will marry you or

"But I do not know, Father!"

depends on your decision. Never mind me!"
choose. I give you freedom. Only remember that your life's happiness
Princess, I hold to the principle that a maiden has a full right to
"Now then, now then, I'm only joking!" he said. "Remember this,

daughter. She lowered her head and was ready to burst into tears.
The prince stopped. He saw the effect these words had produced on his

you..."
take Mademoiselle Bourienne into the bargain. She'll be the wife, while
"That's admirable!" he shouted. "He will take you with your dowry and

prince interrupted her.
I had to express my own desire..." She had no time to finish. The old
submit from habit, and she said: "I wish only to do your will, but if
under which she felt that she could not think, but would only be able to
decided now or never. She lowered her eyes so as not to see the gaze
but at that moment the thought occurred to her that her fate would be
The princess saw that her father regarded the matter with disapproval,

married. What about you? That's what I want to know."
"I? I? What of me? Leave me out of the question. I'm not going to get

"I do not know what you think, Father," whispered the princess.

it'!... And I ask you!"
pupil's behalf. That's how it's to be understood! 'How understand
to his taste as a daughter-in-law and makes a proposal to you on his
"How understand me!" cried her father angrily. "Prince Vasili finds you

and then blushing.
"How am I to understand you, mon pere?" said the princess, growing pale

principles, I refer it to you."
Last night a proposition was made me on your account and, as you know my
referred to Anatole as a "pupil") "for the sake of my beautiful eyes.
come and brought his pupil with him" (for some reason Prince Bolkonski
unnatural smile. "I expect you have guessed that Prince Vasili has not
"I have had a proposition made me concerning you," he said with an

He came to the point at once, treating her ceremoniously.

repeating in a low voice the same words several times over.
arithmetic, when rising from his chair he would walk away from her,
dry hands clenched with vexation at her not understanding a sum in
expression of her father's. His face wore that expression when his
his daughter that morning. Princess Mary well knew this painstaking
The old prince was very affectionate and careful in his treatment of

made her a low bow when she met him in the corridor carrying hot water.
She read this in Tikhon's face and in that of Prince Vasili's valet, who
decided that day, but that they also knew what she thought about it.
It seemed to her that not only did everybody know that her fate would be
Princess Mary went to the door of the study with special trepidation.

Anatole met in the conservatory.
went to her father's room at the usual hour, Mademoiselle Bourienne and
opportunity since morning to meet one another alone. When Princess Mary
much to say to one another in private and so they had been seeking an
up to the appearance of the pauvre mere; they understood that they had
they quite understood one another as to the first part of their romance,
Though no words had passed between Anatole and Mademoiselle Bourienne,

went to the couch on which he slept.
into his slippers and his arms into the sleeves of his dressing gown, he
"No good... no good..." said the prince rapidly, and thrusting his feet

"They have gone to bed and put out their lights, your excellency."

Vasili and his son.
master's thoughts. He guessed that the question referred to Prince
Tikhon, like all good valets, instinctively knew the direction of his

"Gone to bed?" asked the prince.

the face that emerged from the shirt.
therefore met with unaltered looks the angrily inquisitive expression of
Tikhon knew his master's habit of sometimes thinking aloud, and

shirt.
"Devil take 'em!" he muttered, while his head was still covered by the

left."
invited them. They came to disturb my life--and there is not much of it
nightshirt over his dried-up old body and gray-haired chest. "I never
"What devil brought them here?" thought he, while Tikhon was putting the

thought, he called Tikhon and began to undress.
be parted from her) would be gained, so pacifying himself with this
Princess Mary's self-esteem would be wounded and his point (not to
mistake and that Anatole meant to flirt with Mademoiselle Bourienne,
The old prince knew that if he told his daughter she was making a

I'll let her see...."
nothing of her and looks only at Bourienne. No, she has no pride... but
least have some for my sake! She must be shown that the blockhead thinks
pride enough to see it? If she has no pride for herself she might at
Bourienne--I shall have to get rid of her. And how is it she has not
it. Fr... fr... fr! And don't I see that that idiot had eyes only for
herself! Glad to throw her father over! And she knew I should notice
else, runs upstairs and does up her hair and wags her tail and is unlike
"The first man that turns up--she forgets her father and everything

instead of that he only excited himself more and more.
the whole matter and decide what was right and how he should act, but
loved more than himself. He kept telling himself that he would consider
because it concerned not himself but another, his daughter, whom he
had been insulted through his daughter. The insult was the more pointed
pacing angrily about and snorting. The old prince felt as though he
The old prince did not sleep either. Tikhon, half asleep, heard him

voice quivered like that of a child about to cry.
"I should be glad enough to fall asleep, so it's not my fault!" and her
"I told you it was all lumps and holes!" the little princess repeated.

time, muttering to herself.
and disheveled, beat and turned the heavy feather bed for the third
sat in an armchair in her dressing jacket and nightcap and Katie, sleepy
when she was not like that and when everything was light and gay. She
ever because Anatole's presence had vividly recalled to her the time
awkward and uncomfortable, and her burden oppressed her now more than
She could not lie either on her face or on her side. Every position was
The little princess grumbled to her maid that her bed was badly made.

rebuking her for her fall.
working herself up to tears with the imaginary words of her pauvre mere
time that evening, vainly expecting someone, now smiling at someone, now
Mademoiselle Bourienne walked up and down the conservatory for a long

She rang for her maid and asked her to sleep in her room.

with the white forehead, black eyebrows, and red lips.
corner. And this someone was he--the devil--and he was also this man
to her that someone was there standing behind the screen in the dark
seldom experienced, came upon her. She feared to look round, it seemed
that is the chief thing," thought Princess Mary; and fear, which she had
"Is he really to be my husband, this stranger who is so kind--yes, kind,

got into bed, all kept awake a long time that night.
They all separated, but, except Anatole who fell asleep as soon as he


CHAPTER V





smilingly raising a finger at him, she left the room.
well I will give you my hand to kiss. Not till then!" she said. And
"No! No! No! When your father writes to tell me that you are behaving

kissed her warmly. Anatole went up to kiss the little princess' hand.
value her pure affection and devotion to me?" She went up to her and
(Mademoiselle Bourienne) "thinks I could be jealous of her, and not
"What delicacy!" thought the princess. "Is it possible that Amelie"

flushed, and gave the princess a frightened look.
everything so simply and with such assurance!) Mademoiselle Bourienne
Mademoiselle Bourienne's hand. (This was not etiquette, but then he did
shortsighted eyes. Turning from Princess Mary he went up and kissed
but she looked straight into his handsome face as it came near to her
kissed Princess Mary's hand. She did not know how she found the courage,
In the evening, after supper, when all were about to retire, Anatole

feeling his eyes gazing at her.
be possible?" she thought, not daring to look at his face, but still
happy I may be with such a friend and such a husband! Husband? Can it
"How she loves me!" thought Princess Mary. "How happy I am now, and how

look of fearful joy and hope that was also new to the princess.
was also looking at Princess Mary, and in her lovely eyes there was a
then touching with his own under the clavichord. Mademoiselle Bourienne
to the movements of Mademoiselle Bourienne's little foot, which he was
expression, though his eyes were fixed on her, referred not to her but
look she felt upon her made that world still more poetic. But Anatole's
Her favorite sonata bore her into a most intimately poetic world and the
Bourienne. Princess Mary felt his look with a painfully joyous emotion.
came and leaned on his elbows, facing her and beside Mademoiselle
asked to play on the clavichord. Anatole, laughing and in high spirits,
After tea, the company went into the sitting room and Princess Mary was

suddenness and prompt him to the coarsest and most reckless actions.
that passionate animal feeling which was apt to master him with great
beginning to feel for the pretty and provocative Mademoiselle Bourienne
spectacle of his power over these three women. Besides that, he was
tired of being run after by women, his vanity was flattered by the
Although in female society Anatole usually assumed the role of a man

struggle, but with naive and lighthearted gaiety.
familiar gallop of coquetry, without any ulterior motive or any
unconsciously and quite forgetting her condition, prepared for the
The little princess, like an old war horse that hears the trumpet,

him and she wished and tried to please him as much as possible.
to her, and now that Anatole had appeared it just grouped itself around
moment consider what she should do), but all this had long been familiar
Paris. It was not calculation that guided her (she did not even for a
Bourienne's head at the very time she was talking to Anatole about
and he would marry her. So her future shaped itself in Mademoiselle
appeared. He would carry her away and then sa pauvre mere would appear
story to him, her seducer. And now he, a real Russian prince, had
Bourienne was often touched to tears as in imagination she told this
reproached her for yielding to a man without being married. Mademoiselle
seduced, and to whom her poor mother (sa pauvre mere) appeared, and
liked to repeat to herself. It was the story of a girl who had been
a story, heard from her aunt but finished in her own way, which she
off; and here at last was a Russian prince. Mademoiselle Bourienne knew
ungainly Russian princesses, would fall in love with her and carry her
appreciate at a glance her superiority to the plain, badly dressed,
Bourienne had long been waiting for a Russian prince who, able to
aloud to him and being friends with Princess Mary. Mademoiselle
not intend to devote her life to serving Prince Bolkonski, to reading
without any definite position, without relations or even a country, did
arrival, thought in another way. Of course, she, a handsome young woman
Mademoiselle Bourienne, also roused to great excitement by Anatole's

guest. "Poor girl, she's devilish ugly!" thought Anatole.
And Princess Mary tried, but could not manage, to be cordial to her new

not like him."
but then he cannot know what I think of him and may imagine that I do
reserved because in the depth of my soul I feel too near to him already,
"But am I not too cold with him?" thought the princess. "I try to be

tried to conceal them.
family life continually rose in her imagination. She drove them away and
magnanimous. She felt convinced of that. Thousands of dreams of a future
all her attention. He seemed to her kind, brave, determined, manly, and
handsome open face of the man who might perhaps be her husband absorbed
Princess Mary grew quite unconscious of her face and coiffure. The

darkness, was suddenly lit up by a new brightness, full of significance.
increased tenfold, and their life, which seemed to have been passed in
till then. Their powers of reasoning, feeling, and observing immediately
Prince Bolkonski's household felt that their life had not been real
without male society, on Anatole's appearance all the three women of
As always happens when women lead lonely lives for any length of time

"All right, all right, we'll see!"

kinsman."
genius, but he is an honest, goodhearted lad; an excellent son or
companion. "You know, you see right through people. Anatole is no
man convinced of the futility of being cunning with so keen-sighted
"I will tell you frankly," said Prince Vasili in the tone of a crafty

he screamed in the same piercing tone as when parting from his son.
see." The old prince snorted. "Let her marry, it's all the same to me!"
presence; if she is willing, then he can stay on. He can stay and I'll
my principles--everything aboveboard? I will ask her tomorrow in your
Only let me tell you, I want to know my son-in-law better. You know
said the old prince angrily. "What an idea! I'm ready for it tomorrow!
"Well, do you think I shall prevent her, that I can't part from her?"

prince.
together, Prince Vasili announced his hopes and wishes to the old
Vasili's arm and led him to his study. As soon as they were alone
a fine fellow, a fine fellow! Well, come with me now." He took Prince
"Yes, everything is different nowadays, everything is changed. The lad's

is much better than ours."
"I have done my best for him, and I can assure you the education there

said the old prince to Prince Vasili.
"And so you've had him educated abroad, Prince Vasili, haven't you?"

Anatole returned smiling to the ladies.

"You may go," he said to Anatole.

Prince Bolkonski frowned.
laughed Prince Bolkonski, and Anatole laughed still louder. Suddenly
"A splendid soldier, splendid! 'What am I attached to!' Ha, ha, ha!"

with a laugh.
what is it I am attached to, Papa?" said Anatole, turning to his father
"No, Prince, our regiment has gone to the front, but I am attached...

you off to the front?"
and the country? It is wartime. Such a fine fellow must serve. Well, are
"Ah! That's a good thing. So, my dear boy, you wish to serve the Tsar

restrain his laughter.
"No, I have been transferred to the line," said Anatole, hardly able to

scrutinizing Anatole closely and intently.
my dear boy, are you serving in the Horse Guards?" asked the old man,
read and write by the deacon, like your father and me. Now tell me,
"Well, my dear boy, I hear you've been educated abroad, not taught to

the old prince.
"Now the fun begins," thought Anatole, sitting down with a smile beside

turning to Anatole, "come here, let us talk and get acquainted."
"Now you, young prince, what's your name?" said Prince Bolkonski,

Prince Vasili.
"On the contrary, that coiffure suits the princess very well," said

reduced to tears.
And he sat down again, paying no more attention to his daughter, who was

enough as it is."
daughter-in-law, "but she need not make a fool of herself, she's plain
"You must do as you please," said Prince Bolkonski, bowing to his

blush.
"It was my fault, mon pere," interceded the little princess, with a

never to dare to change your way of dress without my consent."
visitors, and before the visitors I tell you that in future you are
"Fine, very fine! You have done up your hair in this new way for the
"Is it for visitors you've got yourself up like that, eh?" said he.

daughter.
Prince Vasili's last words. Then rising, he suddenly went up to his
"And so they are writing from Potsdam already?" he said, repeating

Mary.
attentively to what Prince Vasili said, but kept glancing at Princess
questioning him about political affairs and news. He seemed to listen
and, drawing up an armchair for Prince Vasili, pointed to it and began
Prince Bolkonski sat down in his usual place in the corner of the sofa

told him to expect.
composure, waiting for a display of the eccentricities his father had
Anatole kissed the old man, and looked at him with curiosity and perfect

me," and he offered his cheek.
"Fine young fellow! Fine young fellow!" he said. "Well, come and kiss

Prince Bolkonski surveyed Anatole.

befriend him."
self-confident, familiar tone. "Here is my second son; please love and
"Friendship laughs at distance," began Prince Vasili in his usual rapid,

"Well! How d'ye do? How d'ye do? Glad to see you!"

He went straight up to Prince Vasili.

her!"
he thought, looking irritably at her. "She is shameless, and he ignores
daughter amid the general conversation. "Got herself up like a fool!"
Mademoiselle Bourienne's and Anatole's smiles, and the loneliness of his
Mademoiselle Bourienne's ribbon, Princess Mary's unbecoming coiffure,
round the company. He noticed the change in the little princess' dress,
He entered the drawing room with his usual alert step, glancing rapidly

"That is what we shall see! That is what we shall see!" he added aloud.

And that is what we shall see."
against it," the prince said to himself, "but he must be worthy of her.
His birth and position in society were not bad. "Well, I've nothing
proposing, and today or tomorrow he would probably ask for an answer.
answer. Prince Vasili had brought his son with the evident intention of
yet the question he was always putting off demanded an immediate
the happier for it?" So thought Prince Bolkonski while dressing, and
connections and wealth. Are there no women living unmarried, and even
would marry Marie for love? Plain and awkward! They'll take her for her
hardly be found nowadays--but is she contented with her lot? And who
There's Lise, married to Andrew--a better husband one would think could
him. "And why should she marry?" he thought. "To be unhappy for certain.
Princess Mary, little as he seemed to value her, was unthinkable to
with his feelings but with the very possibility of life. Life without
that he would have to answer it justly, and justice clashed not only
prince never directly asked himself that question, knowing beforehand
bring himself to part from his daughter and give her to a husband. The
which he always deceived himself. The question was whether he could ever
in his mind an unsettled question he always tried to stifle, one about
himself. What angered him was that the coming of these visitors revived
braggart and his son, no doubt, is a fine specimen," he grumbled to
Prince Vasili and that son of his to me? Prince Vasili is a shallow
what he was to do. The coming of these visitors annoyed him. "What are
The old prince dressed leisurely in his study, frowning and considering


    * The little one is charming.


married, la petite est gentille." *
little companion! I hope she will bring her along with her when we're
"Not at all bad!" he thought, examining her, "not at all bad, that
came to the conclusion that he would not find Bald Hills dull either.
about her native land. When he saw the pretty little Bourienne, Anatole
Frenchwoman very readily and, looking at her with a smile, talked to her
had left Paris and how he had liked that city. Anatole answered the
She took the liberty of inquiring whether it was long since Anatole

opportunity of joining in the general current of recollections.
When Paris was mentioned, Mademoiselle Bourienne for her part seized the

is a pearl among women, Princess," he added, turning to Princess Mary.
pining for the dear princess, and how she showed him the door? Oh, she
he had just managed to catch her, "didn't he tell you how he himself was
and seizing the little princess' arm as if she would have run away and
"And didn't Hippolyte tell you?" asked Prince Vasili, turning to his son

him, "I have even heard of your doings in Paris!"
Hippolyte told me about your goings on. Oh!" and she shook her finger at
Anatole. "Ah, I know, I know," she said with a sly glance, "your brother
"Why is it you were never at Annette's?" the little princess asked

"Oh, yes!"

"And our little tea table?"

"Ah, but you won't talk politics to me like Annette!"


    * Anna Pavlovna.


always ran away; you remember cette chere Annette!"
to Prince Vasili. "It's not as at Annette's * receptions where you
ourselves, dear prince," said the little princess (of course, in French)
"Here at least we shall have the benefit of your company all to

pleasantly made to share in these merry reminiscences.
Bourienne also shared them and even Princess Mary felt herself
amusing recollections of things that had never occurred. Mademoiselle
little princess also drew Anatole, whom she hardly knew, into these
existed in this case. Prince Vasili readily adopted her tone and the
reminiscences, though no such reminiscences really exist--just as none
there are some semi-private, long-established jokes and amusing
in the assumption that between the person they so address and themselves
playful manner often employed by lively chatty people, and consisting
lip that lifted over her white teeth. She met Prince Vasili with that
general and animated, thanks to Princess Lise's voice and little downy
expect to interest him, she turned to his father. The conversation was
felt this, and as if wishing to show him that she did not even dare
very little--but his looks and manner gave that impression. The princess
when he met women--even probably he did not, for in general he thought
You'd be only too glad, of course." Perhaps he did not really think this
to them: "I know you, I know you, but why should I bother about you?
supercilious consciousness of his own superiority. It was as if he said
which particularly inspires in them curiosity, awe, and even love--a
say. Besides this, in his behavior to women Anatole had a manner
silence inconvenient, let him talk, but I don't want to," he seemed to
could be silent in this way for a very long time. "If anyone finds this
foot, and smilingly examined the princess' hair. It was evident that he
something to say, the effect is bad. But Anatole was dumb, swung his
consciousness of the impropriety of such silence and an anxiety to find
self-confidence remains dumb on a first introduction and betrays a
composure and imperturbable self-possession. If a man lacking in
conversation, but he had the faculty, so invaluable in society, of
her at all. Anatole was not quick-witted, nor ready or eloquent in
face at the princess without speaking and evidently not thinking about
swinging one foot, and, with his head a little bent, looked with beaming
of his uniform, his chest expanded and his back drawn in, slightly
struck by his beauty. Anatole stood with his right thumb under a button
light-brown hair smelling of pomade. When she looked up at him she was
touched with her lips a white forehead, over which was beautiful
not see him. She only felt a soft hand taking hers firmly, and she
remembered him quite well. Then Anatole came up to her. She still could
hand and answered his question by saying that, on the contrary, she
approached first, and she kissed the bold forehead that bent over her
and handsome moving toward her as she entered the room. Prince Vasili
but him she could not see, she only saw something large, brilliant,
pretty face, and her unusually animated look which was fixed on him,
the visitors. And she saw Mademoiselle Bourienne, with her ribbon and
the little princess curiously noting the impression "Marie" produced on
for an instant at the sight of her, but immediately smiling again, and
them all and saw them in detail. She saw Prince Vasili's face, serious
indicating her to the gentlemen, said: "Voila Marie!" Princess Mary saw
the gentlemen and Mademoiselle Bourienne rose and the little princess,
Bourienne. When she entered with her heavy step, treading on her heels,
in the drawing room, talking to the little princess and Mademoiselle
When Princess Mary came down, Prince Vasili and his son were already


CHAPTER IV





care not a hair of man's head can fall?
could all that matter in comparison with the will of God, without Whose
coiffure nor of how she would go in nor of what she would say. What
and having crossed herself went down, thinking neither of her gown and
fulfillment of her forbidden earthly longing) Princess Mary sighed,
His will." With this consoling thought (but yet with a hope for the
God's will to prove thee in the duties of marriage, be ready to fulfill
from thee, but live so that thou mayest be ready for anything. If it be
not anxious or envious. Man's future and thy own fate must remain hidden
answer in her own heart. "Desire nothing for thyself, seek nothing, be
Thy will?" And scarcely had she put that question than God gave her the
to renounce forever these vile fancies, so as peacefully to fulfill
"how am I to stifle in my heart these temptations of the devil? How am I
others and even from herself, the stronger it grew. "O God," she said,
was for earthly love. The more she tried to hide this feeling from
happiness and of children, but her strongest, most deeply hidden longing
man, be for her? In her thoughts of marriage Princess Mary dreamed of
doubt filled her soul. Could the joy of love, of earthly love for a
lamp, she stood before it with folded hands for a few moments. A painful
eyes fixed on the dark face of a large icon of the Saviour lit by a
before going down she went into the room where the icons hung and, her
She roused herself, and felt appalled at what she had been thinking, and

maid's voice at the door.
"Please come to tea. The prince will be out in a moment," came the

child. "But no, it is impossible, I am too ugly," she thought.
breast, the husband standing by and gazing tenderly at her and the
seen the day before in the arms of her nurse's daughter--at her own
happy world of his own. She fancied a child, her own--such as she had
being rose in her imagination, and carried her into a totally different
pondered. A husband, a man, a strong dominant and strangely attractive
glass. Letting her arms fall helplessly, she sat with downcast eyes and
she not only left her hair as it was, but did not even look in her
Princess Mary was left alone. She did not comply with Lise's request,

answer, she left the room.
"You will change it, won't you?" said Lise. And as Princess Mary gave no

be shaken in her determination.
knew that when it appeared on her face, she became mute and was not to
Mary did not frighten them (she never inspired fear in anyone), but they
both knew, an expression thoughtful and sad. This expression in Princess
but it was too late. She was looking at them with an expression they
that Princess Mary in this guise looked very plain, worse than usual,
Mademoiselle Bourienne and the little princess had to own to themselves

answered a voice struggling with tears.
"Leave me alone, please leave me alone! It is all quite the same to me,"

in the least! Please change it."
"Mary's is a face which such a coiffure does not suit in the least. Not
tell you," she went on, turning reproachfully to Mademoiselle Bourienne,
"At least, change your coiffure," said the little princess. "Didn't I

them, and understood that it was useless and even cruel to insist.
eyes full of tears and of thoughts, gazing shiningly and imploringly at
was silenced at once. They looked at the beautiful, large, thoughtful
Her voice sounded so serious and so sad that the chirping of the birds

"No, leave me alone," said Princess Mary.

birds.
laughing at something, mingled in a merry sound, like the chirping of
The three voices, hers, Mademoiselle Bourienne's, and Katie's, who was

"Well, now we'll arrange something quite simple and becoming," she said.

Mary.
The little princess, taking the dress from the maid, came up to Princess

little effort."
"Come, dear princess," said Mademoiselle Bourienne, "just one more

into sobs.
mirror her eyes full of tears and her mouth quivering, ready to burst
sitting motionless before the glass, looking at her face, and saw in the
But when Katie brought the required dress, Princess Mary remained

of artistic pleasure.
Bourienne, how I shall arrange it," she added, smiling with a foretaste
maid, "bring the princess her gray dress, and you'll see, Mademoiselle
everyday dress. Now please, do it for my sake. Katie," she said to the
really this dress does not suit you. I prefer you in your little gray
"No, it will not do," she said decidedly, clasping her hands. "No, Mary,

with her head bent first on one side and then on the other.
dress with her little hand, now arranging the scarf and looking at her
little princess walked twice round her, now adjusting a fold of the
looks) and she had put on a maroon dress with a pale-blue scarf, the
on the top of her head (a style that quite altered and spoiled her
which Princess Mary meekly submitted, just as her hair had been arranged
would still remain piteous and plain. After two or three changes to
however they might change the setting and adornment of that face, it
the frightened face and the figure could not be altered, and that
the best maroon dress, and so on, all would be well. They forgot that
in the hair, the hair combed up, and the blue scarf arranged lower on
princess felt this; they still thought that if a blue ribbon were placed
that was not pretty, but neither Mademoiselle Bourienne nor the little
It was not the dress, but the face and whole figure of Princess Mary

be at stake. But this one is too light, it's not becoming!"
dress, have it fetched. Really! You know the fate of your whole life may
sideways at Princess Mary from a little distance. "You have a maroon
"No really, my dear, this dress is not pretty," said Lise, looking

can make a face pretty.
sincerity, and with the naive and firm conviction women have that dress
think of her as a rival, so they began dressing her with perfect
to make her look pretty. She was so plain that neither of them could
Mademoiselle Bourienne and Lise. Both these women quite sincerely tried
martyrlike expression it so often wore, as she submitted herself to
grew dim, red blotches came on her face, and it took on the unattractive
prolong their banter and insistence. She flushed, her beautiful eyes
betray her agitation, while to decline their offers to dress her would
To tell them that she felt ashamed for herself and for them would be to
companions' not having the least conception that it could be otherwise.
the arrival of a suitor agitated her, and still more so by both her
dressed. Princess Mary's self-esteem was wounded by the fact that
began to devise and carry out a plan of how Princess Mary should be
The little princess got up, rang for the maid, and hurriedly and merrily

shall have to go down, and you have not smartened yourself up at all!"
"They'll be announcing that the gentlemen are in the drawing room and we
"What! Are you going to remain as you are, dear princess?" she began.

fresh and pretty face yet more attractive.
had been added to Mademoiselle Bourienne's toilet which rendered her
more noticeable how much plainer she had become. Some unobtrusive touch
outlines. Dressed as she used to be in Petersburg society, it was still
face was animated, which, however, did not conceal its sunken and faded
but had on one of her best dresses. Her hair was carefully done and her
She was no longer in the loose gown she generally wore in the morning,

and sinking heavily into an armchair.
"You know they've come, Marie?" said the little princess, waddling in,

had reached her from the corridor, went into Princess Mary's room.
the little princess and Mademoiselle Bourienne, whose chattering voices
like an eagle, three steps at a time. Having received this information,
the father had dragged his legs upstairs while the son had followed him
was, with his rosy cheeks and dark eyebrows, and with what difficulty
the lady's maid, the necessary report of how handsome the minister's son
princess and Mademoiselle Bourienne had already received from Masha,
The mere thought of her father's look filled her with terror. The little
the drawing room? Even if I like him I can't now be myself with him."
happen!" she said, looking at herself in the glass. "How shall I enter
"Why did they write, why did Lise tell me about it? It can never

vainly trying to master her agitation.
been minutely described. Princess Mary was sitting alone in her room,
the minister and his son had arrived, but the appearance of both had
In the meantime, not only was it known in the maidservants' rooms that

"Remember, for you everything depends on this."

those old men! Eh?"
"If he starts a row I'll go away," said Prince Anatole. "I can't bear

with the old prince."
"Enough! What nonsense! Above all, try to be respectful and cautious

during the journey.
continuing a conversation the subject of which had often been mentioned
"I say, Father, joking apart, is she very hideous?" Anatole asked, as if

entered, as if to say: "Yes, that's how I want you to look."
with much animation and cheerfully nodded to his son as the latter
Prince Vasili's two valets were busy dressing him, and he looked round
father's room with the good-humored and victorious air natural to him.
become habitual to him and, his handsome head held high, entered his
He shaved and scented himself with the care and elegance which had

That never does any harm," thought Anatole.
and amusingly. "And why not marry her if she really has so much money?
heiress in the same way. All this might, he thought, turn out very well
And he looked on this visit to a churlish old man and a rich and ugly
of amusement which someone for some reason had to provide for him.
large and handsome eyes. He regarded his whole life as a continual round
table on a corner of which he smilingly and absent-mindedly fixed his
Anatole, having taken off his overcoat, sat with arms akimbo before a

Prince Vasili and Anatole had separate rooms assigned to them.

lodges over the road purposely laden with snow.
and footmen, who, with loud shouts, dragged his sleighs up to one of the
Prince Vasili arrived that evening. He was met in the avenue by coachmen

proceeded to his study.
unnatural way, he stretched out his hand for Alpatych to kiss, and then
"All right, all right," interrupted the prince, and laughing his

stupidity."
"Yes, your excellency. Forgive me for heaven's sake... It was only my

"Has the snow been shoveled back?"

bowed head.
He left the room and went to the waiting room where Alpatych stood with

"Well, all right, all right."

"No, merci, mon pere."

"Do you want anything?"

question as to how she felt.
"Yes, I feel a kind of oppression," she said in reply to the prince's

had sunk, her lip was drawn up, and her eyes drawn down.
She was much altered. She was now plain rather than pretty. Her cheeks

pale on seeing her father-in-law.
was sitting at a small table, chattering with Masha, her maid. She grew
After dinner, he went to see his daughter-in-law. The little princess

after the soup the prince became more genial.
conservatories and the beauty of a flower that had just opened, and
of a subject, she did not stop talking, but chattered about the
Though Mademoiselle Bourienne had been so unsuccessful in her choice

"No, mon pere."

morning?"
Eh? Afraid of the 'minister' as that idiot Alpatych called him this
want him." (He looked at his blushing daughter.) "Are you unwell today?
understand. Perhaps Princess Elizabeth and Princess Mary know. I don't
service," said the prince disdainfully. "Why his son is coming I don't
"Hm!--his excellency is a puppy.... I got him his appointment in the

inquiringly.
Excellency Prince Vasili Kuragin and his son, I understand?" she said
Bourienne, unfolding her white napkin with her rosy fingers. "His
"So we are to have visitors, mon prince?" remarked Mademoiselle

about the old prince and criticized him.
days with her, asked her to sleep in her room, and often talked with her
Hills, she took a special fancy to Mademoiselle Bourienne, spent whole
for her. When the little princess had grown accustomed to life at Bald
reciprocated this antipathy, but it was overpowered by his contempt
realize because the fear was so much the stronger feeling. The prince
with a sense of antipathy to the old prince which she did not
In general at Bald Hills the little princess lived in constant fear, and

knows what a fright might do."
"I am afraid for the baby," she said to Mademoiselle Bourienne: "Heaven

that, hearing he was in a bad humor, she had decided not to appear.
princess was not unwell, but had such an overpowering fear of the prince
flung it away. Tikhon caught it and handed it to a footman. The little
His plate seemed to him not quite clean, and pointing to a spot he

"Hm! Hm!" muttered the prince, sitting down.

smile, "so she won't come down. It is natural in her state."
"She is not very well," answered Mademoiselle Bourienne with a bright

"Where is the princess?" he asked. "Hiding?"

room.
thought--referring to the little princess who was not in the dining
"And the other one is not here. They've been telling tales," he

"Fool... or dummy!" he muttered.

The prince looked at his daughter's frightened face and snorted.

done before) that I'm in the dumps."
him; if I seem sad and out of spirits myself, he will say (as he has
"If I seem not to notice he will think that I do not sympathize with
ought to behave like Mademoiselle Bourienne, but could not. She thought:
What she found hardest to bear was to know that on such occasions she
as usual," and Princess Mary pale, frightened, and with downcast eyes.
Bourienne with a radiant face that said: "I know nothing, I am the same
that the prince was in a bad humor, stood awaiting him; Mademoiselle
Before dinner, Princess Mary and Mademoiselle Bourienne, who knew

his stick again but hurried into the house.
shout: "Blackguards!... Throw the snow back on the road!" did not lift
him, or perhaps for that very reason, the prince, though he continued to
stroke, came up to the prince, bowing his bald head resignedly before
But although Alpatych, frightened at his own temerity in avoiding the

blow. "Thought... Blackguards..." shouted the prince rapidly.
hit Alpatych, the overseer, had not the latter instinctively avoided the
teach you to think!" and lifting his stick he swung it and would have
rapidly and indistinctly. "You thought!... Rascals! Blackguards!... I'll
"You thought!" shouted the prince, his words coming more and more

"Your honor, I thought..."

daughter, but for a minister! For me, there are no ministers!"
shrill, harsh voice. "The road is not swept for the princess my
"What? A minister? What minister? Who gave orders?" he said in his

frowning.
The prince turned round to the overseer and fixed his eyes on him,

your honor, that a minister is coming to visit your honor."
"It would have been hard to drive up, your honor," he added. "I heard,

thought the overseer, "the storm has blown over!"
The prince bowed his head and went up to the porch. "God be thanked,"

"The snow is deep. I am having the avenue swept, your honor."

house.
his master in manners and looks, who was accompanying him back to the
"Can a sleigh pass?" he asked his overseer, a venerable man, resembling

frowning and silent.
through the conservatories, the serfs' quarters, and the outbuildings,
soft snowbanks that bordered both sides of the path. The prince went
visible in the snow and a shovel had been left sticking in one of the
habit of walking, had been swept: the marks of the broom were still
before and the path to the hothouse, along which the prince was in the
collar and cap, went out for his usual walk. It had snowed the day
However, at nine o'clock the prince, in his velvet coat with a sable

heels--we know what that means...."
attention to the sound of the prince's footsteps. "Stepping flat on his
"Do you hear how he's walking?" said Tikhon, drawing the architect's

not to go to the prince with his report.
bad temper, and in the morning Tikhon had already advised the architect
temper made him specially annoyed at Prince Vasili's visit, he was in a
temper because Prince Vasili was coming, or whether his being in a bad
particularly discontented and out of temper. Whether he was in a bad
him. On the day of Prince Vasili's arrival, Prince Bolkonski was
a feeling of contemptuous ill will. He snorted whenever he mentioned
he saw which way the wind was blowing, and his low opinion changed into
from the hints contained in his letter and given by the little princess,
Alexander Prince Vasili had risen to high position and honors. And now,
character, but more so recently, since in the new reigns of Paul and
Old Bolkonski had always had a poor opinion of Prince Vasili's

in advance of him, and he and his son arrived next day.
A fortnight after the letter Prince Vasili's servants came one evening

Prince Nicholas frowned, but said nothing.

princess on hearing the news.
coming to us of their own accord," incautiously remarked the little
"It seems that there will be no need to bring Mary out, suitors are

feels for you."
personally to express the deep respect that, emulating his father, he
accompanying me on his way to the army, so I hope you will allow him
time, my honored benefactor," wrote Prince Vasili. "My son Anatole is
think nothing of an extra seventy miles to come and see you at the same
visit. "I am starting on a journey of inspection, and of course I shall
November, 1805, announcing that he and his son would be paying him a
Old Prince Nicholas Bolkonski received a letter from Prince Vasili in


CHAPTER III





of a wife who was a celebrated beauty and of millions of money.
newly furnished Petersburg house, the happy possessor, as people said,
Six weeks later he was married, and settled in Count Bezukhov's large,


    * "I love you."


moments: but his words sounded so weak that he felt ashamed of himself.
"Je vous aime!" * he said, remembering what has to be said at such

"It is too late now, it's done; besides I love her," thought Pierre.

unpleasantly excited expression.
lips and met them with her own. Her face struck Pierre, by its altered,
with a rapid, almost brutal movement of her head, she intercepted his
inquiring look. He was about to stoop over her hand and kiss it, but
from which spectacles have just been removed, had also a frightened and
Pierre took them off, and his eyes, besides the strange look eyes have

"Oh, take those off... those..." she said, pointing to his spectacles.

drew nearer to him. Her face flushed.
not remember what it was that people say. He looked at her face. She
"Something special is always said in such cases," he thought, but could

"Helene!" he said aloud and paused.

rose and fell.
hand of his betrothed in silence, looking at her beautiful bosom as it
definite and one is rid of the old tormenting doubt." Pierre held the
it is useless to ask whether it is good or bad. It is good because it's
"All this had to be and could not be otherwise," thought Pierre, "so

Helene's hand several times. After a while they were left alone again.
her handkerchief too. Pierre was kissed, and he kissed the beautiful
The old princess came in and also wept. The elderly lady was using

"Princess, come here!" he shouted.

malodorous mouth. Tears actually moistened his cheeks.
He embraced his daughter, and then again Pierre, and kissed him with his

father... and she will make you a good wife... God bless you!..."
boy... Lelya... I am very pleased." (His voice trembled.) "I loved your
put one arm around Pierre and the other around his daughter.)--"My dear
"Thank God!" said Prince Vasili. "My wife has told me everything!" (He

rose in alarm on seeing it.
joyfully up to Pierre. His face was so unusually triumphant that Pierre
past the ladies into the little drawing room. With quick steps he went
himself, he rose, threw back his head, and with resolute steps went
face assumed the coarse, unpleasant expression peculiar to him. Shaking
Prince Vasili frowned, twisting his mouth, his cheeks quivered and his

"Still the same," she said to her husband.

Helene still sat talking just as before.
indifferent air, and glanced into the little drawing room. Pierre and
The princess went up to the door, passed by it with a dignified and

"Aline," he said to his wife, "go and see what they are about."

dozing. His head sank forward and then he roused himself.
a sofa in a far corner of the room. He closed his eyes and seemed to be
Prince Vasili passed by, seeming not to hear the ladies, and sat down on

"Marriages are made in heaven," replied the elderly lady.

"Of course, it is a very brilliant match, but happiness, my dear..."

was talking in low tones to the elderly lady about Pierre.
When Prince Vasili returned to the drawing room, the princess, his wife,

Helene answered with a smile that she too had missed it.
asking what the point of the story was as he had not heard it properly.
again began speaking about indifferent matters, about Sergey Kuzmich,
"The step must be taken but I cannot, I cannot!" thought Pierre, and he

look seemed to say: "Well, it is your own fault."
Pierre: he looked at Helene and she too seemed disconcerted, and her
The sight of the discomposure of that old man of the world touched
went away. It seemed to Pierre that even the prince was disconcerted.
Vasili saw that Pierre knew this. He suddenly muttered something and
about Sergey Kuzmich that interested Prince Vasili just then, and Prince
Pierre smiled, but his smile showed that he knew it was not the story

his waistcoat.
"Sergey Kuzmich--From all sides-" he said, unbuttoning the top button of

And he again turned to Pierre.

Vasili had only acquired by imitating other parents.
parents who have petted their children from babyhood, but which Prince
addressing her with the careless tone of habitual tenderness natural to
"Well, Lelya?" he asked, turning instantly to his daughter and

down, and smiled affectionately.
severity changed, and he drew Pierre's hand downwards, made him sit
so strange that one could not take it in. But then the expression of
him a look of stern inquiry, as though what Pierre had just said was
footsteps. Pierre rose and said it was getting late. Prince Vasili gave
the large drawing room. Prince Vasili came up to Pierre with languid
Some of the nearest relatives had not yet left. They were sitting in

this name day of hers had been one of the pleasantest she had ever had.
satisfied with the party. She replied in her usual simple manner that
But, as he had to say something, he began by asking her whether she was

you."
him. "This happiness is for those who have not in them what there is in
Helene. "This happiness is not for you," some inner voice whispered to
ashamed; he felt that he was occupying someone else's place here beside
but he could not make up his mind to take the final step. He felt
but had never spoken to her of love. Now he felt that it was inevitable,
He had often before, during the last six weeks, remained alone with her,
alone with Helene in the little drawing room where they were sitting.
While the guests were taking their leave Pierre remained for a long time

daughter's happiness.
The old princess did not reply, she was tormented by jealousy of her

stayed longer."
princess, kissing her soundly. "If I hadn't this headache I'd have
"I think I may congratulate you," whispered Anna Pavlovna to the old

fifty."
he thought. "That Princess Helene will be beautiful still when she's
grumbled at his wife when she asked how his leg was. "Oh, the old fool,"
diplomatic career in comparison with Pierre's happiness. The old general
silence as he left the drawing room. He pictured the vanity of his
refusing to let her see them off. The diplomatist preserved a mournful
occupation, came up to her for a moment and made haste to go away,
of Helene. Some, as if unwilling to distract her from an important
drawing room. The guests began to disperse, some without taking leave
After supper Pierre with his partner followed the others into the

"Yes, from Olmutz," he answered, with a sigh.

"How can one talk or think of such trifles?" thought Pierre.

Vasili, who pretended to want to know this in order to settle a dispute.
"When did you get the letter? Was it from Olmutz?" repeated Prince

smile, and Helene smiled too.
"What of it? It's the truth!" and he himself smiled his gentle childlike
him and Helene. "Well, what of it, if you all know it?" thought Pierre.
Prince Vasili smiled, and Pierre noticed that everyone was smiling at

Vasili a third time. "How absent-minded you are, my dear fellow."
"I am asking you when you last heard from Bolkonski," repeated Prince

said.
time. But Pierre was so absorbed that he did not understand what was
Suddenly he heard a familiar voice repeating something to him a second
expand his chest, raise his head, and rejoice at his good fortune.
all looked so at him, and flattered by this general admiration he would
not she but he was so unusually beautiful, and that that was why they
movements, her beauty. Then it would suddenly seem to him that it was
betrothed, seeing, hearing, feeling her nearness, her breathing, her
when did it all come about?" And here he was sitting by her side as her
her and picked up her reticule and drove out with her. How did it begin,
nothing. So why should I not stay at his house? Then I played cards with
it begin? I traveled from Moscow with Prince Vasili. Then there was
himself. "And besides, what have I done to bring it about? How did
of a Helen. "But no doubt it always is and must be so!" he consoled
and, with his plain face, to be looked on as a sort of Paris possessed
awkward to attract everyone's attention and to be considered a lucky man
Or he would suddenly feel ashamed of he knew not what. He felt it

close to his eyes.
certainly happen!" thought Pierre, glancing at those dazzling shoulders
cannot, disappoint them. But how will it be? I do not know, but it will
expecting it, they are so sure that it will happen that I cannot, I
but because of everyone, it must inevitably come about. They are all
quickly! Now I know that not because of her alone, nor of myself alone,
"So it is all finished!" he thought. "And how has it all happened? How

unexpectedly through his mind.
then detached ideas and impressions from the world of reality shot
He did not see, hear, or understand anything clearly. Only now and
embarrassed him. He was like a man entirely absorbed in some occupation.
Pierre felt that he was the center of it all, and this both pleased and

the candles was focused on those two happy faces alone.
happy though uneasy face of Pierre. It seemed as if the very light of
at the beautiful Helene with her radiant face and at the red, broad, and
table seemed to feel this, and they forgot their duties as they looked
evidently forced. Not only the guests but even the footmen waiting at
Jests fell flat, news was not interesting, and the animation was
dominated everything else and soared above all their affected chatter.
and handsome young man and woman for one another. And this human feeling
society had entered the simple feeling of the attraction of a healthy
Into the insignificant, trifling, and artificial interests uniting that

"That's happiness!"
thought a diplomatist, glancing at the happy faces of the lovers.
provocatively happy." "And what nonsense all this is that I am saying!"
now that the time has come for these young ones to be thus boldly,
there's nothing left for you and me but to sip sweet wine, my dear,
glanced angrily at her daughter, and her sigh seemed to say: "Yes,
sighed sadly as she offered some wine to the old lady next to her and
future son-in-law and on his daughter's happiness. The old princess
instant, glanced at Pierre, Prince Vasili read a congratulation on his
him on behalf of "our dear Vyazmitinov," and in her eyes, which, for an
getting on, it will all be settled today." Anna Pavlovna threatened
while he laughed the expression on his face clearly said: "Yes... it's
Kuzmich and at the same time his eyes glanced toward his daughter, and
to--Pierre and Helene. Prince Vasili mimicked the sobbing of Sergey
pretense, and that the whole attention of that company was directed
story about Sergey Kuzmich, the laughter, and the food were all a
of them, one could feel by the occasional glances they gave that the
looking at the young couple, and heedless and unobservant as they seemed
enjoyed their Rhine wine, saute, and ices, and however they avoided
But much as all the rest laughed, talked, and joked, much as they
to do with Sergey Kuzmich--a smile of bashfulness at their own feelings.
suppressed smile brightening both their faces, a smile that had nothing
Helene sat silently side by side almost at the bottom of the table, a
influence of a variety of exciting sensations. Only Pierre and
honored guests sat, everyone seemed to be in high spirits and under the
Everybody laughed a great deal. At the head of the table, where the

dear Vyazmitinov...."
up a threatening finger. "He is such a worthy and excellent man, our
"Don't be unkind," cried Anna Pavlovna from her end of the table holding

laughing.
"Kuzmich... From all sides... and then tears," someone repeated

asked to read it."
Kuzmich, From all sides,'... and tears, till at last somebody else was
could get no farther. And again his handkerchief, and again: 'Sergey
'Kuz-mi-ch,' tears, and 'From all sides' was smothered in sobs and he
rescript again and again, but as soon as he uttered 'Sergey' he sobbed,
Kuzmich...' Poor Vyazmitinov could not get any farther! He began the
laughing, "'Sergey Kuzmich... From all sides... From all sides... Sergey
"Exactly, not a hair's breadth farther," answered Prince Vasili,

the ladies.
"Well, and so he never got farther than: 'Sergey Kuzmich'?" asked one of

the words: "Sergey Kuzmich, From all sides reports reach me," etc.
nation and would endeavor to be worthy of it. This rescript began with
particular pleasure, and that he was proud to be at the head of such a
the people's loyalty, that the declaration from Petersburg gave him
Emperor said that he was receiving from all sides declarations of
of the Emperor Alexander from the army to Sergey Kuzmich, in which the
general of Petersburg, had received and read the then famous rescript
Council, at which Sergey Kuzmich Vyazmitinov, the new military governor
was telling the ladies about last Wednesday's meeting of the Imperial
attracted everybody's attention. With a facetious smile on his face, he
some Mary Viktorovna or other. At the center of the table, Prince Vasili
she laughed; at the other could be heard the story of the misfortunes of
heard assuring an old baroness that he loved her passionately, at which
several conversations. At one end of the table, the old chamberlain was
clatter of plates, knives, and glasses mingled with the animated hum of
men's epaulets; servants in scarlet liveries moved round the table, the
gleamed, so did the ladies' toilets and the gold and silver of the
the whole party. The wax candles burned brightly, the silver and crystal
Pierre and Helene, whose presence he seemed not to notice. He enlivened
To each of them he made some careless and agreeable remark except to
in a merry mood, sitting down now by one, now by another, of the guests.
side. Prince Vasili was not having any supper: he went round the table
there too sat the members of the family, and Pierre and Helene, side by
Scherer. At the other end sat the younger and less important guests, and
more important guests--an old general and his wife, and Anna Pavlovna
was sitting at the head of the table. On either side of her sat the
Princess Kuragina, a portly imposing woman who had once been handsome,
would be decided that evening. The visitors were seated at supper.
relations had been given to understand that the fate of the young girl
wife said--met for supper at Prince Vasili's. All these friends and
On Helene's name day, a small party of just their own people--as his

an unacknowledged sense of the guilt of that desire paralyzed his will.
a feeling of desire while stooping over the snuffbox at Anna Pavlovna's,
themselves quite innocent, and since that day when he was overpowered by
possessed. Pierre was one of those who are only strong when they feel
he lacked that strength of will which he had known in himself and really
He wished to take a decision, but felt with dismay that in this matter

resolution. Can it be that I have none?"
that dreadful abyss, Pierre said to himself: "What am I doing? I need
that month and a half while he felt himself drawn nearer and nearer to
seized him at the thought of that dreadful step. A thousand times during
sooner or later he would step across it, but an incomprehensible terror
waiting for him to say a word and cross a certain line, and he knew that
smile that usually brightened her face. Pierre knew that everyone was
alone, in which there was something more significant than in the general
She always addressed him with a radiantly confiding smile meant for him

comparison with that smile.
superiority. She was right in regarding all arguments as nonsense in
look and smile which more palpably than anything else showed Pierre her
appropriate remark--showing that it did not interest her--or by a silent
her company, and she had always answered him either by a brief but
woman!" He had often begun to make reflections or think aloud in
She never was abashed and is not abashed now, so she cannot be a bad
but what she does say is always clear and simple, so she is not stupid.
"she never makes a mistake, never says anything stupid. She says little,
is not stupid, she is an excellent girl," he sometimes said to himself
what she really is. Was I mistaken before, or am I mistaken now? No, she
and the same thing: "It is time I understood her and made up my mind
Pierre felt unable to disappoint him. Every day he said to himself one
he said) for Pierre's sake, hardly exchanged a couple of words with him,
your sake," and so on. And though Prince Vasili, when he stayed in (as
or, "Be in to dinner or I shall not see you," or, "I am staying in for
clean-shaven cheek for Pierre to kiss and would say: "Till tomorrow,"
and draw it downwards, or absent-mindedly hold out his wrinkled,
rare moments when he was at home, would take Pierre's hand in passing
pleasure and disappoint everyone's expectation. Prince Vasili, in the
at which Pierre had to be present unless he wished to spoil the general
receptions) now hardly let a day go by without having an evening party
to free himself but that Prince Vasili (who had rarely before given
have to unite his fate with hers. He might perhaps have been able
away from her, and that though it would be a terrible thing he would
him to return to his former conception of her, that he could not break
every day more and more connected with her, that it was impossible for
left Prince Vasili's and felt with terror that in people's eyes he was
ought to avoid her and go away, Pierre, despite that decision, had not
when he had decided that to marry Helene would be a calamity and that he
Six weeks after Anna Pavlovna's "At Home" and after the sleepless night

ought to do then it will be my affair--yes, my affair. I am her father."
I will invite two or three people, and if he does not understand what he
be brought to a head. The day after tomorrow will be Lelya's name day.
with him," thought he, relishing his own goodness of heart, "but it must
behaving very well in this matter. "Youth, frivolity... well, God be
who was under such obligations to him ("But never mind that") was not
to himself, with a sorrowful sigh, one morning, feeling that Pierre
"This is all very fine, but things must be settled," said Prince Vasili

her.
Helene's presence (as a lover should be), but had not yet proposed to
where he was staying, and had been absurd, excited, and foolish in
latterly spent whole days at home, that is, in Prince Vasili's house
Prince Vasili had to settle matters with Pierre, who, it is true, had
rich old man. But before leaving home and undertaking these new affairs,
Bolkonski in order to arrange a match for him with the daughter of that
where his regiment was stationed, and take him to visit Prince Nicholas
visit his neglected estates at the same time and pick up his son Anatole
four different provinces. He had arranged this for himself so as to
In November, 1805, Prince Vasili had to go on a tour of inspection in


CHAPTER II





image rose in all its womanly beauty.
expressing this conviction to himself, in another part of his mind her
evidently wrong and that he ought not to do. But at the very time he was
he had already, in some way, bound himself to do something that was
such hints from Prince Vasili and others, and was seized by terror lest
and looks when she spoke to him about his house, recalled thousands of
of those who had seen them together. He recalled Anna Pavlovna's words
marriage. He recalled her former words and looks and the words and looks
something unnatural, and as it seemed to him dishonorable, in this
again he told himself that it was impossible, that there would be
dress. "But no! Why did this thought never occur to me before?" and
of Prince Vasili, but visualized her whole body only veiled by its gray
heard of her might be false. And he again saw her not as the daughter
would love him become quite different, and how all he had thought and
worthlessness he was also dreaming of how she would be his wife, how she
that another line of thought had sprung up, and while thinking of her
was still incomplete), he caught himself smiling and was conscious
bad...." he reflected, but while he was thinking this (the reflection
away. Hippolyte is her brother... Prince Vasili is her father... It's
with him, that there was quite a scandal and that that's why he was sent
I have been told that her brother Anatole was in love with her and she
is something nasty, something wrong, in the feeling she excites in me.
"But she's stupid. I have myself said she is stupid," he thought. "There

understood that this woman might belong to him.
mentioned he had said absent-mindedly: "Yes, she's good looking," he had
the woman he had known as a child, of whom when her beauty was
had happened. What had happened? Nothing. He had merely understood that
When he got home he could not sleep for a long time for thinking of what

muttered something and colored.
Helene nor she at him. But she was just as terribly close to him. He
continued, uniting them both in one glance. Pierre did not look at
mentioned their age. "If you marry it will be a different thing," she
She paused, as women always do, expecting something after they have

advice. Don't be angry with me for exercising an old woman's privilege."
know something about that. Don't I? And you are still so young. You need
have a friend like the prince," she said, smiling at Prince Vasili. "I
"That's a good thing, but don't move from Prince Vasili's. It is good to

done up.
Pierre, without knowing why, was having his enormous Petersburg house
This was true. The architect had told him that it was necessary, and

to him: "I hear you are refitting your Petersburg house?"
A little later when he went up to the large circle, Anna Pavlovna said

knew what had happened to him as he knew it himself.
reprehensible, looked round with a blush. It seemed to him that everyone
And Pierre, anxiously trying to remember whether he had done anything

voice, "I see you are all right there."
"Well, I will leave you in your little corner," came Anna Pavlovna's

barrier except the barrier of his own will.
She already had power over him, and between them there was no longer any
once recognized it to be a tuft of grass. She was terribly close to him.
mist and taking it for a tree can again take it for a tree after he has
than a man who has been looking at a tuft of steppe grass through the
day until then, but he could no longer do it. He could not, any more
her as a distant beauty far removed from him, as he had seen her every
Pierre dropped his eyes, lifted them again, and wished once more to see

that it would be a bad thing), but he knew it would happen.
even know if it would be a good thing (he even felt, he knew not why,
altar with her. How and when this would be he did not know, he did not
He knew this at that moment as surely as if he had been standing at the

it could not be otherwise.
Pierre felt that Helene not only could, but must, be his wife, and that
may belong to anyone--to you too," said her glance. And at that moment
say. "You had not noticed that I am a woman? Yes, I am a woman who
"So you have never noticed before how beautiful I am?" Helene seemed to

just as we cannot renew an illusion we have once seen through.
garments. And having once seen this he could not help being aware of it,
whole with her dress, but all the charm of her body only covered by her
corset as she moved. He did not see her marble beauty forming a complete
of the warmth of her body, the scent of perfume, and the creaking of her
only have bent his head a little to have touched them. He was conscious
living charm of her neck and shoulders, so near to his lips that he need
so close to him that his shortsighted eyes could not but perceive the
back. Her bust, which had always seemed like marble to Pierre, was
wearing a dress such as was then fashionable, cut very low at front and
and looked round with a smile. She was, as always at evening parties,
passing it across Helene's back. Helene stooped forward to make room,
He half rose, meaning to go round, but the aunt handed him the snuffbox,

snuffbox while trying to hear what was being said at the other table.
celebrated miniaturist, and he leaned over the table to take the
"That is probably the work of Vinesse," said Pierre, mentioning a

portrait of the aunt's husband on the box lid.
Bezukhov, and showed them her own box. Princess Helene asked to see the
a collection of snuffboxes that had belonged to Pierre's father, Count
for him, that he paid no attention to it. The aunt was just speaking of
everyone. Pierre was so used to that smile, and it had so little meaning
turned to Pierre with the beautiful bright smile that she gave to
the same look. In the middle of a dull and halting conversation, Helene
Helene, then she turned to Pierre with the same words of welcome and
coughed, swallowed, and said in French that she was very pleased to see
possibility of anyone seeing her without being enchanted. The aunt
Helene smiled, with a look implying that she did not admit the

in my house again," and she glanced at Helene.
touched Pierre's sleeve, saying: "I hope you won't say that it is dull
she was to do with these people. On leaving them, Anna Pavlovna again
her fear of Anna Pavlovna. She looked at her niece, as if inquiring what
desirous of hiding her adoration for Helene and inclined rather to show
The old aunt received the two young people in her corner, but seemed

remarkable skill in appearing silently dignified in society.
manner. If he ever thought of Helene, it was just of her beauty and her
Pierre, in reply, sincerely agreed with her as to Helene's perfection of

only wanted to know your opinion," and Anna Pavlovna let Pierre go.
would occupy a most brilliant position in society. Don't you think so? I
heart. Happy the man who wins her! With her the least worldly of men
girl, such tact, such masterly perfection of manner! It comes from her
beauty as she glided away. "And how she carries herself! For so young a
"Isn't she exquisite?" she said to Pierre, pointing to the stately

as if she had to give some final necessary instructions.
The beauty went to the aunt, but Anna Pavlovna detained Pierre, looking

refuse to accompany you."
And that it will not be too dull, here is the dear count who will not
my poor aunt who adores you. Go and keep her company for ten minutes.
glanced at Helene and smiled at her.) "My dear Helene, be charitable to
"Wait a bit, I have something in view for you this evening." (She

action--seeing Pierre, touched his sleeve with her finger, saying:
of new and brilliant ideas occur which there is hardly time to put in
excited condition of a commander on a battlefield to whom thousands
Pierre wished to join the former, but Anna Pavlovna--who was in the
had the benefit of the diplomat. Another group was at the tea table.
skill. The large group, in which were Prince Vasili and the generals,
arranged the different groups in her drawing room with her habitual
Empress Marya Fedorovna. Pierre felt flattered by this. Anna Pavlovna
melancholy she showed at the mention of her most august Majesty the
father he had hardly known), and her melancholy was just like the august
duty to assure Pierre that he was greatly afflicted by the death of the
by the death of Count Bezukhov (everyone constantly considered it a
a shade of melancholy, evidently relating to the young man's recent loss
against the enemy of the human race. Anna Pavlovna received Pierre with
themselves in an indissoluble alliance to uphold the cause of justice
visit to Potsdam, and of how the two august friends had pledged
from Berlin with the very latest details of the Emperor Alexander's
offered her guests this time was not Mortemart, but a diplomatist fresh
Anna Pavlovna's "At Home" was like the former one, only the novelty she

entertaining supposition.
being imposed on him which he could not fulfill, and pleased him as an
Helene, and that thought both alarmed him, as if some obligation were
link which other people recognized had grown up between himself and
When he read that sentence, Pierre felt for the first time that some

see."
will find the beautiful Helene here, whom it is always delightful to
Pavlovna's usual pink notes with an invitation to which was added: "You
In the beginning of the winter of 1805-6 Pierre received one of Anna

wished to and only refrained out of regard for his modesty.
charmant. Even if Anna Pavlovna did not say so, he could see that she
remarks came out clever and apt. Now everything Pierre said was
as soon as he uttered them, while on the contrary Hippolyte's stupidest
which seemed to him clever while they formed in his mind became foolish
he was saying was out of place, tactless and unsuitable, that remarks
Formerly in Anna Pavlovna's presence, Pierre had always felt that what

attitude toward him that had taken place in society.
Like the others, Anna Pavlovna Scherer showed Pierre the change of

daughter Helene.
house in the company of the stout princess, his wife, and his beautiful
taken up with dinners and balls and was spent chiefly at Prince Vasili's
a friend older than himself and whom he respected. His whole time was
used to like to spend them, or to open his mind by intimate talks with
was abroad; so Pierre had not the opportunity to spend his nights as he
ranks; Anatole was in the army somewhere in the provinces; Prince Andrew
The Guards had gone to the front; Dolokhov had been reduced to the
Of his former bachelor acquaintances many were no longer in Petersburg.

attained.
and continual expectation of some good, always in front of him but never
that, even more than in Moscow, he felt a sense of bewilderment, bustle,
and acquaintances, invitations, and social occupations were so numerous
rank (for he did nothing), that Prince Vasili had procured for him,
gentleness and affection. He could not refuse the post, or rather the
In Petersburg, as in Moscow, Pierre found the same atmosphere of

prince had retained for himself.
thousand rubles quitrent received from Pierre's peasants, which the
By "what was due from the Ryazan estate" Prince Vasili meant several

require it. We'll go into the accounts later."
received what was due from the Ryazan estate and will keep it; you won't
know, mon cher, your father and I had some accounts to settle, so I have
can go in your carriage. Ah! I was nearly forgetting," he added. "You
recollections." Prince Vasili sighed. "Yes, yes, my boy. And my valet
Petersburg. It is high time for you to get away from these terrible
up tomorrow. But you will see everything for yourself when you get to
being too much loved; and besides, you are free, you could throw it
and there is nothing to thank me for. No one has ever complained yet of
"Mais, mon cher, I did this for my own sake, to satisfy my conscience,

needed.
his speech, which he used in extreme cases when special persuasion was
special deep cooing tone, precluding the possibility of interrupting
wished to make some suggestion. But Prince Vasili interrupted him in the
were pronounced, Pierre, who had so long been considering his career,
Notwithstanding the tone of wearied assurance with which these words

The diplomatic career now lies open before you."
entered in the diplomatic corps and made a Gentleman of the Bedchamber.
received from the chancellor. I asked him for you, and you have been
settled, and I ought to have been off long ago. Here is something I have
my carriage. I am very glad. All our important business here is now
not now be altered. "We start tomorrow and I'm giving you a place in
he were saying something which had long since been agreed upon and could
one day, closing his eyes and fingering Pierre's elbow, speaking as if
"Well, my dear fellow, tomorrow we are off at last," said Prince Vasili

the only thing possible."
myself about you, and you also know quite well that what I propose is
overwhelmed with business and it is purely out of charity that I trouble
and assurance, as if he were adding every time: "You know I am
him himself, and tell him what ought to be done in a tone of weariness
Moscow after the death of Count Bezukhov, he would call Pierre, or go to
of fate and the designs of rogues. During the few days he spent in
his old friend and the possessor of such enormous wealth, to the caprice
pity's sake, leave this helpless youth who, after all, was the son of
man oppressed by business, weary and suffering, who yet would not, for
Bezukhov he did not let go his hold of the lad. He had the air of a
and of Pierre himself in those early days. From the death of Count
More than anyone else, Prince Vasili took possession of Pierre's affairs

him, but still that happy result always remained in the future.
did this and that, all would be well; and he did what was demanded of
he did not do it he would grieve and disappoint many people, but if he
general movement; that something was constantly expected of him, that if
intoxication. He felt as though he were the center of some important and
was always busy and always felt in a state of mild and cheerful
no time to ask himself whether these people were sincere or not. He
not but believe in the sincerity of those around him. Besides, he had
would have seemed so unnatural had anyone disliked him, that he could
It seemed so natural to Pierre that everyone should like him, and it

him feel confused by her smiles and her own confusion when meeting him.
especially the youngest, the pretty one with the mole, who often made
grew still kinder. The younger sisters also became affectionate to him,
inlaid portfolio. Pierre signed the deed and after that the princess
it might not occur to her to speak of his share in the affair of the
this bone--a bill for thirty thousand rubles--to the poor princess that
Prince Vasili had come to the conclusion that it was necessary to throw

deed to sign for the princess' benefit.
great deal from the deceased," said Prince Vasili to him, handing him a
"Do this for my sake, mon cher; after all, she had to put up with a

knitting a striped scarf for him.
From that day the eldest princess quite changed toward Pierre and began
took her hand and begged her forgiveness, without knowing what for.
words. Touched that this statuesque princess could so change, Pierre
she had sacrificed so much. She could not refrain from weeping at these
to remain for a few weeks longer in the house she so loved and where
anything, except only for permission, after the blow she had received,
misunderstandings and did not now feel she had a right to ask him for
and frequent blushes she told him she was very sorry about their past
had come into Pierre's room after the funeral. With drooping eyes
princess, with the long waist and hair plastered down like a doll's,
unfriendly now became gentle and affectionate. The angry eldest
Even people who had formerly been spiteful toward him and evidently
had always seemed to him that he really was very kind and intelligent.
extraordinary intelligence, the more so as in the depth of his heart it
he began sincerely to believe in his own exceptional kindness and
honorable Count," or, "Were he as clever as you," and so on, till
kindness," or, "With your excellent heart," "You are yourself so
qualities. He was always hearing such words as: "With your remarkable
manner: they were all evidently firmly convinced of Pierre's noble
disposed to treat the young heir in the most friendly and flattering
people--businessmen, relations, and acquaintances alike--were all
and grieved had he chosen not to see them. These different
even wish to know of his existence but would now have been offended
estate near Moscow, and to receive many people who formerly did not
which was not clear to him, to question his chief steward, to visit his
sign papers, to present himself at government offices, the purpose of
preoccupied that only in bed was he able to be by himself. He had to
himself after his recent loneliness and freedom from cares so beset and
Pierre, on unexpectedly becoming Count Bezukhov and a rich man, felt

seizing the most opportune moment for making use of people.
those richer and more powerful than himself and he had rare skill in
above and below him in social standing. Something always drew him toward
shown such unaffected familiarity in intercourse with everybody both
thought out his plans beforehand he could not have been so natural and
Prince Vasili did everything to get Pierre to marry his daughter. Had he
yet with unhesitating assurance that he was doing the right thing,
Petersburg and staying at his house. With apparent absent-mindedness,
Councilor of State, and insisted on the young man accompanying him to
Gentleman of the Bedchamber, which at that time conferred the status of
He had Pierre at hand in Moscow and procured for him an appointment as

become intimate with him, and finally make his request.
Vasili took the first opportunity to gain his confidence, flatter him,
him that this man could be useful, and without any premeditation Prince
But when he came across a man of position his instinct immediately told
him to marry my daughter and lend me the forty thousand rubles I need."
grant." Nor did he say to himself: "Pierre is a rich man, I must entice
must gain his confidence and friendship and through him obtain a special
did not, for instance, say to himself: "This man now has influence, I
some approaching achievement, and some in course of disintegration. He
or two in his head but dozens, some only beginning to form themselves,
circumstances and persons he met. Of these plans he had not merely one
were constantly shaping themselves in his mind, arising from the
to himself, but which formed the whole interest of his life,
become a habit. Schemes and devices for which he never rightly accounted
was merely a man of the world who had got on and to whom getting on had
Still less did he think of injuring anyone for his own advantage. He
Prince Vasili was not a man who deliberately thought out his plans.


CHAPTER I





BOOK THREE: 1805





Bagration's detachment was reunited to Kutuzov's army.
Next day the French army did not renew their attack, and the remnant of

I come here?" he wondered.
healthy body, and all the affection and care of his family. "And why did
bright home, his fluffy fur coat, his quickly gliding sleigh, his
fluttering above the fire and remembered a Russian winter at his warm,
Rostov did not listen to the soldier. He looked at the snowflakes

"What a lot of men have been crippled today--frightful!"
over the fire, and not waiting for an answer he gave a grunt and added:
"Eh, is anything hurting you?" asked the soldier, shaking his shirt out

doing so, groaned involuntarily.
me. Yet I was once at home, strong, happy, and loved." He sighed and,
"Nobody wants me!" thought Rostov. "There is no one to help me or pity

the other side of the fire, warming his thin yellow body.
come. He was alone now, except for a soldier who was sitting naked at
fluttering in that light. Tushin had not returned, the doctor had not
than a yard above the glow of the charcoal. Flakes of falling snow were
He opened his eyes and looked up. The black canopy of night hung less

get rid of them.
would be well--if only they did not pull it, but it was impossible to
instant let his shoulder move a hair's breadth. It would not ache--it
direction. He tried to get away from them, but they would not for an
incessantly pulling and pressing his arm and always dragging it in one
voice, and it was that affair and this soldier that were so agonizingly,
Bogdanich. That affair was the same thing as this soldier with the harsh
voice and mustache, and Telyanin and all that affair with Telyanin and
thin little shoulders, Natasha's eyes and laughter, Denisov with his
appeared to him in a dream: his mother and her large white hand, Sonya's
For a moment he dozed, but in that short interval innumerable things

rid himself of them he closed his eyes.
the sinews and scorching the flesh of his sprained arm and shoulder. To
unwounded--it was they who were crushing, weighing down, and twisting
with the physical pain. It was they, these soldiers--wounded and
impression of those voices and faces and a sense of loneliness merged
drowsiness overpowered him, red rings danced before his eyes, and the
him. The pain in his arm became more and more intense. Irresistible
this end?" thought Rostov, looking at the changing shadows before
"Who are they? Why are they here? What do they want? And when will all


sad and depressed. It was all so strange, so unlike what he had hoped.
Prince Andrew gave him a look, but said nothing and went away. He felt

"Thank you; you saved me, my dear fellow!" said Tushin.

with him.
bent his head, and told Tushin that he could go. Prince Andrew went out
in Bolkonski's emphatic opinion yet not feeling able fully to credit it,
Prince Bagration looked at Tushin, evidently reluctant to show distrust

awaiting a reply, Prince Andrew rose and left the table.
and the heroic endurance of Captain Tushin and his company," and without
continued, "we owe today's success chiefly to the action of that battery
"And, if your excellency will allow me to express my opinion," he

who spoke with suppressed agitation.
Prince Bagration and Tushin looked with equal intentness at Bolkonski,

smashed, and no supports at all."
there and found two thirds of the men and horses knocked out, two guns
voice, "you were pleased to send me to Captain Tushin's battery. I went
"Your excellency!" Prince Andrew broke the silence with his abrupt

fingers twitched nervously.
intervene. Prince Andrew looked at Tushin from under his brows and his
to be severe, found nothing to say; the others did not venture to
The silence lasted some time. Prince Bagration, apparently not wishing

blundered looks at an examiner.
trouble, and silently fixed his eyes on Bagration as a schoolboy who has
was perfectly true. He was afraid of getting some other officer into
Tushin did not say that there were no covering troops, though that

"You might have taken some from the covering troops."

excellency... I had no men... your excellency."
jaw trembling and was hardly able to mutter: "I don't know... your
confused him still more. He stood before Bagration with his lower
he had not thought about it until that moment. The officers' laughter
themselves to Tushin in all their horror. He had been so excited that
and the disgrace of having lost two guns and yet remaining alive present
Only now, when he was confronted by the stern authorities, did his guilt

loudest.
at the captain as at those who were laughing, among whom Zherkov laughed
"How was it a gun was abandoned?" asked Bagration, frowning, not so much

stumbled over it. Several of those present laughed.
sight of his superiors, he did not notice the staff of the banner and
generals in the crowded hut, feeling embarrassed as he always was by the
timidly from behind the backs of the generals. As he stepped past the
All were silent. Tushin appeared at the threshold and made his way

abruptly.
"I had not the pleasure of seeing you," said Prince Andrew, coldly and

with a smile to Bolkonski.
"Of course, we only just missed one another," said the staff officer,

Andrew.
"Oh, but you were there?" said Prince Bagration, addressing Prince

village and had already been sent for.
Someone mentioned that Captain Tushin was bivouacking close to the

left.... It is true that it was hot there," he added, modestly.
understand. I was there all the time giving orders and had only just
"One was damaged," answered the staff officer, "and the other I can't

"I think I sent you?" he added, turning to the staff officer on duty.
the guns there had been abandoned at the very beginning of the action.)
Bagration did not ask about the guns on the left flank; he knew that all
the center?" he inquired, searching with his eyes for someone. (Prince
cavalry, and artillery. How was it that two guns were abandoned in
"Gentlemen, I thank you all; all arms have behaved heroically: infantry,

foundation. Prince Bagration turned to the old colonel:
though many of them knew that what he was saying was a lie devoid of any
of our arms and of the day's work, they assumed a serious expression,
usual jokes, but noticing that what he was saying redounded to the glory
Several of those present smiled at Zherkov's words, expecting one of his

two squares, your excellency."
day, but had heard about them from an infantry officer. "They broke up
Zherkov, looking uneasily around. He had not seen the hussars all that
"I saw the Pavlograd hussars attack there, your excellency," chimed in

particularly distinguished himself."
reduced to the ranks, took a French officer prisoner in my presence and
interview with the gentleman-ranker--"that Private Dolokhov, who was
continued--remembering Dolokhov's conversation with Kutuzov and his last
"By the way, your excellency, I should inform you," he

confusion what did or did not happen?
it might really have been so? Could one possibly make out amid all that
to do it that it seemed to him as if it had really happened. Perhaps
The general had so wished to do this and was so sorry he had not managed

what I did."
on and will meet them with the fire of the whole battalion'--and that's
disorganized, I stopped in the road and thought: 'I'll let them come
"When I saw, your excellency, that their first battalion was

had broken up the French troops.
French to pass him, had made a bayonet charge with two battalions and
from the wood, mustered the men who were woodcutting, and, allowing the
informing the prince that as soon as the action began he had withdrawn
losses. The general whose regiment had been inspected at Braunau was
individual commanders and inquiring into details of the action and our
were flocking in to look at him. Prince Bagration was thanking the
French colonel who had been taken prisoner by our dragoons. Our officers
a dinner where there was no place for him. In the next hut there was a
perhaps because it was hard for him, hungry as he was, to look on at
head in perplexity--perhaps because the banner really interested him,
the accountant with the naive face was feeling its texture, shaking his
In a corner of the hut stood a standard captured from the French, and

pale, with compressed lips and feverishly glittering eyes.
ring, and Zherkov, uneasily glancing at them all, and Prince Andrew,
glass of vodka and the dinner; and the staff officer with the signet
general who had served blamelessly for twenty-two years, flushed by a
the half-closed eyes was there greedily gnawing a mutton bone, and the
officers who had gathered at his quarters. The little old man with
for him, Prince Bagration sat at dinner, talking with some commanding
Not far from the artillery campfire, in a hut that had been prepared

away from the fire.
Tushin rose and, buttoning his greatcoat and pulling it straight, walked

"Coming, friend."

a gunner, coming up to Tushin.
"Your honor, you're wanted by the general. He is in the hut here," said

"Yes."

"Still aching?" Tushin asked Rostov in a whisper.

And they disappeared into the darkness with their load.

"Shut up!"

"He's dead--why carry him?" said another.

"Who the devil has put the logs on the road?" snarled he.

by the fire. One of them stumbled.
Next came four soldiers, carrying something heavy on a cloak, and passed

he, carrying away into the darkness a glowing stick.
countrymen. Thanks for the fire--we'll return it with interest," said
"A nice little hot torch for the infantry! Good luck to you, fellow

up, begging a little fire for the infantry.
Tushin told them to give the man some water. Then a cheerful soldier ran

"Must one die like a dog?" said he.

band, came up and in angry tones asked the artillerymen for water.
Then a thin, pale soldier, his neck bandaged with a bloodstained leg

shouted hoarsely.
"You picked it up?... I dare say! You're very smart!" one of them

to snatch from the other a boot they were both holding on to.
the campfire. They were quarreling and fighting desperately, each trying
trifle to let a wagon go past. After he had gone, two soldiers rushed to
the bonfire, and addressing Tushin asked him to have the guns moved a
With the soldier, an infantry officer with a bandaged cheek came up to

your honor. I don't know where... such bad luck!"
"You don't mind your honor?" he asked Tushin. "I've lost my company,

his hands to the blaze, and turned away his face.
around him. An infantryman came to the fire, squatted on his heels, held
Rostov looked at and listened listlessly to what passed before and
gloom, but a dark sea swelling and gradually subsiding after a storm.
It was no longer, as before, a dark, unseen river flowing through the

crackling of wood fires near and afar, merged into one tremulous rumble.
of voices, the tramping feet, the horses' hoofs moving in mud, the
were walking, driving past, and settling down all around. The sound
From all sides were heard the footsteps and talk of the infantry, who

to help him but could not.
commiseration on Rostov, who saw that Tushin with his whole heart wished
Tushin's large, kind, intelligent eyes were fixed with sympathy and
figure of Tushin who was sitting cross-legged like a Turk beside him.
which seemed to him dazzlingly red, and at the feeble, round-shouldered
position. He kept closing his eyes and then again looking at the fire,
an excruciating pain in his arm, for which he could find no satisfactory
body. Drowsiness was irresistibly mastering him, but he kept awake by
fire. From pain, cold, and damp, a feverish shivering shook his whole
soldiers had kindled on the road. Rostov, too, dragged himself to the
station or a doctor for the cadet, and sat down by a bonfire the
having given orders to his company, sent a soldier to find a dressing
Fires were lighted and the talk became more audible. Captain Tushin,

the muddy road.
those in front had halted. All remained where they were in the middle of
together and a report spread that they were ordered to halt: evidently
questions from all sides. The whole moving mass began pressing closer
did he say? Where to, now? Halt, is it? Did he thank us?" came eager
white horse followed by his suite, and said something in passing: "What
After a while the moving mass became agitated, someone rode past on a
groans, which seemed to melt into one with the darkness of the night.
of the night. The gloom that enveloped the army was filled with their
wounded were more distinctly heard than any other sound in the darkness
hoofs and wheels. Amid the general rumble, the groans and voices of the
always in one direction, humming with whispers and talk and the sound of
In the darkness, it seemed as though a gloomy unseen river was flowing

humming infantry as by a frame.
the complete darkness Tushin's guns moved forward, surrounded by the
The French had been repulsed for the last time. And again and again in

could be seen. Pitch-dark, brother! Isn't there something to drink?"
"You couldn't see a thing. How they shot at their own fellows! Nothing

another.
"We've given it 'em hot, mate! They won't make another push now," said

"Not hurt, Petrov?" asked one.

of a side street.
fate. The firing died down and soldiers, talking eagerly, streamed out
Tushin, and the cadet exchanged silent glances as they awaited their
village again, but Tushin's guns could not move, and the artillerymen,
who had sheltered in the village houses. They all rushed out of the
the darkness. This was the last French attack and was met by soldiers
right, shouting and firing were again heard. Flashes of shot gleamed in
off, and the firing had begun to subside. Suddenly, near by on the
had grown so dark that one could not distinguish the uniforms ten paces
infantry, and having reached the village of Gruntersdorf they halted. It
It was all that they could do to get the guns up the rise aided by the

state of his gun.
wiping away the blood with his coat sleeve, as if apologizing for the
"It was the officer, your honor, stained it," answered the artilleryman,

"Then what is this blood on the gun carriage?" inquired Tushin.

"No, it's a sprain."

which Rostov sat.
"What, are you wounded, my lad?" said Tushin, approaching the gun on

spread under him was wet with blood which stained his breeches and arm.
the gun from which they had removed the dead officer. The cloak they
and his jaw trembled, shivering feverishly. He was placed on "Matvevna,"
The cadet was Rostov. With one hand he supported the other; he was pale

Antonov."
"Help him up. Sit down, dear fellow, sit down! Spread out the cloak,

"He has been set down. He died," replied someone.

officer?"
he said, addressing his favorite soldier. "And where is the wounded
"Give him a seat," said Tushin. "Lay a cloak for him to sit on, lad,"

"Tell them to give me a seat, for God's sake!"

been refused. He asked in a hesitating, piteous voice.
It was plain that this cadet had already repeatedly asked for a lift and

sake... I can't walk. For God's sake!"
"Captain, for God's sake! I've hurt my arm," he said timidly. "For God's

the other, came up to Tushin and asked for a seat.
At the foot of the hill, a pale hussar cadet, supporting one hand with
shed was laid, with a bullet in his stomach, on "Matvevna's" carriage.
officer who just before the battle had rushed out of Tushin's wattle
troops and begged for seats on the gun carriages. The jaunty infantry
were to abandon the wounded, many of them dragged themselves after
without knowing why--rode behind on his artillery nag. Though the orders
silently--fearing to speak because at every word he felt ready to weep
reprimanding and reproaching him. Tushin gave no orders, and,
they all gave, and transmitted, orders as to how to proceed,
Tushin's battery but had never reached it. Interrupting one another,
among them the staff officer and Zherkov, who had been twice sent to
of fire and had descended into the dip, he was met by some of the staff,
continually driving round or coming upon wounded men, was out of range
the right sounded oftener and nearer. As soon as Tushin with his guns,
cannonade was dying down, but the rattle of musketry behind and on
dark and the glow of two conflagrations was the more conspicuous. The
hung low over the field of battle on the horizon. It was growing
The wind had fallen and black clouds, merging with the powder smoke,


CHAPTER XXI





fellow!" and for some unknown reason tears suddenly filled his eyes.
"Good-by, my dear fellow," said Tushin. "Dear soul! Good-by, my dear

"Well, till we meet again..." he said, holding out his hand to Tushin.

up to Tushin.
(one shattered gun and one unicorn were left behind), Prince Andrew rode
that remained uninjured out of the four, they began moving down the hill
not to notice one another. When having limbered up the only two cannon
Prince Andrew said nothing to Tushin. They were both so busy as to seem

artilleryman to Prince Andrew. "Not like your honor!"
"A staff officer was here a minute ago, but skipped off," said an

to the removal of the guns.
across the bodies and under a terrible fire from the French, he attended
positions and withdrawn in his presence. Together with Tushin, stepping
leave the battery. He decided to have the guns removed from their
dismounted slowly among the guns. He delivered the order and did not
of being afraid roused him again. "I cannot be afraid," thought he, and
and he felt a nervous shudder run down his spine. But the mere thought
several dead men. One ball after another passed over as he approached
Blood was gushing from its leg as from a spring. Among the limbers lay
broken leg, that lay screaming piteously beside the harnessed horses.
where Tushin's guns were stationed was an unharnessed horse with a
It was Prince Andrew. The first thing he saw on riding up to the space

order.
The soldiers laughed. A moment later, an adjutant arrived with the same

"Retire! All to retire!" he shouted from a distance.

stopped him. He turned his horse and galloped off.
He paused, and just as he was about to say something more, another ball
ball, flying close to him, caused him to duck and bend over his horse.
But the staff officer did not finish what he wanted to say. A cannon

"I... don't..." he muttered, holding up two fingers to his cap. "I..."

superior.
"Why are they down on me?" thought Tushin, looking in alarm at his

"Are you mad? You have twice been ordered to retreat, and you..."

him out of the booth at Grunth. He was shouting in a gasping voice:
Tushin turned round in dismay. It was the staff officer who had turned

head: "Captain Tushin! Captain!"
he moved from the gun, when a strange, unfamiliar voice called above his
"Now then, Matvevna, dear old lady, don't let me down!" he was saying as

cannon balls at the French with both hands.
He imagined himself as an enormously tall, powerful man who was throwing

"Ah! Breathing again, breathing!" he muttered to himself.


    * Daughter of Matthew.


flow of these sounds.
seemed like someone's breathing. He listened intently to the ebb and
musketry at the foot of the hill, now diminishing, now increasing,
at anyone else and took delight in his every movement. The sound of
second gun's crew was "uncle"; Tushin looked at him more often than
him like ants. In that world, the handsome drunkard Number One of the
and of an old pattern. The French swarming round their guns seemed to
name his fancy gave to the farthest gun of the battery, which was large
"Come along, our Matvevna!" he said to himself. "Matvevna" * was the

"Nothing... only a shell..." he answered.

by, who heard him muttering.
"What do you want, your honor?" asked an artilleryman, standing close

"Now look out for the ball... we'll throw it back."

wind.
cloud rose from the hill and was borne in a streak to the left by the
"There... he's puffing again," muttered Tushin to himself, as a small

which occasional puffs were blown by an invisible smoker.
pleasure. The enemy's guns were in his fancy not guns but pipes from
own had taken possession of his brain and at that moment afforded him
horse), from the sight of all these things a fantastic world of his
followed by a ball flying past and striking the earth, a man, a gun, a
and horses, from the little puffs of smoke on the enemy's side (always
of the crew bustling round the guns, from the sight of the blood of men
thud of the enemy's cannon balls, from the flushed and perspiring faces
From the deafening sounds of his own guns around him, the whistle and

feverish delirium or drunkenness.
best of officers could do in his position, he was in a state akin to
thought of everything, considered everything, and did everything the
of the field he stood on was well-known and familiar ground. Though he
had first seen the enemy and fired the first shot, and that the corner
seemed to him that it was a very long time ago, almost a day, since he
occurred to him. On the contrary, he became more and more elated. It
fear, and the thought that he might be killed or badly wounded never
activity, Tushin did not experience the slightest unpleasant sense of
Owing to the terrible uproar and the necessity for concentration and

theirs.
situation, and the expression on his face was invariably reflected on
officer--all looked at their commander like children in an embarrassing
company, a head and shoulders taller and twice as broad as their
most part handsome fellows and, as is always the case in an artillery
case, hesitated about lifting the injured or dead. The soldiers, for the
away from the sight, shouting angrily at the men who, as is always the
animated. Only when a man was killed or wounded did he frown and turn
voice, so high pitched and irresolute. His face grew more and more
or wounded horses and harnessing fresh ones, and shouting in his feeble
aiming, now counting the charges, now giving orders about replacing dead
jump, Tushin not taking his pipe from his mouth ran from gun to gun, now
Amid the smoke, deafened by the incessant reports which always made him

working the screws himself.
"Smack at 'em, lads!" he kept saying, seizing the guns by the wheels and

forward shading his eyes with his small hand to look at the French.
"refill my pipe for that one!" and then, scattering sparks from it, ran
Little Tushin, moving feebly and awkwardly, kept telling his orderly to

the French appearing below them, and then they fired grapeshot at them.
artillerymen were still as merry and lively as ever. Twice they noticed
seventeen of the forty men of the guns' crews had been disabled, but the
had been killed at the beginning of the engagement and within an hour
were turned against the ten-gun battery. Tushin's companion officer
reserve gun carriage, the wounded were carried away, and the four guns
but only changed character. The horses were replaced by others from a
driver's leg. Their spirits once roused were, however, not diminished,
knocking over two horses and another tearing off a munition-wagon
battery when two balls, and then four more, fell among our guns, one
successfully cannonading the French, our artillerymen only noticed this
In their childlike glee, aroused by the fire and their luck in

firing them at Tushin's battery.
failure, the enemy placed ten guns to the right of the village and began
advanced beyond the village went back; but as though in revenge for this
fanned by the breeze, was rapidly spreading. The French columns that had
cried at each shot: "Fine! That's good! Look at it... Grand!" The fire,
direction of the conflagration. As if urging each other on, the soldiers
All the guns, without waiting for orders, were being fired in the

up.
Look at the smoke, the smoke!" exclaimed the artillerymen, brightening
"Look at them scurrying! It's burning! Just see the smoke! Fine! Grand!

setting fire to Schon Grabern.
Soon after Prince Bagration had left him, Tushin had succeeded in

on the hillock.
occasion had been driven back by grapeshot from the four isolated guns
concentrated. Twice they had attempted to attack this point, but on each
French to suppose that here--in the center--the main Russian forces were
guns. On the contrary, the energetic action of that battery led the
could have the effrontery to continue firing from four quite undefended
captured by the French because the enemy could not surmise that anyone
by someone's order, the battery had continued firing and was only not
to Tushin's battery had been moved away in the middle of the action
the battery to retire as quickly as possible. When the supports attached
send his orderly staff officer, and later Prince Andrew also, to order
action did Prince Bagration, still hearing the cannonade in the center,
Tushin's battery had been forgotten and only at the very end of the


"A bayonet wound. I remained at the front. Remember, your excellency!"

head, pulled it off, and showed the blood congealed on his hair.
But Dolokhov did not go away; he untied the handkerchief around his

Ekonomov.
"All right, all right," replied the commander, and turned to Major

this, your excellency!"
sentences. "The whole company can bear witness. I beg you will remember
company." Dolokhov breathed heavily from weariness and spoke in abrupt
French sword and pouch. "I have taken an officer prisoner. I stopped the
"Your excellency, here are two trophies," said Dolokhov, pointing to the

could not help taking notice of the soldier.
commander was occupied in giving instructions to Major Ekonomov, he
into the commander's face, and his lips were smiling. Though the
sword in his hand. The soldier was pale, his blue eyes looked impudently
over his shoulder a French munition pouch was slung. He had an officer's
of broadcloth, he had no knapsack or cap, his head was bandaged, and
stirrup, almost leaning against him. The man was wearing a bluish coat
pass by them, when a soldier came up and took hold of the commander's
Ekonomov had stopped beside a bridge, letting the retreating companies
join up, and the fight was at an end. The regimental commander and Major
in half were for the moment repulsed. Our reserve units were able to
battalions re-formed, and the French who had nearly cut our left flank
surrendering French officer by his collar. Our fugitives returned, the
killed a Frenchman at close quarters and was the first to seize the
thrown down their muskets and run. Dolokhov, running beside Timokhin,
such mad, drunken determination that, taken by surprise, the French had
only with a sword, had rushed at the enemy with such a desperate cry and
ambush in a ditch, now attacked the French unexpectedly. Timokhin, armed
which alone had maintained its order in the wood and, having lain in
sharpshooters showed themselves in the copse. It was Timokhin's company,
reason, ran back and disappeared from the outskirts, and Russian
moment the French who were attacking, suddenly and without any apparent
powder smoke and stopped in despair. Everything seemed lost. But at that
The general had a fit of coughing as a result of shouting and of the

of battles was evidently culminating in a panic.
air, and disobeying orders. The moral hesitation which decided the fate
his saber, the soldiers all continued to run, talking, firing into the
distorted out of all likeness to his former self, and the flourishing of
so terrible to the soldiers, despite his furious purple countenance
continue their flight? Despite his desperate shouts that used to seem
attend to the voice of their commander, or would they, disregarding him,
the fate of battles had arrived. Would this disorderly crowd of soldiers
descending the valley. That moment of moral hesitation which decides
the copse across which our men, regardless of orders, were running and
Having galloped safely through the French, he reached a field behind

censured, should not be held to blame.
an exemplary officer of twenty-two years' service, who had never been
cost correct, or remedy, the mistake if he had made one, so that he,
missed him. His one desire was to know what was happening and at any
the regiment under a hail of bullets which fell around, but fortunately
clutched the crupper of his saddle and, spurring his horse, galloped to
all quite forgetting the danger and all regard for self-preservation, he
recalcitrant cavalry colonel, his own dignity as a general, and above
negligence or inefficiency so staggered him that, forgetting the
never been to blame, might be held responsible at headquarters for
thought that he, an exemplary officer of many years' service who had
realized that something dreadful had happened to his regiment, and the
The moment he heard the firing and the cry from behind, the general

"Surrounded! Cut off? We're lost!" shouted the fugitives.

infected the whole crowd with a feeling of panic.
senseless cry, "Cut off!" that is so terrible in battle, and that word
retreated as a disorderly crowd. One soldier, in his fear, uttered the
of the wood ran out of it, the different companies getting mixed, and
The infantry regiments that had been caught unawares in the outskirts


CHAPTER XX





reached the bushes. Behind these were some Russian sharpshooters.
last remaining strength, took hold of his left hand with his right, and
down. One bullet and then another whistled past him. He mustered his
Frenchman also stopped and took aim. Rostov closed his eyes and stooped
a seventy-pound weight were tied to it. He could run no more. The
to kill me." But at the same time, his left arm felt as heavy as if
paused. "No, there's some mistake," thought he. "They can't have wanted
turning, shouted something loudly to a comrade farther back. Rostov
just as he looked round the first man changed his run to a walk and,
bushes he glanced round once more. The French had fallen behind, and
through him: "No, better not look," he thought, but having reached the
good-natured, pale, young face to look back. A shudder of terror went
the impetuosity he used to show at catchplay, now and then turning his
whole being. Rapidly leaping the furrows, he fled across the field with
sentiment, that of fear for his young and happy life, possessed his
but with the feeling of a hare fleeing from the hounds. One single
feeling of doubt and conflict with which he had trodden the Enns bridge,
ran with all his might toward the bushes. He did not now run with the
his pistol and, instead of firing it, flung it at the Frenchman and
holding his breath, and running so lightly, frightened Rostov. He seized
seen. And the excited, alien face of that man, his bayonet hanging down,
nose, was already so close that the expression of his face could be
realizing the situation. The foremost Frenchman, the one with the hooked
do it!" For more than ten seconds he stood not moving from the spot or
enemy's intention to kill him seemed impossible. "But perhaps they may
his mother's love for him, and his family's, and his friends', and the
And why? To kill me? Me whom everyone is so fond of?" He remembered
his eyes. "Who are they? Why are they running? Can they be coming at me?
to pieces, their proximity now seemed so awful that he could not believe
but a moment before he had been galloping to get at them and hack them
"Can they be French?" He looked at the approaching Frenchmen, and though
me too? Who are these men?" thought Rostov, scarcely believing his eyes.
"It must be one of ours, a prisoner. Yes. Can it be that they will take

his horse was being led behind him.
similar shakos was a Russian hussar. He was being held by the arms and
strange, not in Russian. In among the hindmost of these men wearing
came two more, and many more running behind. One of them said something
shako and a blue cloak, swarthy, sunburned, and with a hooked nose. Then
toward him. "They will help me!" In front came a man wearing a strange
here are people coming," he thought joyfully, seeing some men running
He examined his hand carefully, vainly trying to find blood on it. "Ah,
hanging on his benumbed left arm. The wrist felt as if it were not his.
as he got up: and at that moment he felt that something superfluous was
could not answer. "Can something bad have happened to me?" he wondered
line that had so sharply divided the two armies?" he asked himself and
Having disentangled his leg, he rose. "Where, on which side, was now the

know. There was no one near.
in the saddle. Where our men were, and where the French, he did not
also tried to rise but fell back, his sabretache having become entangled
Blood was flowing from his head; he struggled but could not rise. Rostov
tried to rise on his forelegs but fell back, pinning his rider's leg.
blood under his arm. "No, I am wounded and the horse is killed." Rook
him but the motionless earth and the stubble around him. There was warm
Instead of the moving horses and hussars' backs, he saw nothing before
and answered at the same instant. He was alone in the middle of a field.
"How is it I am not moving? I have fallen, I am killed!" Rostov asked

him. Bondarchuk's horse swerved and galloped past.
Bondarchuk, an hussar he knew, jolted against him and looked angrily at
with unnatural speed but yet stayed on the same spot. From behind him
Rostov felt as in a dream that he continued to be carried forward
the trooper Nikitenko, who was galloping ahead, shot away from him, and
squadron. Rostov raised his saber, ready to strike, but at that instant
visible. Suddenly something like a birch broom seemed to sweep over the
gallop so that he outstripped the others. Ahead, the enemy was already
thought Rostov driving his spurs into Rook and letting him go at a full
"Hur-a-a-a-ah!" came a roar of voices. "Let anyone come my way now,"

will slash at him!" thought Rostov, gripping the hilt of his saber.
everything was becoming more and more happy and animated. "Oh, how I
had crossed that line and not only was there nothing terrible, but
in the middle of the line that had seemed so terrible--and now he
elated. He had noticed a solitary tree ahead of him. This tree had been
Rostov anticipated his horse's movements and became more and more

drooping as he broke into a gallop.
"Faster!" came the word of command, and Rostov felt Rook's flanks

took to be the enemy. Shots could be heard, but some way off.
still farther ahead a dark line which he could not see distinctly but
Before him, on the right, Rostov saw the front lines of his hussars and

reins and started of his own accord.
The horses' croups began to sway in the front line. Rook pulled at the

fo'ward!"
"Fo'ward, with God, lads!" rang out Denisov's voice. "At a twot

often heard from his fellow hussars.
the time had come to experience the joy of an attack of which he had so
"If only they would be quick!" thought Rostov, feeling that at last

irresolution communicated itself to the men.
alike, felt that the commander did not himself know what to do, and this
Still no one moved. The troops of the left flank, infantry and hussars
out and the sabers whizzed as they were drawn from their scabbards.
of an attack spread through the squadron. The command to form up rang
his own way, gave an order. No one said anything definite, but the rumor
to him by the officers, and, like a man desperately insisting on having
The colonel rode to the front, angrily gave some reply to questions put

it or not, and how they would cross it, agitated them all.
conscious of this unseen line, and the question whether they would cross
separating the living from the dead--lay between them. All were
terrible dividing line of uncertainty and fear--resembling the line
there was nothing between the squadron and the enemy, and again that
before it was halted facing the enemy. Again, as at the Enns bridge,
The squadron in which Rostov was serving had scarcely time to mount

was now necessary to attack in order to cut away through for themselves.
retreat on the left by the French. However inconvenient the position, it
hussars to retreat with the infantry. They were cut off from the line of
the men collecting wood in the copse. It was no longer possible for the
muffled shout almost behind them in the wood. The French had attacked
had it not been that just then they heard the rattle of musketry and a
would have remained there for a long time testing each other's courage
alleged that he had been the first to leave the range of fire, they
nothing to be said, and neither wished to give occasion for it to be
in the other. Both passed the examination successfully. As there was
preparing for battle, each vainly trying to detect signs of cowardice
sternly and significantly at one another like two fighting cocks
the French were outflanking our left. The general and colonel looked
for cavalry to act among the bushes and broken ground, as well as that
where they had been before it had been evident that it was impossible
silence. There was nothing fresh to be seen from the line, for from
reached the front, several bullets sped over them, and they halted in
if their differences would be settled there amongst the bullets. They
expanded his chest and rode, frowning, beside him to the front line, as
Taking the colonel's outburst as a challenge to his courage, the general

I won't allow it to be said!"
"You forget yourself, Colonel. I am not considering my own pleasure and

destroy my men for your pleasure!"
come to ze front and see dat zis position iss no goot? I don't vish to
his horse and turning purple in the face. "Vill you be so goot to
"Quite avare, your excellency," suddenly shouted the colonel, touching

are not aware of the fact..."
"I am not in the cavalry, Colonel, but I am a Russian general and if you

replied the irate colonel. "If you vere in the cavalry..."
"I peg of you yourself not to mix in vot is not your business!" suddenly

position and prepare for an attack."
in the wood. I beg of you, I beg of you," he repeated, "to occupy the
"Once again, Colonel," said the general, "I can't leave half my men

malevolence in their hearts.
commander. The commanders met with polite bows but with secret
drew himself up very straight and tall and rode to the Pavlograd
the infantry went toward his horse with jerky steps, and having mounted
up within twice the range of a musket shot. The general in command of
Lannes' sharpshooters were already seen crossing the milldam and forming
together, thundered on the right and in the center, while the capotes of
But haste was becoming imperative. Cannon and musketry, mingling

retreat!"
what he vill, but I cannot sacrifice my hussars... Bugler, sount ze
flushing and addressing an adjutant who had ridden up, "so let him do
"He higher iss dan I in rank," said the German colonel of the hussars,

horses and the infantry collecting wood.
battle and were engaged in peaceful occupations, the cavalry feeding the
impending action. From privates to general they were not expecting a
regiments, both cavalry and infantry, were by no means ready for the
in discussion with the sole object of offending one another. But the
the right flank and the French were already advancing, were engaged
exasperated with one another and, long after the action had begun on
was serving, and a misunderstanding arose. The two commanders were much
assigned to the commander of the Pavlograd regiment in which Rostov
serving as a private. But the command of the extreme left flank had been
the regiment Kutuzov had reviewed at Braunau and in which Dolokhov was
The command of the left flank belonged by seniority to the commander of

could not possibly be, and so did not deliver the order.
firing was, he began to look for the general and his staff where they
Having reached the left flank, instead of going to the front where the

dangerous.
failed him. He was seized by panic and could not go where it was
and galloped off. But no sooner had he left Bagration than his courage
Zherkov, not removing his hand from his cap, turned his horse about

general commanding that left flank with orders to retreat immediately.
Lannes and was thrown into confusion. Bagration had sent Zherkov to the
simultaneously attacked and outflanked by superior French forces under
of the Azov and Podolsk infantry and the Pavlograd hussars--was
different companies did not get mixed. But our left--which consisted
of the dip in the ground at the rear was hurried and noisy, but the
gave us time to retreat. The retirement of the center to the other side
French were putting out the fire which the wind was spreading, and thus
set fire to the Schon Grabern village, delayed the French advance. The
flank. In the center Tushin's forgotten battery, which had managed to
The attack of the Sixth Chasseurs secured the retreat of our right


CHAPTER XIX





and eager crowd down the hill at their disordered foe.
Bagration and racing one another they rushed in an irregular but joyous
"Hurrah--ah!--ah!" rang a long-drawn shout from our ranks, and passing

Bagration looked round and shouted, "Hurrah!"
gaily and complacently. But at the moment the first report was heard,
of our men fell, among them the round-faced officer who had marched so
appeared all along their uneven ranks, and musket shots sounded. Several
ranks. Suddenly one shot after another rang out from the French, smoke
gave no further orders and silently continued to walk on in front of the
and turned-out toes, climbed the hill with difficulty.) Prince Bagration
faces. (He distinctly saw an old French officer who, with gaitered legs
could clearly distinguish their bandoliers, red epaulets, and even their
The French were already near. Prince Andrew, walking beside Bagration,

forward, and experienced great happiness.
a cavalryman. Prince Andrew felt that an invisible power was leading him
he went forward uneasily over the rough field with the awkward gait of
turning for a moment to the front line, and slightly swinging his arms,
"Forward, with God!" said Bagration, in a resolute, sonorous voice,

column, with its officers leading, appeared from below the hill.
stretched his legs, and set his cap straight. The head of the French
He gave the reins to a Cossack, took off and handed over his felt coat,
Bagration rode round the ranks that had marched past him and dismounted.

The order was given to halt and down knapsacks.

relax, shouted with his mouth wide open and passed on.
that ourselves!" Another, without looking round, as though fearing to
Bagration as he shouted, with an expression that seemed to say: "We know
the ranks. A morose soldier marching on the left turned his eyes on
"Glad to do our best, your ex'len-lency!" came a confused shout from

"Well done, lads!" said Prince Bagration.

beating the ground in unison, one seemed to hear left... left... left.
angrily, and through the ominous silence and the regular tramp of feet
ran to catch up his line and, falling into step with a hop, looked back
flank, a noncommissioned officer who had stopped beside the dead men,
round something where the ball had fallen, and an old trooper on the
commander's voice in jaunty tones. The soldiers passed in a semicircle
column to the measure of "Left... left!" "Close up!" came the company
flew over the heads of Bagration and his suite, and fell into the
panting to catch up with his company. A cannon ball, cleaving the air,
fallen behind, his face showing alarm at his defection, ran at a trot,
major skirted a bush, puffing and falling out of step; a soldier who had
to himself at each alternate step, "Left... left... left..." A fat
step, and each one of these hundreds of soldiers seemed to be repeating
the wall of soldiers burdened with knapsacks and muskets marched in
each alternate step; and in time to this, with stern but varied faces,
was happy. "Left... left... left..." he seemed to repeat to himself at
in the best possible manner, and feeling that he was doing it well he
if all the powers of his soul were concentrated on passing the commander
without losing step, his whole powerful body turning flexibly. It was as
weapon) and looked now at the superior officers and now back at the men
to his leg a narrow unsheathed sword (small, curved, and not like a real
tread of the soldiers who were keeping step with him. He carried close
height without the smallest effort, his ease contrasting with the heavy
his muscular legs as if sailing along, stretching himself to his full
With the self-satisfaction of a man on parade, he stepped lightly with

would appear as he passed the commander.
moment he was clearly thinking of nothing but how dashing a fellow he
expression--the same man who had rushed out of the wattle shed. At that
a company commander, a fine round-faced man, with a stupid and happy
could be heard. On their left flank, nearest to Bagration, marched
reached Bagration, the weighty tread of the mass of men marching in step
two battalions of the Sixth Chasseurs in fine order. Before they had
and moved to the right; from behind it, dispersing the laggards, came
The remains of our regiment which had been in action rapidly formed up

would take place on this side of it...
The head of the column had already descended into the hollow. The clash

"They march splendidly," remarked someone in Bagration's suite.

flapping against its staff.
caps, distinguish the officers from the men, and see the standard
down over the uneven ground. One could already see the soldiers' shaggy
involuntarily on this French column advancing against them and winding
the French moving about on it, opened out before them. All eyes fastened
to left as if drawn by an invisible hand, and the hill opposite, with
concealed the hollow, driven by a rising wind, began to move from right
battalions. While he was speaking, the curtain of smoke that had
cease firing and re-form, so as to give room for the two approaching
appeals, but Bagration did not reply; he only gave an order to
persuasiveness to his words. The staff officer joined in the colonel's
bullets could not kill him, and his half-closed eyes gave still more
used to it, but you, sir, will blister your hands." He spoke as if those
that a carpenter uses to a gentleman who has picked up an ax: "We are
continually around them. He spoke in the tone of entreaty and reproach
and he drew attention to the bullets whistling, singing, and hissing
at an officer of the suite who turned away from him. "There, you see!"
your excellency, for God's sake!" he kept saying, glancing for support
to go back as it was too dangerous to remain where they were. "Please,
The commander of the regiment turned to Prince Bagration, entreating him

movements were still slow and measured.
eagerly and rather disdainfully, not resting on anything although his
of profound thought. The round, steady, hawk's eyes looked before him
The dull, sleepy expression was no longer there, nor the affectation
a man who on a hot day takes a final run before plunging into the water.
expressed the concentrated and happy resolution you see on the face of
the changed expression on Prince Bagration's face at this moment. It
Chasseurs whom they had just passed. Prince Andrew was struck by
adjutant he ordered him to bring down the two battalions of the Sixth
that this was exactly what he had desired and expected. Turning to his
were firing at our men. Prince Bagration bowed his head as a sign
had disappeared, but at French infantry who had come into the hollow and
men had begun firing. They were still firing, not at the cavalry which
hitting men and that afterwards someone had shouted "Cavalry!" and our
of the action balls and shells began flying all over his regiment and
regiment had been broken up. All he knew was that at the commencement
could not say with certainty whether the attack had been repulsed or his
had happened during that half-hour to the troops entrusted to him, and
occurred to his regiment, but in reality he did not himself know what
had been repulsed, employing this military term to describe what had
repulsed, he had lost more than half his men. He said the attack
been attacked by French cavalry and that, though the attack had been
a host welcomes an honored guest. He reported that his regiment had
giving him a mild expression, rode up to Bagration and welcomed him as
pleasant smile--his eyelids drooping more than half over his old eyes,
The commander of the regiment, a thin, feeble-looking old man with a

be a square--for they are not drawn up for that."
of soldiers. "It can't be an attack, for they are not moving; it can't
often heard. "What is this?" thought Prince Andrew approaching the crowd
wind to carry away. A pleasant humming and whistling of bullets were
they were firing at could not be seen for the smoke which there was no
taking charges from their pouches, while others were firing, though who
were using their ramrods, others putting powder on the touchpans or
smoke. The excited faces of the soldiers were blackened with it. Some
the sound of voices and the shouts of command. The whole air reeked with
to the ranks along which shots crackled now here and now there, drowning
the crowd of retreating soldiers, ordering them back. Bagration rode up
smoke, and an officer catching sight of Bagration rushed shouting after
In front of them rows of gray cloaks were already visible through the
despite the general's presence were talking loudly and gesticulating.
unwounded. The soldiers were ascending the hill breathing heavily, and
lying on the ground; they also met a crowd of soldiers some of whom were
Crossing a road they descended a steep incline and saw several men
that moment been wounded and his face showed fear rather than suffering.
blood from it was streaming over his greatcoat as from a bottle. He had
groaning aloud and swinging his arm which had just been hurt, while
mouth. Another was walking sturdily by himself but without his musket,
was spitting blood. A bullet had evidently hit him in the throat or
supported him under the arms. There was a gurgle in his throat and he
bleeding head and no cap was being dragged along by two soldiers who
of the actual battlefield. They began to meet wounded men. One with a
the hollow the less they could see but the more they felt the nearness
on account of the smoke nothing could be seen. The nearer they got to
began riding downhill to where the roll of musketry was heard but where
Prince Bagration, having reached the highest point of our right flank,


CHAPTER XVIII





him.
presence, and were evidently anxious to display their courage before
soldiers and officers greeted him gaily, grew more cheerful in his
Officers who approached him with disturbed countenances became calm;
owing to the tact Bagration showed, his presence was very valuable.
happened was due to chance and was independent of the commander's will,
with his intentions. Prince Andrew noticed, however, that though what
commanders was done, if not by his direct command, at least in accord
everything done by necessity, by accident, or by the will of subordinate
really given, but that Prince Bagration tried to make it appear that
the orders he gave them and, to his surprise, found that no orders were
attentively to Bagration's colloquies with the commanding officers and
support of his battery all was forgotten. Prince Andrew listened
attack very long. About Tushin and the battalion that had been in
as the right flank would probably not be able to withstand the enemy's
he must retreat as quickly as possible behind the hollow in the rear,
(the one who had paraded his regiment before Kutuzov at Braunau) that
himself, Prince Bagration sent Zherkov to tell the general in command
as it was too far to the left flank for him to have time to go there
As he was leaving the battery, firing was heard on the left also, and

"Very good!" said Bagration.

so had hastened to throw some sharpshooters into the wood.
a heavy fire had been opened on him and he was losing men uselessly, and
of the dragoons had already retreated beyond the dip in the ground, as
adjutant returned half an hour later with the news that the commander
an adjutant to the dragoons with orders to attack the French. But this
sign of assent and approval. He rode off at a walk to the right and sent
retreating upon the Kiev grenadiers. Prince Bagration bowed his head in
coming down upon them and that his regiment was in disorder and was
regiment in the hollow and news that immense masses of the French were
an adjutant galloped up with a message from the commander of the
just and that really no answer could be made to it. But at that moment
him in silence. It seemed to Prince Andrew that the officer's remark was
Prince Bagration turned to the officer and with his dull eyes looked at
if these battalions went away, the guns would remain without support.
flank. The officer of the suite ventured to remark to the prince that
ordered two battalions from the center to be sent to reinforce the right
To the left the horizon bounded by the adjacent wood. Prince Bagration
suite pointed out to Bagration a French column that was outflanking us.
and much farther to the right beyond the dragoons, the officer of the
flowed, the soul-stirring rolling and crackling of musketry was heard,
which the Kiev regiment was stationed, in the hollow where the rivulet
him. The French had advanced nearest on our right. Below the height on
and began deliberately to examine the whole battlefield extended before
village. "Very good!" said Bagration in reply to the officer's report,
respect, he had decided that it would be a good thing to set fire to the
consulting his sergeant major, Zakharchenko, for whom he had great
No one had given Tushin orders where and at what to fire, but after

which large masses of French were advancing.
balls at the village of Schon Grabern visible just opposite, in front of
guns had been intended to cannonade the valley, he was firing incendiary
but like a priest's benediction, approached the general. Though Tushin's
with a bashful and awkward gesture not at all like a military salute
Bagration called to him, and Tushin, raising three fingers to his cap

figure. "Number Two!" he squeaked. "Fire, Medvedev!"
voice to which he tried to impart a dashing note, ill suited to his weak
"Lift it two lines more and it will be just right," cried he in a feeble

shading his eyes with his small hand.
carriage, moved forward and, not noticing the general, looked out
round-shouldered Captain Tushin, stumbling over the tail of the gun
a trembling hand placed a charge in the cannon's mouth. The short,
a mop, his legs far apart, sprang to the wheel; while Number Two with
former position. A huge, broad-shouldered gunner, Number One, holding
the gunners who had seized it straining to roll it quickly back to its
suite, and in the smoke that suddenly surrounded the gun they could see
As he approached, a ringing shot issued from it deafening him and his

past the limbers to the farthest cannon.
"Yes, yes," muttered Bagration as if considering something, and he rode

gunner in a merry voice, standing to attention.
"Captain Tushin's, your excellency!" shouted the red-haired, freckled

here?" and the artilleryman understood him.
He asked, "Whose company?" but he really meant, "Are you frightened

the ammunition wagon.
"Whose company?" asked Prince Bagration of an artilleryman standing by

which Prince Andrew had been when he examined the battlefield.
particularly pleasant at that moment. They had reached the battery at
giving his saber to Bagration in Italy, and the recollection was
no longer in general use. Prince Andrew remembered the story of Suvorov
which had caught in his cloak. It was an old-fashioned saber of a kind
of a skillful rider and, slightly bending over, disengaged his saber
it worth while noticing trifles?" He reined in his horse with the case
cause of the confusion, turned away with indifference, as if to say, "Is
Prince Bagration screwed up his eyes, looked round, and, seeing the

horse still struggled.
and examined him with attentive curiosity. The Cossack was dead, but the
turned their horses away. The accountant stopped, facing the Cossack,
his horse. Zherkov and the staff officer bent over their saddles and
a little to their right and behind the accountant, crashed to earth with
ended with a thud into something soft... f-f-flop! and a Cossack, riding
when they again heard an unexpectedly violent whistling which suddenly
He seemed to swell with satisfaction. He had hardly finished speaking

"So that's what they hit with?" asked the accountant. "How awful!"

"A French pancake," answered Zherkov.

"What's that that has fallen?" asked the accountant with a naive smile.

struck the ground in front of them.
By this time they were all approaching Tushin's battery, and a ball

prince, but could not get it quite right.)
remembered that in French there is some peculiar way of addressing a
"It is very strange, mon Monsieur Prince," said the staff officer. (He

purposely trying to appear stupider than he really was.
smile, as if flattered at being made the subject of Zherkov's joke, and
"Oh, leave off!" said the accountant with a beaming but rather cunning

accountant, "but he feels a pain in the pit of his stomach already."
"He wants to see a battle," said Zherkov to Bolkonski, pointing to the

officer's saddle.
adjutants, in his camlet coat, as he jolted on his horse with a convoy
and presented a strange appearance among the hussars, Cossacks, and
full-faced man, looked around him with a naive smile of satisfaction
be present at the battle out of curiosity. The accountant, a stout,
horse, and a civilian--an accountant who had asked permission to
an orderly officer, the staff officer on duty, riding a fine bobtailed
rode an officer of the suite, the prince's personal adjutant, Zherkov,
battery. Prince Andrew followed with the suite. Behind Prince Bagration
hurry. However, he put his horse to a trot in the direction of Tushin's
particularly slowly, as if to impress the fact that there was no need to
Prince Bagration, uttering his words with an Oriental accent, spoke
Prince Andrew, out of breath with his rapid ride, spoke quickly.
took place and was reported to him was exactly what he had foreseen.
said, "Very good!" in a tone that seemed to imply that everything that
his head in sign of agreement with what Prince Andrew told him, and
face?" Prince Andrew asked himself as he looked. Prince Bagration bent
feeling at that moment. "Is there anything at all behind that impassive
and wished he could tell what, if anything, this man was thinking and
Prince Andrew gazed with anxious curiosity at that impassive face
Bagration's hard brown face with its half-closed, dull, sleepy eyes.
The feeling, "It has begun! Here it is!" was seen even on Prince

told him what he had seen.
Prince Andrew nodded to him. He still looked ahead while Prince Andrew
him to come up; Prince Bagration reined in his horse and recognizing
white horse, was Prince Bagration. Prince Andrew stopped, waiting for
The foremost, wearing a Cossack cloak and lambskin cap and riding a
in the light of the dull autumn evening, mounted men coming toward him.
Before he had reached the embankments that were being thrown up, he saw,

face of each soldier and each officer seemed to say.
heart. "It has begun! Here it is, dreadful but enjoyable!" was what the
and on all their faces he recognized the same eagerness that filled his
movement of soldiers forming ranks and getting their muskets ready,
vodka a quarter of an hour before, he saw everywhere the same rapid
Passing between the companies that had been eating porridge and drinking

rush to his heart. "But where and how will my Toulon present itself?"
"It has begun. Here it is!" thought Prince Andrew, feeling the blood

crush the contemptible detachment that stood before him.
wings, hoping before evening and before the arrival of the Emperor to
moved his forces to attack the center and outflank both the Russian
and Murat, humiliated and anxious to expiate his fault, had at once
Lemarrois had just arrived at a gallop with Bonaparte's stern letter,

the report of musketry.
From the bottom of the slope, where the parleys had taken place, came
growing louder and more frequent. Evidently our guns had begun to reply.
to Grunth to find Prince Bagration. He heard the cannonade behind him
The battle had begun! Prince Andrew turned his horse and galloped back
not yet dispersed before another puff appeared, followed by a report.
probably to strengthen the front line. The smoke of the first shot had
small but distinctly visible enemy column was moving down the hill,
mounted Frenchmen, probably adjutants, were galloping up the hill. A
a battery to their left. The smoke above it had not yet dispersed. Two
motionless masses of the French now swayed and that there really was
ran rapidly over the wide space, but he only saw that the hitherto
looking at the puff from the gun that had sent the ball. His eyes
Mounting his horse again Prince Andrew lingered with the battery,


CHAPTER XVII





off to his company, buttoning up his coat as he ran.
by the owner of the manly voice, a dashing infantry officer who hurried
his kind, intelligent face rather pale, rushed out of the shed followed
And immediately Tushin, with a short pipe in the corner of his mouth and

seemed to groan at the terrible impact.
the shed with super human force, throwing up a mass of earth. The ground
had not finished saying what was necessary, thudded into the ground near
nearer, faster and louder, louder and faster, a cannon ball, as if it
He did not finish. Just then there was a whistle in the air; nearer and

future life..."
"Some herb vodka? Certainly!" said Tushin. "But still, to conceive a

philosophizing voice with pleasure.
the sutler's hut without his boots." He recognized the agreeable,
"Why," thought Prince Andrew, "that's the captain who stood up in

"Well, stand us some of your herb vodka, Tushin," it said.

The manly voice again interrupted the artillery officer.

an atmosphere."
say about the soul going to the sky... we know there is no sky but only
voice. "One is afraid of the unknown, that's what it is. Whatever we may
"Yes, one is afraid," continued the first speaker, he of the familiar

laughed.
And the owner of the manly voice, evidently an infantry officer,

wise, because you can take everything along with you--vodka and snacks."
voice interrupting them both. "Of course you artillery men are very
"All the same, one is afraid! Oh, you clever people," said a third manly

escape it anyhow."
Another, a younger voice, interrupted him: "Afraid or not, you can't

beyond death, none of us would be afraid of it. That's so, friend."
familiar voice, "what I say is that if it were possible to know what is
"No, friend," said a pleasant and, as it seemed to Prince Andrew, a

sincere that he could not but listen.
he was struck by a voice coming from the shed, and its tone was so
had not understood a word of what they were saying. Suddenly, however,
he had heard the voices of the officers distinctly, but as often happens
echelons." So he reasoned.... All the time he had been beside the gun,
shall withdraw the left flank under its cover, and retreat to the dip by
attack our center we, having the center battery on this high ground,
the dragoons could successfully make a flank counterattack. If they
hold their position till reserves from the center come up. In that case
he said to himself, "the Kiev grenadiers and the Podolsk chasseurs must
only important possibilities: "If the enemy attacks the right flank,"
course of events in the forthcoming action in broad outline. He imagined
historical accounts of battles, involuntarily pictured to himself the
following the mass movements and general orders, and constantly studying
dip. Prince Andrew, being always near the commander in chief, closely
center, and secondly, to withdraw the cavalry to the other side of the
Bagration. His idea was, first, to concentrate all the artillery in the
position. He made some notes on two points, intending to mention them to
out his notebook and, leaning on the cannon, sketched a plan of the
difficult for artillery and cavalry to retire. Prince Andrew took
on both sides. Behind our position was a steep and deep dip, making it
wider than ours, and it was plain that they could easily outflank us
bonfires of our infantry who were felling wood. The French line was
On the left our troops were close to a copse, in which smoked the
direct descent and ascent to the brook separating us from Schon Grabern.
Prince Andrew was surveying the position, was the easiest and most
dragoons. In the center, where Tushin's battery stood and from which
Our infantry were stationed there, and at the farthest point the
posted on a rather steep incline which dominated the French position.
was impossible to see it clearly with the naked eye. Our right flank was
that village, amid the smoke, was something resembling a battery, but it
evidently in the village itself and behind the hill. To the left from
amid the smoke of their campfires, the greater part of whom were
could be seen, and in three places to left and right the French troops
it, on the crest of the opposite hill, the village of Schon Grabern
greater part of the enemy's opened out from this battery. Just facing
It was true that a view over nearly the whole Russian position and the

sound of officers' voices in eager conversation.
cannon, was a small, newly constructed wattle shed from which came the
and artillerymen's bonfires. To the left, not far from the farthest
Behind the guns were their limbers and still farther back picket ropes
officer arrived, but at a sign resumed his measured, monotonous pacing.
artillery sentry was pacing up and down; he stood at attention when the
beside the farthest of the four unlimbered cannon. Before the guns an
told him the whole field could be seen. Here he dismounted, and stopped
Andrew made his way up to the battery from which the staff officer had
Having ridden round the whole line from right flank to left, Prince


CHAPTER XVI





confronted one another as before.
entrenchments looked out just as menacingly, and the unlimbered cannon
But the guns remained loaded, the loopholes in blockhouses and

quickly as possible.
to unload the muskets, explode the ammunition, and all return home as
involuntarily, so much so that the only thing left to do seemed to be
good-humored laughter from the soldiers that it infected the French
"Ho! ho! ho! Ha! ha! ha! ha! Ouh! ouh!" came peals of such healthy and

trying to give an expressive intonation to his voice.
sounds very fast: "Kari, mala, tafa, safi, muter, Kaska," he said,
Sidorov, turning to the French, winked, and began to jabber meaningless

Sidorov, you have a try!"
"Ah, that's the way to talk French," said the picket soldiers. "Now,

"Let us go, Ivan Lukich," he said to the captain.

his musket walked away.
And Dolokhov swore at him in coarse soldier's Russian and shouldering

"The devil skin your Emperor."

"Not Bonaparte. He is the Emperor! Sacre nom...!" cried he angrily.

"Bonaparte..." began Dolokhov, but the Frenchman interrupted him.

others..."
former war. "The Emperor will teach your Suvara as he has taught the
"It's ancient history," said another, guessing that it referred to a


    * "What's he singing about?"


"Qu' est-ce qu'il chante?" * asked a Frenchman.


    * "On vous fera danser."


"We'll make you dance as we did under Suvorov...," * said Dolokhov.

The French onlookers and listeners laughed.

French grenadier.
"Only take care you and your Cossacks are not all captured!" said the

Dolokhov.
"We have orders to drive you off here, and we shall drive you off," said

surrendered but had beaten the French.
the way from Ulm, while Dolokhov maintained that the Russians had not
trying to prove that the Russians had surrendered and had fled all
campaign. The Frenchman, confusing the Austrians with the Russians, was
dispute with the French grenadier. They were naturally talking about the
Dolokhov did not answer the captain; he had been drawn into a hot

him. "More, please: more! What's he saying?"
trying not to lose a word of the speech which was incomprehensible to
"Now then, go on, go on!" incited the officer, bending forward and

captain.
come from the left flank where their regiment was stationed, with his
recognized him and stopped to listen to what he was saying. Dolokhov had
The soldier to whom the laughers referred was Dolokhov. Prince Andrew

an adept at French.
"Wait a bit and listen. It's fine!" answered Sidorov, who was considered

him. There now, Sidorov!"
jabbering! Fine, isn't it? It's all the Frenchy can do to keep up with
was rapidly and excitedly talking to a French grenadier. "Hark to him
Russian musketeer who had gone up to the picket line with an officer and
"Look! Look there!" one soldier was saying to another, pointing to a

at the French.
grew weary waiting to be relieved. Prince Andrew halted to have a look
no longer looked at the French but paid attention to the sight-seers and
soldiers forming the picket line, like showmen exhibiting a curiosity,
line--the officers had been unable to keep sight-seers away. The
Since early morning--despite an injunction not to approach the picket

who, jesting and laughing, stared at their strange foreign enemies.
formed the picket line on either side, there were many curious onlookers
another's faces and speak to one another. Besides the soldiers who
morning, the lines were so near together that the men could see one
but in the center where the men with a flag of truce had passed that
line and that of the enemy were far apart on the right and left flanks,
Prince Andrew, having reached the front line, rode along it. Our front

as he rode by.
stepped away from the man and looked round inquiringly at the adjutant
A young officer with a bewildered and pained expression on his face

"Go on, go on!" said the major.

screams, continued.
So the swishing sound of the strokes, and the desperate but unnatural

him, he's a scoundrel. Go on! Go on!"
honorable, and brave, but if he robs his fellows there is no honor in
"It's a shame for a soldier to steal; a soldier must be honest,

screams kept repeating:
A stout major was pacing up and down the line, and regardless of the
striking him regularly on his bare back. The man shrieked unnaturally.
soldiers held him while two others were flourishing their switches and
out in front of a platoon of grenadiers before whom lay a naked man. Two
commander, higher than and different from the others, Prince Andrew came
busy with similar peaceful affairs--near the shelter of the regimental
chasseur regiment and in the lines of the Kiev grenadiers--fine fellows
which at least half of them would be left on the field. After passing a
encampment, and not within sight of the enemy before an action in
as serene as if all this were happening at home awaiting peaceful
wiping them on the sleeves of their greatcoats. All their faces were
the sergeant major with brightened expressions, licking their lips and
emptied them, rolling the vodka in their mouths, and walked away from
soldiers lifted the canteen lids to their lips with reverential faces,
a keg, filled one after another the canteen lids held out to him. The
crowded round a pockmarked, broad-shouldered sergeant major who, tilting
Another company, a lucky one for not all the companies had vodka,

before his shelter, had been tasted.
sergeant was carrying in a wooden bowl to an officer who sat on a log
at the steaming boiler, waiting till the sample, which a quartermaster
In one company dinner was ready, and the soldiers were gazing eagerly
boots or overcoats and crowding round the boilers and porridge cookers.
dressed and undressed, drying their shirts and leg bands or mending
shelters with merry chatter and laughter; around the fires sat others,
the whole place were dragging logs and brushwood and were building
the ribs and telling him to hold his hand up. Soldiers scattered over
officers were counting the men, poking the last man in each section in
their greatcoats were ranged in lines, the sergeants major and company
more confident was the appearance of our troops. The soldiers in
could be felt, but the nearer Prince Andrew came to the French lines the
miles away from the French. At Grunth also some apprehension and alarm
in the baggage train he had passed that morning on the Znaim road seven
cheerful were the troops. The greatest disorder and depression had been
The farther forward and nearer the enemy he went, the more orderly and

The staff officer remained behind and Prince Andrew rode on alone.

yourself further."
to rid himself of this staff officer's company, "please don't trouble
"Thank you very much, I will go on alone," said Prince Andrew, wishing

can see everything from there; let's go there, Prince."
point. "It's in charge of the queer fellow we saw without his boots. You
"That's our battery," said the staff officer indicating the highest

seen. Prince Andrew stopped and began examining the position.
They rode up the opposite hill. From there the French could already be


    * "This is a pleasure one gets in camp, Prince."


officer.
"Voila l'agrement des camps, monsieur le Prince," * said the staff

trot to escape from the poisoned atmosphere of these latrines.
entrenchment. They had to hold their noses and put their horses to a
dozens of soldiers, continually replaced by others, who ran from the
the entrenchment, and went on again. Just behind it they came upon some
bank by unseen hands. Prince Andrew and the officer rode up, looked at
spadefuls of red clay were continually being thrown up from behind the
the cold wind, swarmed in these earthworks like a host of white ants;
red. Several battalions of soldiers, in their shirt sleeves despite
entrenchments being thrown up, the freshly dug clay of which showed up
soldiers and officers of various regiments, they saw on their left some
Having ridden beyond the village, continually meeting and overtaking

The staff officer and Prince Andrew mounted their horses and rode on.

but extremely attractive.
There was something peculiar about it, quite unsoldierly, rather comic,
Prince Andrew glanced again at the artillery officer's small figure.

his gravity.
"Kindly return to your posts," said the staff officer trying to preserve

unacceptable and had not come off. He grew confused.
a jocular tone. But before he had finished he felt that his jest was
smiling shyly in his uncomfortable position, evidently wishing to adopt
"The soldiers say it feels easier without boots," said Captain Tushin

Prince Andrew to the staff officer.
other, glanced inquiringly with his large, intelligent, kindly eyes from
Tushin, who silent and smiling, shifting from one stockinged foot to the
Prince Andrew smiled involuntarily as he looked at the artillery officer

all!" he added in a tone of command.
officer smiled.) "Kindly return to your posts, gentlemen, all of you,
and you'll be in a pretty position without your boots!" (The staff
example, yet here you are without your boots! The alarm will be sounded
"One would think that as an artillery officer you would set a good
"Well, aren't you ashamed of yourself, Captain Tushin?" he continued.

rose when they entered, smiling not altogether comfortably.
(he had given them to the canteen keeper to dry), in only his stockings,
turned to a thin, dirty little artillery officer who without his boots
gave orders that no one should leave his post. Now you, Captain," and he
once. "You know it won't do to leave your posts like this. The prince
reproachful tone of a man who has repeated the same thing more than
"Now what does this mean, gentlemen?" said the staff officer, in the

weary faces, were sitting at the table eating and drinking.
They dismounted and entered the tent. Several officers, with flushed and

"Why didn't you mention it, Prince? I would have offered you something."

Prince Andrew who had not yet had time to eat anything.
"Yes, let's go in and I will get myself a roll and some cheese," said

there, Prince, and scare them a bit. It won't take a moment."
morning I turned them all out and now look, it's full again. I must go
there," he pointed to a sutler's tent, "they crowd in and sit. This
pointing to the soldiers. "The officers don't keep them in hand. And
"There now, Prince! We can't stop those fellows," said the staff officer

and fencing from the village.
seemed to be seeking something, and soldiers dragging doors, benches,
On all sides they saw rain-soaked officers with dejected faces who

he spoke it badly, offered to conduct Prince Andrew.
diamond ring on his forefinger, who was fond of speaking French though
order. The officer on duty, a handsome, elegantly dressed man with a
forces, so as to know his bearings should he be sent to execute an
permission to ride round the position to see the disposition of the
thought Bagration. Prince Andrew, without replying, asked the prince's
stay with me, let him... he'll be of use here if he's a brave officer,"
he can get his reward just as well in the rearguard, but if he wishes to
"If he is one of the ordinary little staff dandies sent to earn a medal

if to reassure Prince Andrew.
"However, there will hardly be an engagement today," said Bagration as

important."
rearguard and have an eye on the order of retreat, "which is also very
him full liberty to remain with him during the battle or to join the
there would probably be an engagement that day or the next, and giving
with distinction and special marks of favor, explaining to him that
knowing Bolkonski to be a favorite and trusted adjutant, received him
but also disbelieved in the nearness of an engagement. Bagration,
peace but did not believe in its possibility; others talked of a battle
no one knew anything of the general position of affairs. They talked of
detachment and the battle had not yet begun. In Bagration's detachment
himself to Bagration. Bonaparte's adjutant had not yet reached Murat's
persisted in his request to Kutuzov, arrived at Grunth and reported
Between three and four o'clock in the afternoon Prince Andrew, who had


CHAPTER XV





for him.
for three days, and not one of them knew or imagined what was in store
dried and warmed themselves, cooked their porridge for the first time
escape, and Bagration's four thousand men merrily lighted campfires,
the Guards to the field of battle, afraid of letting a ready victim
Murat. Bonaparte himself, not trusting to his generals, moved with all
Bonaparte's adjutant rode full gallop with this menacing letter to


NAPOLEON

letting yourself be tricked by an aide-de-camp of the Emperor.
themselves be tricked at the crossing of the Vienna bridge, you are
when they have no powers; this one had none.... The Austrians let
The Russian Emperor's aide-de-camp is an impostor. Officers are nothing

army.... You are in a position to seize its baggage and artillery.
ratify it; but it is only a trick. March on, destroy the Russian
If, however, the Emperor of Russia ratifies that convention, I will

one but the Emperor of Russia has that right.
general who signed that capitulation had no right to do so, and that no
the armistice immediately and march on the enemy. Inform him that the
order. You are causing me to lose the fruits of a campaign. Break
my advance guard, and have no right to arrange an armistice without my
I cannot find words to express to you my displeasure. You command only

To PRINCE MURAT,

at eight o'clock in the morning

Schonbrunn, 25th Brumaire, 1805,


Murat:
a capitulation, he detected a ruse and wrote the following letter to
Hollabrunn) received Murat's dispatch with the proposal of a truce and
correct. As soon as Bonaparte (who was at Schonbrunn, sixteen miles from
also that Murat's mistake would very soon be discovered, proved
no way binding) might give time for part of the transport to pass, and
Kutuzov's expectations that the proposals of capitulation (which were in

stationary in face of an enemy eight times as strong as itself.
this movement of the transport and of the whole army, had to remain
road. Bagration's exhausted and hungry detachment, which alone covered
movements of the baggage trains of the entire army along the Krems-Znaim
meanwhile Kutuzov sent his adjutants back to hasten to the utmost the
to agree to the truce but also to offer terms of capitulation, and
attendance on him, to the enemy camp. Wintzingerode was not merely
immediately dispatched Adjutant General Wintzingerode, who was in
unexpected, chance of saving the army. On receiving the news he
stage nearer Znaim. The offer of a truce gave the only, and a quite
(whose movements were concealed from the French) advance if but one
exhausted troops some rest, and letting the transport and heavy convoys
A truce was Kutuzov's sole chance of gaining time, giving Bagration's

Kutuzov to report the offer he had received.
authorized either to accept or refuse a truce and sent his adjutant to
Russian army the three days' truce. Bagration replied that he was not
to the Russian line to announce the peace negotiations and to offer the
and retired, leaving Bagration's division exposed. Another emissary rode
Austrian general occupying the advanced posts, believed Murat's emissary
offered this truce to avoid unnecessary bloodshed. Count Nostitz, the
negotiations for peace were already proceeding, and that he therefore
armies should remain in position without moving. Murat declared that
and with this object offered a three days' truce on condition that both
arrival of the rest of the troops who were on their way from Vienna,
Kutuzov's whole army. To be able to crush it absolutely he awaited the
Bagration's weak detachment on the Znaim road he supposed it to be
a fight led Murat to try to deceive Kutuzov in a similar way. Meeting
that had placed the Vienna bridge in the hands of the French without
freak of fate made the impossible possible. The success of the trick
that came upon him at Hollabrunn, which was clearly impossible. But a
hungry, exhausted men would have to detain for days the whole enemy army
before he could reach Znaim. Hence Bagration with his four thousand
Vienna. Kutuzov with his transport had still to march for some days
a few hours ahead of the French who were approaching Hollabrunn from
by the way, Bagration came out on the Vienna-Znaim road at Hollabrunn
hungry, ill-shod soldiers, and losing a third of his men as stragglers
Marching thirty miles that stormy night across roadless hills, with his

Kutuzov himself with all his transport took the road to Znaim.
in forestalling the French he was to delay them as long as possible.
and to halt facing Vienna with Znaim to his rear, and if he succeeded
the Vienna-Znaim road. Bagration was to make this march without resting,
thousand strong, to the right across the hills from the Krems-Znaim to
The night he received the news, Kutuzov sent Bagration's vanguard, four

Russians from Krems to Znaim.
from Vienna to Znaim was shorter and better than the road for the
the French with his whole army was impossible. The road for the French
disgrace such as that of Ulm, or to utter destruction. But to forestall
French forestall him at Znaim meant the exposure of his whole army to a
French, there would be great hope of saving the army; to let the
on the line of Kutuzov's retreat. If he reached Znaim before the
advancing by forced marches toward Znaim, which lay sixty-six miles off
The French, the spy reported, having crossed the Vienna bridge, were

Kutuzov chose this latter course.

times as strong, who would hem him in from two sides.
transport, having to accept battle on the march against an enemy three
who had crossed the Vienna bridge, and encumbered by his baggage and
from Russia, he risked being forestalled on that road by the French
along the road from Krems to Olmutz, to unite with the troops arriving
all hope of a junction with Buxhowden. If Kutuzov decided to retreat
defending himself against superior forces of the enemy and abandoning
have to march with no road into unknown parts of the Bohemian mountains,
the road connecting him with the troops arriving from Russia, he would
himself in the position of Mack at Ulm. If Kutuzov decided to abandon
and surround his exhausted army of forty thousand, and he would find
army of one hundred and fifty thousand men would cut him off completely
arriving from Russia. If Kutuzov decided to remain at Krems, Napoleon's
force upon Kutuzov's line of communication with the troops that were
French, after crossing the bridge at Vienna, were advancing in immense
commanded was in an almost hopeless position. The spy reported that the
On November 1 Kutuzov had received, through a spy, news that the army he


CHAPTER XIV





affair, and about some ladies they both knew.
Emperor, about the remarks he had heard at court concerning the Krems
questioned Prince Andrew about the details of his interview with the
There was not a trace of agitation on his face. With delicate irony he
on the soft springs of the carriage, he turned to Prince Andrew.
saying, and sat plunged in thought. Five minutes later, gently swaying
Kutuzov did not reply. He seemed to have forgotten what he had been

"That is why I beg to be sent to that detachment," he said.

thought Bolkonski.
socket. "Yes, he has a right to speak so calmly of those men's death,"
temple, where an Ismail bullet had pierced his skull, and the empty eye
involuntarily noticed the carefully washed seams of the scar near his
Prince Andrew glanced at Kutuzov's face only a foot distant from him and

if speaking to himself.
a tenth part of his detachment returns I shall thank God," he added as
penetration he understood all that was passing in Bolkonski's mind. "If
"There is still much, much before us," he said, as if with an old man's

They got into the carriage and drove for a few minutes in silence.

added: "I need good officers myself, need them myself!"
"Get in," said Kutuzov, and noticing that Bolkonski still delayed, he

with Prince Bagration's detachment."
"Your excellency, I should like to be of use here. Allow me to remain

"Get in with me," said he to Bolkonski.
"Christ be with you!" Kutuzov repeated and went toward his carriage.

instead.
habitual, offering his puffy cheek, but Bagration kissed him on the neck
a ring, he made the sign of the cross over him with a gesture evidently
hand he drew Bagration toward him, and with his right, on which he wore
His face suddenly softened and tears came into his eyes. With his left

Christ be with you in your great endeavor!"
"Well, good-by, Prince," said he to Bagration. "My blessing, and may

Kutuzov went out into the porch with Bagration.

"Ah, from Vienna? Very good. Later, later!"

loudly, handing Kutuzov an envelope.
"I have the honor to present myself," repeated Prince Andrew rather

impassive face of Oriental type, came out after the commander in chief.
Bagration, a gaunt middle-aged man of medium height with a firm,

"One moment, your excellency."

"Well, have you finished?" said he to Kozlovski.

straight at his adjutant's face without recognizing him.
thoughts and anxieties as to be oblivious of his presence. He looked
commander in chief's one sound eye showed him to be so preoccupied with
Prince Andrew stood right in front of Kutuzov but the expression of the
and Kutuzov with his eagle nose and puffy face appeared in the doorway.
Just as he was going to open it the sounds ceased, the door opened,
Prince Andrew moved toward the door from whence voices were heard.

"Nothing of the sort. Orders are issued for a battle."

"What about capitulation?"

"Immediately, Prince," said Kozlovski. "Dispositions for Bagration."

He turned to Kozlovski with urgent questions.

disastrous was about to happen.
horses near the window, Prince Andrew felt that something important and
in chief, and from the noisy laughter of the Cossacks holding the
Kozlovski were squatting on the floor by a tub so near to the commander
disrespectful manner of the exhausted clerk, the fact that the clerk and
sound of these voices, the inattentive way Kozlovski looked at him, the
dissatisfied, interrupted by another, an unfamiliar voice. From the
Through the door came the sounds of Kutuzov's voice, excited and

and disrespectfully at Kozlovski.
"One can't write so fast, your honor," said the clerk, glancing angrily

clerk. "The Kiev Grenadiers, Podolian..."
"Second line... have you written it?" he continued dictating to the

Prince Andrew and did not even nod to him.
looked worn--he too had evidently not slept all night. He glanced at
up, was hastily writing at a tub turned bottom upwards. Kozlovski's face
squatting on his heels in front of a clerk. The clerk, with cuffs turned
general who had succeeded Schmidt. In the passage little Kozlovski was
house with Prince Bagration and Weyrother. Weyrother was the Austrian
Andrew entered the passage. Kutuzov himself, he was told, was in the
suite, with their Cossacks who were talking loudly together, Prince
Passing by Kutuzov's carriage and the exhausted saddle horses of his

where the commander in chief was.
quite abominable!" said Prince Andrew, and he went off to the house
"Well, all I can make out is that everything is abominable, abominable,

"I can't make out at all," said Nesvitski.

"What is the commander in chief doing here?" he asked.

the convoy officer.
He had just remembered his recent encounter with the doctor's wife and

"It's nothing," replied Prince Andrew.

Prince Andrew winced as at an electric shock.
with you? You must be ill to shiver like that," he added, noticing that
mountains with. It's a bad lookout, old fellow! But what's the matter
"They've made up splendid packs for me--fit to cross the Bohemian
"Well, I have got all I need into packs for two horses," said Nesvitski.

"We are to spend the night in Znaim."

"Where are headquarters?"

adjutant.
Prince. And God only knows where your man Peter is," said the other
"You won't be able to find either your baggage or anything else now,

something to eat."
we're getting it still worse," said Nesvitski. "But sit down and have
"And we, my dear boy! It's terrible! I was wrong to laugh at Mack,

do to get here."
"I was going to ask you. I know nothing except that it was all I could

"Well, is it true that it's peace and capitulation?" asked Nesvitski.

"Here, in that house," answered the adjutant.

"Where is the commander in chief?" asked Bolkonski.

was particularly noticeable on Nesvitski's usually laughing countenance.
had any news. On their familiar faces he read agitation and alarm. This
having something to eat. They hastily turned round to him asking if he
Entering the house, Prince Andrew saw Nesvitski and another adjutant

"Bolkonski! Bolkonski!... Don't you hear? Eh? Come quick..." he shouted.

flourishing his arm, called him to enter.
window. Nesvitski, moving his moist lips as he chewed something, and
He turned round. Nesvitski's handsome face looked out of the little

name.
to the window of the first house, when a familiar voice called him by
is a mob of scoundrels and not an army," he was thinking as he went up
out the stinging and tormenting thoughts that confused his mind. "This
intending to rest if but for a moment, eat something, and try to sort
On reaching the village he dismounted and went to the nearest house,

was.
galloped on to the village where he was told that the commander in chief
a sense of disgust the minutest details of this humiliating scene he
doctor's wife, who was calling him her deliverer, and recalling with
Prince Andrew without lifting his eyes rode hastily away from the

disorder," he muttered. "Do as you like."
"It's all the fault of these fellows on the staff that there's this

The officer flourished his arm and hastily rode away.

"Kind...ly let--them--pass!"

riding whip.
Andrew, his face distorted with fury, rode up to him and raised his
instinct urged him on. Before the officer finished his sentence Prince
what he dreaded more than anything in the world--to ridicule; but his
championship of the doctor's wife in her queer trap might expose him to
tipsy rage when a man does not know what he is saying. He saw that his
Prince Andrew saw that the officer was in that state of senseless,

behind.
"That was a nice snub for the little aide-de-camp," came a voice from

expression evidently pleased him.
you! Go back or I'll flatten you into a pancake," repeated he. This
"who are you? Are you in command here? Eh? I am commander here, not
"And who are you?" cried the officer, turning on him with tipsy rage,

lips.
"Let them pass, I tell you!" repeated Prince Andrew, compressing his

soldier. "I'll teach you to push on!... Back!"
The officer glanced at him, and without replying turned again to the

Andrew riding up to the officer.
"Kindly let this cart pass. Don't you see it's a woman?" said Prince

doctor's wife.
"Mr. Aide-de-camp! Help me!... What does it all mean?" screamed the

soldier. "Turn back with your slut!"
"I'll flatten you into a pancake!" shouted the angry officer to the

our people..."
Chasseurs.... They won't let us pass, we are left behind and have lost
me! What will become of us? I am the wife of the doctor of the Seventh
"Mr. Aide-de-camp! Mr. Aide-de-camp!... For heaven's sake... Protect

and, waving her thin arms from under the woolen shawl, cried:
piercingly. Seeing Prince Andrew she leaned out from behind the apron
of his whip fell on the apron of the equipage. The woman screamed
the woman's vehicle for trying to get ahead of others, and the strokes
officer in charge of transport was beating the soldier who was driving
was diverted by the desperate shrieks of the woman in the vehicle. An
and was just putting his question to a soldier when his attention
apron under the leather hood of the vehicle. Prince Andrew rode up
soldier was driving, and a woman enveloped in shawls sat behind the
looking like something between a cart, a cabriolet, and a caleche. A
evidently rigged up by soldiers out of any available materials and
a convoy. Directly opposite to him came a strange one-horse vehicle,
Wishing to find out where the commander in chief was, he rode up to

Bilibin's words.
"Here is our dear Orthodox Russian army," thought Bolkonski, recalling

that they despaired of the possibility of checking this disorder.
voices were but feebly heard amid the uproar and one saw by their faces
directing the march rode backward and forward between the carts. Their
traces broke, and lungs were strained with shouting. The officers
pushed the guns and wagons themselves. Whips cracked, hoofs slipped,
din of shouting more incessant. Soldiers floundering knee-deep in mud
each ascent or descent of the road the crowds were yet denser and the
returned from them dragging sheep, fowls, hay, and bulging sacks. At
companies, crowds of whom set off to the neighboring villages, or
sat waiting for something, and again soldiers straggling from their
flayed, some not, and broken-down carts beside which solitary soldiers
All along the sides of the road fallen horses were to be seen, some
urging of horses, and the swearing of soldiers, orderlies, and officers.
and gun carriages, the tramp of horses, the crack of whips, shouts, the
could reach, there were the rattle of wheels, the creaking of carts
sometimes four abreast. From all sides, behind and before, as far as ear
kinds overtaking one another and blocking the muddy road, three and
carts, guns, artillery, and again baggage wagons and vehicles of all
He looked with disdain at the endless confused mass of detachments,


     fate--(the fate of the army at Ulm)."
     the earth by English gold, we shall cause to share the same
     * "That Russian army which has been brought from the ends of


thought. "Well, if need be, I shall do it no worse than others."
and a hope of glory. "And should there be nothing left but to die?" he
astonishment at the genius of his hero, a feeling of wounded pride,
to his army at the beginning of the campaign, and they awoke in him
l'armee d'Ulm)." * He remembered these words in Bonaparte's address
de l'univers, nous allons lui faire eprouver le meme sort--(le sort de
"Cette armee russe que l'or de l'Angleterre a transportee des extremites

the troops in their disorderly flight confirmed these rumors.
position of the army reached him as he went along, and the appearance of
commander in chief and of his own luggage. Very sinister reports of the
weary, making his way past the baggage wagons, rode in search of the
took a horse and a Cossack from a Cossack commander, and hungry and
with carts that it was impossible to get by in a carriage. Prince Andrew
great haste and in the greatest disorder. The road was so obstructed
Andrew struck the high road along which the Russian army was moving with
baggage was already being dispatched to Olmutz. Near Hetzelsdorf Prince
In Brunn everybody attached to the court was packing up, and the heavy

fearing to be captured by the French on the way to Krems.
set off to rejoin the army, not knowing where he would find it and
That same night, having taken leave of the Minister of War, Bolkonski


CHAPTER XIII





"My dear fellow, you are a hero!" said Bilibin.

"I am going to save the army."
"I cannot argue about it," replied Prince Andrew coldly, but he thought:

insoluble.
And Bilibin unwrinkled his temple, feeling that the dilemma was

disgrace with Kutuzov's whole army."
your regiment before peace is concluded, or you will share defeat and
and the skin over his left temple puckered, "either you will not reach
going, when you might remain here? You are faced by one of two things,"
"I am speaking sincerely as a friend! Consider! Where and why are you

"Do stop joking, Bilibin," cried Bolkonski.

decent town. You and I will travel comfortably in my caleche."
ill luck takes us. They say we are going to Olmutz, and Olmutz is a very
dismissed from here; therefore, you can stay and go with us wherever our
anything else.... You have not been ordered to return and have not been
is to take care of yourself. Leave it to those who are no longer fit for
side of the question and you will see that your duty, on the contrary,
"But as you are a philosopher, be a consistent one, look at the other

"Not at all," said Prince Andrew.

heroism!"
the army now that it is in danger. I understand that. Mon cher, it is
"Why are you going? I know you think it your duty to gallop back to

Prince Andrew looked inquiringly at him and gave no reply.

vanished from his face.
And in proof of the conclusiveness of his opinion all the wrinkles

thinking about you. Why are you going?"
"Do you know, mon cher," said Bilibin following him, "I have been

his room.
And Prince Andrew after giving directions about his departure went to

"But now I am off at once."

"But you meant to stay another two days?"

"To the army."

"Where to?"

"I am going away."

and was going toward his room.
"Where are you off to?" he said suddenly to Prince Andrew who had risen

slight smile he began to examine his nails.
hitherto puckered brow became smooth as a sign of pleasure, and with a
had produced a good epigram, a fresh one that would be repeated. His
is a bit of Mack. We are Macked)," he concluded, feeling that he
expression. "C'est... c'est du Mack. Nous sommes mackes (It is... it
as at Ulm... it is..."--he seemed to be trying to find the right
Bilibin. "It's not treachery nor rascality nor stupidity: it is just
"Not that either. That puts the court in too bad a light," replied

glory that awaited him.
overcoats, wounds, the smoke of gunpowder, the sounds of firing, and the
"It may be treachery," said Prince Andrew, vividly imagining the gray


     he ought to be firing at the enemy.
     * (2) That their fire gets into his eyes and he forgets that

     * Bridgehead.


rascality...."
of the Thabor Bridge is delightful! It is not exactly stupidity, nor
orders the sergeant to be arrested. Come, you must own that this affair
was a stroke of genius. Prince Auersperg feels his dignity at stake and
discipline, if you allow a subordinate to address you like that!' It
true Gascon) and says: 'I don't recognize the world-famous Austrian
to speak, turns to Auersperg with feigned astonishment (he is a
the French!' Murat, seeing that all is lost if the sergeant is allowed
goes up to Auersperg and says: 'Prince, you are being deceived, here are
stayed his hand. The sergeant, who was evidently wiser than his general,
troops were running onto the bridge, was about to fire, but Lannes
the mines and blow up the bridge, this sergeant, seeing that the French
sergeant in charge of the cannon which was to give the signal to fire
subsiding under the delightful interest of his own story, "is that the
bridge is taken! But what is best of all," he went on, his excitement
"The French battalion rushes to the bridgehead, spikes the guns, and the
forget to pause after this mot to give time for its due appreciation.
l'ennemi!" *(2) In spite of the animation of his speech, Bilibin did not
qu'il n'y voit que du feu, et oublie celui qu'il devait faire faire sur
and so dazzled by the sight of Murat's mantle and ostrich plumes,
flattered by his rapidly established intimacy with the French marshals,
Gascons indeed, so bewildered him with fine words, and he is so
to make Prince Auersperg's acquaintance.' In a word, those gentlemen,
shake one another's hand.... The Emperor Napoleon burns with impatience
Austrian army, hero of the Turkish wars Hostilities are ended, we can
Prince Auersperg von Mautern himself. 'Dearest foe! Flower of the
the tete-de-pont. At length appears the lieutenant general, our dear
flings the bags of incendiary material into the water, and approaches
cannon, and meanwhile a French battalion gets to the bridge unobserved,
Auersperg; these gentlemen embrace the officers, crack jokes, sit on the
desire to see Prince Auersperg, and so on. The officer sends for
the Emperor Francis is arranging a meeting with Bonaparte, that they
They spin him a thousand gasconades, saying that the war is over, that
negotiate with Prince Auersperg. He lets them enter the tete-de-pont. *
assure the officer on duty that they, the marshals, are on their way to
gentlemen ride onto the bridge alone and wave white handkerchiefs; they
"I am not jesting," Bilibin went on. "Nothing is truer or sadder. These

"Stop this jesting," he said

executing of the plan.
that could save the army, and how he alone would be entrusted with the
he would give an opinion at the war council which would be the only one
Listening to Bilibin he was already imagining how on reaching the army
the ranks of obscure officers and offer him the first step to fame!
out of this position; that here was the Toulon that would lift him from
situation it occurred to him that it was he who was destined to lead it
As soon as he learned that the Russian army was in such a hopeless

grieved him and yet he was pleased.
"Stop jesting," said Prince Andrew sadly and seriously. This news


    * The marshalls.


on us, you, and your lines of communication."
and now with their whole army are on this side of the Danube, marching
let's!' say the others. And off they go and take the bridge, cross it,
Napoleon if we take this bridge, so let us three go and take it!' 'Yes,
and not let us cross? But it will please our sovereign the Emperor
an army of fifteen thousand men has been ordered to blow up the bridge
doubly mined and that there are menacing fortifications at its head and
'Gentlemen,' says one of them, 'you know the Thabor Bridge is mined and
mount and ride to the bridge. (Observe that all three are Gascons.)
gentlemen, messieurs les marechaux, * Murat, Lannes, and Belliard,
Vienna as I told you. Very well. Next day, which was yesterday, those
"That's just it," answered Bilibin. "Listen! The French entered

will be cut off," said he.
"But if the bridge is crossed it means that the army too is lost? It

Bolkonski shrugged his shoulders.

"That is what I ask you. No one, not even Bonaparte, knows why."

"What? Here? But why did they not blow up the bridge, if it was mined?"

now rushing along the road to Brunn and will be here in a day or two."
Auersperg was defending, and the bridge was not blown up: so Murat is
"What's it all about? Why, the French have crossed the bridge that

"I did not... What is it all about?" inquired Prince Andrew impatiently.

"And you didn't see that everybody is packing up?"

"I come from the archduchess'. I heard nothing there."

knows?"
"But where do you come from not to know what every coachman in the town

Prince Andrew could not understand.

blow!"
the Thabor Bridge, at Vienna.... They have crossed without striking a
"There now! Confess that this is delightful," said he. "This affair of

Bilibin came out to meet him. His usually calm face showed excitement.

"Eh? What?" asked Prince Andrew.

scoundrel is again at our heels!"
portmanteau into the vehicle, "we are to move on still farther. The
"Oh, your excellency!" said Franz, with difficulty rolling the

"What is it?" he asked.

time in the shop.
provide himself with some books for the campaign, and had spent some
Before returning to Bilibin's Prince Andrew had gone to a bookshop to

the front door.
Bilibin's man, was dragging a portmanteau with some difficulty out of
to Brunn. At the door he found a vehicle half full of luggage. Franz,
house thinking out a letter to his father about the battle and his visit
the afternoon, having made all his calls, he was returning to Bilibin's
calling on the principal Austrian dignitaries. Between four and five in
Bolkonski was invited everywhere, and had to spend the whole morning
the Grand Cross of Maria Theresa, and the whole army received rewards.
received. A thanksgiving service was arranged, Kutuzov was awarded
Contrary to Bilibin's forecast the news he had brought was joyfully

the shoulder, led him to the window, and began to talk to him.
seconds collected his thoughts. Then the Russian ambassador took him by
also wished to see him. He did not know whom to answer, and for a few
Empress' chamberlain invited him to see Her Majesty. The archduchess
Order of the third grade, which the Emperor was conferring on him. The
The Minister of War came up and congratulated him on the Maria Theresa
him for not having stayed at the palace, and offered him his own house.
friendly looks and heard friendly words. Yesterday's adjutant reproached
was immediately surrounded by courtiers on all sides. Everywhere he saw
The Emperor thanked Prince Andrew and bowed. Prince Andrew withdrew and

"At seven o'clock? It's very sad, very sad!"

"At seven o'clock, I believe."

"At what o'clock was General Schmidt killed?"

The Emperor interrupted him.

"Forage has not been supplied to the extent..."

"Is there sufficient forage in Krems?"

night."
"According to the scouts the last of them crossed on rafts during the

"The French have abandoned the left bank?"

"Three and a half miles, Your Majesty."

"From Durrenstein to Krems."

"From where to where, Your Majesty?"

"How many miles?"

and interrupted him.
ready in his mind, of all he knew and had seen. But the Emperor smiled
that he would have a chance to give a reliable account, which he had
the afternoon," replied Bolkonski growing more animated and expecting
front, but at Durrenstein, where I was, our attack began after five in
"I cannot inform Your Majesty at what o'clock the battle began at the

"At what o'clock did the battle begin?" asked the Emperor.

to these questions, as was only too evident, did not interest him.
as if his sole aim were to put a given number of questions--the answers
"Was Kutuzov well? When had he left Krems?" and so on. The Emperor spoke
Prince Andrew replied. Then followed other questions just as simple:

"Tell me, when did the battle begin?" he asked hurriedly.

seemed confused and blushed as if not knowing what to say.
conversation began Prince Andrew was struck by the fact that the Emperor
Francis received him standing in the middle of the room. Before the
Bolkonski that the Emperor desired to give him an audience. The Emperor
over, the adjutant he had seen the previous day ceremoniously informed
face and just nodded to him with his long head. But after it was
been told to, and the Emperor Francis merely looked fixedly into his
At the levee Prince Andrew stood among the Austrian officers as he had


CHAPTER XII





will see."
audiences, but he does not like talking himself and can't do it, as you
"Well, talk as much as you can, anyway. He has a passion for giving

can't," replied Bolkonski, smiling.
"I should like to speak well of them, but as far as I know the facts, I

accompanying him to the hall.
that provisions are supplied and the routes indicated," said Bilibin,
"When speaking to the Emperor, try as far as you can to praise the way

early to dinner," cried several voices. "We'll take you in hand."
"Oh! Oh! Oh! Well, au revoir, Bolkonski! Au revoir, Prince! Come back

"To the Emperor."

"Where to?"

looking at his watch.
gentlemen, it is already time for me to go," replied Prince Andrew
"I shall scarcely be able to avail myself of your hospitality,

interests," said Bilibin.
"In general we must turn this bloodthirsty soldier to more humane

kissing his finger tips.
"We must let him see Amelie, she's exquisite!" said one of "ours,"

women."
undertake the theater, I society, and you, Hippolyte, of course the
beg you all to help me. Brunn's attractions must be shown him. You can
but here, in this wretched Moravian hole, it is more difficult, and I
all the pleasures of life here. If we were in Vienna it would be easy,
house and in Brunn itself. I want to entertain him as far as I can, with
"Well now, gentlemen," said Bilibin, "Bolkonski is my guest in this

laughter that convulsed his usually impassive features.
distressed, and breathed painfully, but could not restrain the wild
Everybody laughed, and Hippolyte louder than anyone. He was evidently

satisfaction.
mouth!" said Bilibin, and the mop of hair on his head moved with
"Demosthenes, I know thee by the pebble thou secretest in thy golden

he released Bolkonski's arm to indicate that he had now quite finished.
nonreceipt of our dispatch of November 18. That is how it will end." And
nonintervention. And..." he paused. "Finally one cannot impute the
by the arm, "I believe that intervention will be stronger than
"Wait, I have not finished..." he said to Prince Andrew, seizing him

His Majesty the Emperor derogates from the principle of our alliance...
expressing... as in its last note... you understand... Besides, unless
Hippolyte gazing round with importance at the others, "without
"The Berlin cabinet cannot express a feeling of alliance," began

two.
to him about politics. Prince Andrew and the others gathered round these
He sat down beside Hippolyte and wrinkling his forehead began talking

is exquisite when he discusses politics--you should see his gravity!"
"Oh, I must give you a treat," Bilibin whispered to Bolkonski. "Kuragin

almost been jealous on his wife's account, was the butt of this set.
and Prince Andrew saw that Hippolyte, of whom--he had to admit--he had
Bilibin and the rest of "ours" burst out laughing in Hippolyte's face,


    * "Woman is man's companion."


began looking through a lorgnette at his elevated legs.
"La femme est la compagne de l'homme," * announced Prince Hippolyte, and

the women!"
Russian army) are nothing compared to what this man has been doing among
"that all the atrocities of the French army (I nearly said of the
"You, Bolkonski, don't know," said Bilibin turning to Prince Andrew,

"Oh, you Don Juan! You serpent!" cried several voices.

"Tell me about that!" he said.

arm. He began to laugh.
Prince Hippolyte was lolling in a lounge chair with his legs over its

advantage of it!"
that that man suffers, and this Don Juan, wicked fellow, is taking
"But the worst of it, gentlemen--I am giving Kuragin away to you--is

Can you fancy the figure he cut?..."
appointment to London was a promotion and that he was so to regard it.
a fellow diplomat, "that the Chancellor told him flatly that his
"But the best of it was," said one, telling of the misfortune of


    * Ours.


jests and gossip.
about the army and the battle, and then the talk went off into merry
politeness and to start conversation, they asked him a few questions
Andrew as one of themselves, an honor they did not extend to many. From
the official side of the service. These gentlemen received Prince
war or politics but related to high society, to certain women, and to
diplomats, evidently had its own interests which had nothing to do with
leader, called les notres. * This set, consisting almost exclusively of
men, who here, as in Vienna, formed a special set which Bilibin, their
The gentlemen assembled at Bilibin's were young, wealthy, gay society

introduced him to the others.
secretary to the embassy, Bolkonski was already acquainted. Bilibin
of the diplomatic corps. With Prince Hippolyte Kuragin, who was a
and handsome, with his hand bandaged. In the study were four gentlemen
not worn for a long time, he went into Bilibin's study fresh, animated,
dressed for his attendance at court in full parade uniform, which he had
Austrian adjutant, Bilibin, and last night's conversation. Having
to the Emperor Francis; he remembered the Minister of War, the polite
thought that came into his mind was that today he had to be presented
Next day he woke late. Recalling his recent impressions, the first


CHAPTER XI





a child, he fell into a deep, youthful slumber.
"Yes, that all happened!" he said, and, smiling happily to himself like

He woke up...

childhood.
and he experienced tenfold the joy of living, as he had not done since
forward beside Schmidt with the bullets merrily whistling all around,
the French were firing, and he felt his heart palpitating as he rode
again drawn out in a thin line the musketeers were descending the hill,
and the rattling of carriage wheels seemed to fill his ears, and now
He closed his eyes, and immediately a sound of cannonading, of musketry

Emperor Francis occupied his thoughts.
new triumph, tomorrow's levee and parade, and the audience with the
from him. The alliance with Prussia, Austria's treachery, Bonaparte's
felt that the battle of which he had brought tidings was far, far away
clean shirt on the feather bed with its warmed and fragrant pillows, he
When Prince Andrew reached the room prepared for him and lay down in a

smooth as a sign that the conversation was at an end.
"If we live we shall see," replied Bilibin, his face again becoming

"Impossible!" cried Prince Andrew. "That would be too base."


    * Fine eyes.


projects for peace, a secret peace concluded separately."
being deceived, my instinct tells me of negotiations with France and
therefore--this is between ourselves--I instinctively feel that we are
taken, and all this for the beaux yeux * of His Sardinian Majesty. And
Russian army loots terribly--her army is destroyed, her capital
place because her provinces have been pillaged--they say the Holy
used to it. She will retaliate. And she has been fooled in the first
"This is what I think. Austria has been made a fool of, and she is not

campaign is over?"
"But joking apart," said Prince Andrew, "do you really think the


    * "We must let him off the u!"


shall certainly adopt an innovation and call him simply Bonaparte!"
laws for Austria at Schonbrunn, il faut lui faire grace de l'u! * I
repeated, accentuating the u: "I think, however, now that he lays down
indicate that he was about to say something witty. "Buonaparte?" he
"Buonaparte?" said Bilibin inquiringly, puckering up his forehead to

the man has!"
clenching his small hand and striking the table with it, "and what luck
"What an extraordinary genius!" Prince Andrew suddenly exclaimed,

Campo Formio are to be drawn up."
it is merely a question of settling where the preliminaries of the new
Allies, Austria's hand will be forced and there will be war. If not
Alexander and the King of Prussia in Berlin? If Prussia joins the
"The only question is what will come of the meeting between the Emperor
of his own mots, releasing the wrinkles on his forehead, and pausing.
decide the matter, but those who devised it," said Bilibin quoting one
be your skirmishing at Durrenstein, or gunpowder at all, that will
say so. It will be as I said at the beginning of the campaign, it won't
"Well, I think it is. The bigwigs here think so too, but they daren't

Andrew.
"But still this does not mean that the campaign is over," said Prince

between two fires."
Bohemia, and you and your army would have spent a bad quarter of an hour
blow it up. Otherwise we should long ago have been in the mountains of
hope it will not be, for it is mined and orders have been given to
Vienna is on the other side. No, the bridge has not yet been taken and I
us--doing it very badly, I think, but still he is defending us. But
"Prince Auersperg is on this, on our side of the river, and is defending

Prince Auersperg was defending Vienna?" he said.
its celebrated bridgehead and Prince Auersperg? We heard reports that
Austria's capital. "How is it Vienna was taken? What of the bridge and
was really of small importance in view of such events as the fall of
Andrew, beginning to understand that his news of the battle before Krems
"Really I don't care about that, I don't care at all," said Prince

received as a savior."
victory is not a matter for great rejoicing and that you can't be
described: Prince Murat et tout le tremblement... You see that your
showed me a letter in which the parade of the French in Vienna was fully
"Count Lichtenfels was here this morning," Bilibin continued, "and

the full significance of the words he heard.
especially after having dined, Bolkonski felt that he could not take in
After the fatigues and impressions of the journey, his reception, and

dear Count Vrbna, goes to him for orders."
"Not only occupied, but Bonaparte is at Schonbrunn, and the count, our

"What? Occupied? Vienna occupied?"

army!"
of events? It's too late now when Vienna is occupied by the French
Karl gained a victory, what effect would that have on the general course
Besides, suppose you did gain a brilliant victory, if even the Archduke
have been conceived. It's as if it had been done on purpose, on purpose.
us on the victory! Admit that more irritating news than yours could not
all loved, Schmidt, you expose to a bullet, and then you congratulate
with us, but heaven help you and your capital!' The one general whom we
You abandon Vienna, give up its defense--as much as to say: 'Heaven is
Archduke Karl does nothing, the Archduke Ferdinand disgraces himself.
cannon! But this sort of thing seems done on purpose to vex us. The
of Bonaparte's, that will be another story and we'll fire off some
good as another, as you know) and even if it is only over a fire brigade
news of a victory by the Archduke Karl or Ferdinand (one archduke's as
do we, I mean the Austrian court, care for your victories? Bring us nice
Russia, for the Orthodox Greek faith! All that is beautiful, but what
"That's just it, my dear fellow. You see it's hurrah for the Tsar, for

and the Minister of War does not even care to hear the details."
real victory, destroying the spell of the invincibility of the French,
of life and make blunder after blunder. Kutuzov alone at last gains a
a whole army, the Archduke Ferdinand and the Archduke Karl give no signs
here beyond my feeble intelligence, but I can't make it out. Mack loses
confess I do not understand: perhaps there are diplomatic subtleties
"It is now my turn to ask you 'why?' mon cher," said Bolkonski. "I

forehead.
He looked straight at Prince Andrew and suddenly unwrinkled his

we have no Prater here..."
Franz a thaler, or let him go with his Liebchen to the Prater... True,
Russian Embassy, do not feel any need in token of my joy to give my
is not much delighted by your victory. Even I, a poor secretary of the
of War but also his Most August Majesty the Emperor and King Francis
didn't you capture him? So don't be surprised if not only the Minister
marshals, sitting on a sofa by the fire! That is true, but still why
"I know," interrupted Bilibin, "you're thinking it's very easy to take

the same tone.
methods that he had better leave Genoa alone?" retorted Prince Andrew in
"Why did you not succeed in impressing on Bonaparte by diplomatic

ought to have been there at seven in the morning."
been there at seven in the morning," returned Bilibin with a smile. "You
"And why didn't you do it at seven in the morning? You ought to have

in the morning but had not reached it by five in the afternoon."
a parade. We had expected, as I told you, to get at their rear by seven
"Because not everything happens as one expects or with the smoothness of

"Why didn't you capture one, just one, marshal for us?"

boasting that it was a little better than at Ulm..."
"But seriously," said Prince Andrew, "we can at any rate say without

Where's the victory?"
and his one division, and even then Mortier slips through your fingers!
"Come now! You with all your forces fall on the unfortunate Mortier

Russian on which he wished to put a contemptuous emphasis.
He went on talking in this way in French, uttering only those words in


     particularly victorious."
     Russian army, I must say that your victory was not
     * "But my dear fellow, with all my respect for the Orthodox


n'est pas des plus victorieuses." *
je professe pour the Orthodox Russian army, j'avoue que votre victoire
and puckering the skin above his left eye, "malgre la haute estime que
"Cependant, mon cher," he remarked, examining his nails from a distance

Bilibin smiled and the wrinkles on his face disappeared.

skittles," said he in conclusion.
"They received me and my news as one receives a dog in a game of

engagement and his reception by the Minister of War.
Bolkonski, very modestly without once mentioning himself, described the

"Well, now tell me about your exploits," said he.

twinkled and looked out straight.
deep wrinkles would crease his cheeks. His small, deep-set eyes always
and his eyebrows were lifted, then his eyebrows would descend and
of expression on his face. Now his forehead would pucker into deep folds
Russian bath. The movement of these wrinkles formed the principal play
looked as clean and well washed as the tips of one's fingers after a
His thin, worn, sallow face was covered with deep wrinkles, which always

considered important.
in the Viennese drawing rooms and often had an influence on matters
drawing room. And, in fact, Bilibin's witticisms were hawked about
that insignificant society people might carry them from drawing room to
inner laboratory of his mind in a portable form as if intentionally, so
finished phrases of general interest. These sayings were prepared in the
possible. His conversation was always sprinkled with wittily original,
something striking and took part in a conversation only when that was
elegantly witty. In society he always awaited an opportunity to say
Bilibin liked conversation as he liked work, only when it could be made

his skill in dealing and conversing with those in the highest spheres.
Bilibin's services were valued not only for what he wrote, but also for
circular, memorandum, or report, skillfully, pointedly, and elegantly.
might be he did not care, but it gave him great pleasure to prepare a
but the question "How?" that interested him. What the diplomatic matter
whatever the import of his work. It was not the question "What for?"
sometimes spend a whole night at his writing table. He worked well
who, liking work, knew how to do it, and despite his indolence would
avoid doing certain things, and speak French. He was one of those,
diplomats who are esteemed because they have certain negative qualities,
in Vienna knew him and valued him. He was not one of those many
important post in Vienna. Both the foreign minister and our ambassador
of sixteen, had been in Paris and Copenhagen, and now held a rather
no longer a young diplomat, as he had entered the service at the age
promise of rising in his diplomatic career. He still a young man but
in the military profession, so to an even greater extent Bilibin gave
Just as Prince Andrew was a young man who gave promise of rising high
had become more intimate when Prince Andrew was in Vienna with Kutuzov.
Prince Andrew. They had known each other previously in Petersburg, but
Bilibin was a man of thirty-five, a bachelor, and of the same circle as

then particularly strong.
supposed, share the general Russian antipathy to the Austrians which was
(for they were speaking French) at least with a Russian who would, he
after his reception by the Austrians, to speak if not in Russian
as he had been accustomed to from childhood. Besides it was pleasant,
Andrew felt a pleasant sense of repose among luxurious surroundings such
all the comforts of cleanliness and all the refinements of life, Prince
After his journey and the campaign during which he had been deprived of

settled down comfortably beside the fire.
luxurious study and sat down to the dinner prepared for him. Bilibin
After washing and dressing, Prince Andrew came into the diplomat's

here ill, as you see."
in. "So you're a messenger of victory, eh? Splendid! And I am sitting
things in my bedroom," said he to the servant who was ushering Bolkonski
Bilibin as he came out to meet Prince Andrew. "Franz, put the prince's
"Ah, my dear prince! I could not have a more welcome visitor," said

his in the diplomatic service.
Prince Andrew stayed at Brunn with Bilibin, a Russian acquaintance of


CHAPTER X





the memory of a remote event long past.
whole tenor of his thoughts instantaneously changed; the battle seemed
indifferent hands of the Minister of War and the polite adjutant. The
and happiness the victory had afforded him had been now left in the
When Prince Andrew left the palace he felt that all the interest

you," he added, bowing his head.
"Au revoir! Thank you very much. His Majesty will probably desire to see

reappeared.
The stupid smile, which had left his face while he was speaking,

However, I will let you know."
you! You must have a rest. Be at the levee tomorrow after the parade.
His Majesty will no doubt wish to see you, but not today. I thank
news, though Schmidt's death is a heavy price to pay for the victory.
not captured." Again he pondered. "I am very glad you have brought good
"Ah what a calamity! You say the affair was decisive? But Mortier is

at Prince Andrew, evidently considering something.
Having glanced through the dispatch he laid it on the table and looked

What a calamity!"
"Oh, my God! My God! Schmidt!" he exclaimed in German. "What a calamity!

with a mournful expression.
He took the dispatch which was addressed to him and began to read it

There has been an encounter with Mortier? A victory? It was high time!"
"From General Field Marshal Kutuzov?" he asked. "I hope it is good news?

continually receiving many petitioners one after another.
does not even attempt to hide its artificiality) of a man who is
habitual to him. His face took on the stupid artificial smile (which
expression on his face changed in a way evidently deliberate and
head, but the instant he turned to Prince Andrew the firm, intelligent
evenly, and then raised his head. He had an intellectual and distinctive
thought. The minister drew the remaining papers together, arranged them
impression. "But that is a matter of perfect indifference to me," he
concerned with, or he wanted to give the Russian special messenger that
the Minister of War less than any of the other matters he was
Prince Andrew felt that either the actions of Kutuzov's army interested

papers and still taking no notice of the special messenger.
"Take this and deliver it," said he to his adjutant, handing him the

raising his eyes at the opening of the door and the sound of footsteps.
bald head with its gray temples. He went on reading to the end, without
of his arrival. A wax candle stood at each side of the minister's bent
notes on them, and for the first two or three minutes taking no notice
minister seated at a large table reading some papers and making pencil
deliberate steps. This feeling of disdain was heightened when he saw the
disdainfully, he entered the room of the Minister of War with peculiarly
probably think it easy to gain victories!" he thought. His eyes narrowed
adjutant and the minister. "Away from the smell of powder, they
suggested to him a point of view which gave him a right to despise the
one of disdain which was quite uncalled for. His fertile mind instantly
without his noticing it the feeling of offense immediately turned into
approached the door of the minister's room. He felt offended, and
Prince Andrew's joyous feeling was considerably weakened as he

attempt at familiarity on the part of the Russian messenger.
adjutant by his elaborate courtesy appeared to wish to ward off any
corridor to the cabinet where the Minister of War was at work. The
with particular courtesy ushered Prince Andrew before him along a
in to the Minister of War. Five minutes later he returned and bowing
The adjutant on duty, meeting Prince Andrew, asked him to wait, and went

Minister of War."
the adjutant on duty," said the official. "He will conduct you to the
"To the right from the corridor, Euer Hochgeboren! There you will find

learning that he was a special messenger led him to another entrance.
to the palace, however, an official came running out to meet him, and
expected to be at once presented to the Emperor. At the chief entrance
questions that might be put to him and the answers he would give. He
stating them to the Emperor Francis. He vividly imagined the casual
dim, but definite and in the concise form in which he imagined himself
rapidity. He again vividly recalled the details of the battle, no longer
and his thoughts followed one another with extraordinary clearness and
alert than he had done the day before. Only his eyes gleamed feverishly
Prince Andrew when he drove up to the palace felt even more vigorous and
soldier after camp life. Despite his rapid journey and sleepless night,
atmosphere of a large and active town which is always so attractive to a
lights of shops, houses, and street lamps, fine carriages, and all that
streets of Brunn and found himself surrounded by high buildings, the
It was already quite dark when Prince Andrew rattled over the paved

"Good news!... Go on!" he shouted to the driver, and they galloped on.

conversation.
"What news, sir?" asked the officer, evidently anxious to start a

plenty to do still."
"Get well soon, lads!" he continued, turning to the soldiers. "There's

"That's for them all," he said to the officer who came up.

soldier three gold pieces.
answered the soldier. Prince Andrew took out his purse and gave the
action they had been wounded. "Day before yesterday, on the Danube,"
Prince Andrew told his driver to stop, and asked a soldier in what

hurrying past them.
silently, with the languid interest of sick children, at the envoy
words), others were eating bread; the more severely wounded looked
jolted over the stony road. Some of them were talking (he heard Russian
the long German carts six or more pale, dirty, bandaged men were being
cart, shouting and scolding a soldier with coarse abuse. In each of
The Russian officer in charge of the transport lolled back in the front
At one of the post stations he overtook a convoy of Russian wounded.

of the road were forests of different kinds, fields, and villages.
thawing in the sunshine, the horses galloped quickly, and on both sides
starry night was followed by a bright cheerful morning. The snow was
during the battle, and feeling reassured he dozed off.... The dark
again recalled all the details of the victory and his own calm courage
this was not so but that on the contrary the French had run away. He
quickly roused himself with a feeling of joy, as if learning afresh that
the Russians were running away and that he himself was killed, but he
wheels and the sensation of victory. Then he began to imagine that
as he closed his eyes his ears seemed filled with the rattle of the
man who has at length begun to attain a long-desired happiness. As soon
Andrew was galloping along in a post chaise enjoying the feelings of a
given him by the commander in chief and his fellow officers, Prince
impression his news of a victory would create, or recalling the send-off
impressions of the recent battle, picturing pleasantly to himself the
had fallen the previous day--the day of the battle. Reviewing his
The night was dark but starry, the road showed black in the snow that

meant not only a reward but an important step toward promotion.
he was sent immediately with a special dispatch to Brunn. To be so sent
Krems excited but not weary, with dispatches from Dokhturov to Kutuzov,
very muscular men, and on the night of the battle, having arrived at
build Prince Andrew could endure physical fatigue far better than many
threatened by the French) but at Brunn. Despite his apparently delicate
this victory to the Austrian court, now no longer at Vienna (which was
of the commander in chief's special favor he was sent with the news of
wounded under him and his own arm slightly grazed by a bullet. As a mark
General Schmidt, who was killed in the action. His horse had been
Prince Andrew during the battle had been in attendance on the Austrian

the retreat of the frightened Bonaparte.
of columns from Russia, of some victory gained by the Austrians, and of
most joyful though erroneous rumors were rife of the imaginary approach
the army considerably. Throughout the whole army and at headquarters
stand made at Krems and the victory over Mortier raised the spirits of
hospitals could no longer accommodate all the sick and wounded, yet the
though the big hospitals and the houses in Krems converted into military
in which Kutuzov entrusted them to the humanity of the enemy; and
wounded had been abandoned on the other side of the Danube with a letter
killed, wounded, sick, and stragglers; though a number of sick and
were ill-clad, exhausted, and had lost a third of their number in
not only held the field but had repulsed the French. Though the troops
fortnight's retreat, the Russian troops had halted and after a fight had
banners, cannon, and two enemy generals. For the first time, after a
and broke it up. In this action for the first time trophies were taken:
thirtieth he attacked Mortier's division, which was on the left bank,
with the river between himself and the main body of the French. On the
left bank of the Danube and took up a position for the first time
On the twenty-eighth of October Kutuzov with his army crossed to the

advancing from Russia, without losing his army as Mack had done at Ulm.
aim remaining for him was to effect a junction with the forces that were
Vienna by the Austrian Hofkriegsrath, the sole and almost unattainable
modern science of strategics, had been handed to Kutuzov when he was in
offensive, the plan of which, carefully prepared in accord with the
The defense of Vienna was no longer to be thought of. Instead of an
and Kutuzov was left with only his own weak and exhausted forces.
had joined Kutuzov at Braunau now separated from the Russian army,
rapid retreat. Austrian troops that had escaped capture at Ulm and
Russians fought, the only consequence of these actions was a yet more
courage and endurance--acknowledged even by the enemy--with which the
There had been actions at Lambach, Amstetten, and Melk; but despite the
necessary to enable it to retreat without losing its heavy equipment.
overtaken by the enemy and fighting rearguard actions only as far as
by Kutuzov was hurriedly retreating along the Danube, stopping where
been foreseen, the Russian army of thirty-five thousand men commanded
and compelled to act under conditions of war unlike anything that had
losing confidence in its allies, suffering from shortness of supplies,
of Bonaparte, encountering a population that was unfriendly to it,
Pursued by the French army of a hundred thousand men under the command


CHAPTER IX





pronouncing the phrase "knocked out" with ringing distinctness.
and one knocked out," he added, unable to restrain a happy smile, and
"A trifle," said the colonel in his bass voice: "two hussars wounded,

"And if he asks about the losses?"

triumphantly and gaily.
"Inform the prince that I the bridge fired!" said the colonel

promoted to a sublieutenancy."
"Here's something for you to report," said Zherkov. "See if I don't get

the cadet under fire for the first time had experienced.
true. No one had taken any notice, for everyone knew the sensation which
"Well, it seems that no one has noticed," thought Rostov. And this was

the colonel, Nesvitski, Zherkov, and the officer from the suite.
And Denisov rode up to a group that had stopped near Rostov, composed of

a target."
But this sort of thing is the very devil, with them shooting at you like
it's nasty work! An attack's pleasant work! Hacking away at the dogs!
"Yes and no mistake!" cried Denisov. "You worked like wegular bwicks and

"Was that grapeshot?" he asked Denisov.

from the orderly and began to mount.
sighing deeply he took Rook, his horse, which stood resting one foot,
"It's all over; but I am a coward--yes, a coward!" thought Rostov, and

his ear.
"Well, fwiend? So you've smelt powdah!" shouted Vaska Denisov just above

sounded louder and calmer, the stretchers disappeared from sight.
The hussars ran back to the men who held their horses; their voices

me!" Rostov whispered.
"O Lord God! Thou who art in that heaven, save, forgive, and protect

feeling of sickening agitation.
the stretchers, and love of the sun and of life, all merged into one
stretchers came into view before Rostov. And the fear of death and of
At that instant the sun began to hide behind the clouds, and other

the sun, this water, that gorge!..."
here above me and around... Another instant and I shall never again see
all running back somewhere, and I shall run with them, and it, death, is
uncertainty and hurry... There--they are shouting again, and again are
is so much happiness; but here... groans, suffering, fear, and this
were there," thought Rostov. "In myself alone and in that sunshine there
and happiness... "I should wish for nothing else, nothing, if only I
the pine forests veiled in the mist of their summits... There was peace
blue mountains beyond the river, the nunnery, the mysterious gorges, and
waters of the distant Danube shone. And fairer still were the faraway
How bright and glorious was the setting sun! With what soft glitter the
sun. How beautiful the sky looked; how blue, how calm, and how deep!
into the distance, at the waters of the Danube, at the sky, and at the
Nicholas Rostov turned away and, as if searching for something, gazed

he was lifted and laid on the stretcher.
"Oooh! For Christ's sake let me alone!" cried the wounded man, but still

hussar and began lifting him.
the others. Again someone shouted, "Stretchers!" Four men seized the
to him fell against the rails with a groan. Rostov ran up to him with
rattle on the bridge as if nuts were being spilt, and the hussar nearest
other soldiers. He stood looking about him, when suddenly he heard a
bridge because he had not brought any burning straw with him like the
had always imagined battles to himself), nor could he help to fire the
bridge not knowing what to do. There was no one to hew down (as he
Rostov, absorbed by his relations with Bogdanich, had paused on the

knocked three of them over.
high, but the last round fell in the midst of a group of hussars and
got back to their horses. Two were misdirected and the shot went too
The French had time to fire three rounds of grapeshot before the hussars

someone to fire at.
longer to hinder them but because the guns were trained and there was
setting it on fire and the French batteries were now firing at them, no
as a dense cloud of smoke arose from it. The hussars had succeeded in
bridge. But this time Nesvitski could not see what was happening there,
but at irregular intervals, and grapeshot cracked and rattled onto the
uniforms advanced toward the bridge at a run. Smoke appeared again
The French guns were hastily reloaded. The infantry in their blue

"If I were Tsar I would never go to war," said Nesvitski, turning away.

"Two, I think."

the suite by the arm. "Look! A man has fallen! Fallen, fallen!"
"Oh! Oh!" groaned Nesvitski as if in fierce pain, seizing the officer of

reports one after another, and a third.
moment when the first report was heard a fourth was seen. Then two
appeared, then a second and a third almost simultaneously, and at the
On the French side, amid the groups with cannon, a cloud of smoke

and hurriedly removed.
He pointed to the French guns, the limbers of which were being detached

"There now!" said the officer of the suite, "that's grapeshot."

things are done."
recommended for honors and he may get a ribbon. Our Bogdanich knows how
and ribbon? But now, even if they do get peppered, the squadron may be
at things! Send two men? And who then would give us the Vladimir medal
was speaking in jest or in earnest. "Ah, your excellency! How you look
but still with that naive air that made it impossible to know whether he
"Ah, your excellency," put in Zherkov, his eyes fixed on the hussars,

the job just as well."
"True enough," answered Nesvitski; "two smart fellows could have done

"He shouldn't have taken so many men," said the officer of the suite.

grapeshot range now."
"Ugh. The hussars will get it hot!" said Nesvitski; "they are within

bayonets and guns.
light and the blue tunics advancing from the other side with their
sinking heart--watching the bridge and the hussars in the bright evening
on the high ground above the bridge involuntarily asked himself with a
and wipe them out?" These were the questions each man of the troops
there and fire the bridge or will the French get within grapeshot range
"Will they burn the bridge or not? Who'll get there first? Will they get

and groups with horses, easily recognizable as artillery.
approaching in the distance from the opposite side--the blue uniforms
riding breeches, who were swarming near the bridge, and then at what was
men with yellow shakos, dark-green jackets braided with cord, and blue
together out of range of the shots, watching, now the small group of
Meanwhile Nesvitski, Zherkov, and the officer of the suite were standing


his saddle.
"Oh, every bullet has its billet," answered Vaska Denisov, turning in

"Why run risks, Captain? You should dismount," he said.

his courage, had ridden on to the planks of the bridge:
back, Cadet!" he cried angrily; and turning to Denisov, who, showing off
"Who's that running on the middle of the bridge? To the right! Come

to him:
better. But Bogdanich, without looking at or recognizing Rostov, shouted
was about to run on, thinking that the farther he went to the front the
Rostov wiping his muddy hands on his breeches looked at his enemy and

triumphant, cheerful face.
having ridden ahead, had pulled up his horse near the bridge, with a
"At boss zides, Captain," he heard the voice of the colonel, who,

and fell on his hands. The others outstripped him.
looking at the ground, he came on some sticky, trodden mud, stumbled,
trying only to be ahead of the others; but just at the bridge, not
Rostov did not think what this call for stretchers meant; he ran on,

"Stretchers!" shouted someone behind him.

and their sabers clattering.
saw nothing but the hussars running all around him, their spurs catching
thud. Denisov rode past him, leaning back and shouting something. Rostov
an orderly's charge, and he felt the blood rush to his heart with a
that his heart stood still. His hand trembled as he gave his horse into
had no time. He was afraid of falling behind the hussars, so much afraid
were crossing themselves. Rostov no longer looked at the colonel, he
hussars hastily dismounted, not knowing what they were to do. The men
Their sabers catching in the bridles and their spurs jingling, the

"Look sharp! Look sharp!" several voices repeated around him.

command.
he always did when at the front, solemn and stern. Then came the word of
conjecture, but the colonel did not once glance at Rostov, and looked as
the colonel, closely--to find in his face confirmation of his own
appeared that they had worn when under fire. Rostov watched his enemy,
Again on all the bright faces of the squadron the serious expression

him see whether I am a coward!" he thought.
test me!" His heart contracted and the blood rushed to his face. "Let
"There, it's just as I thought," said Rostov to himself. "He wishes to

the bridge.
squadron, that in which Rostov was serving under Denisov, to return to
for everything, the colonel moved forward and ordered the second
Striking his horse with his long muscular legs as if it were to blame

do the right thing.
that in spite of all the unpleasantness he had to endure he would still
"I will the bridge fire," he said in a solemn tone as if to announce

staff officer, and at Zherkov, and he frowned.
The colonel looked silently at the officer of the suite, at the stout

the enemy will bring up his guns to use grapeshot."
"Colonel," interrupted the officer of the suite, "You must be quick or

offended tone.
"You were saying, Mr. Staff Officer..." continued the colonel in an

"On the same business. But you are damp! Let me wring you out!"

"How did you get here?" said he, turning to Zherkov.
"Ah, that's always the way!" said Nesvitski with a wave of the hand.

could not know by the holy spirit!"
to obey. You said the bridge would be burned, but who would it burn, I
burn the bridge! I know the service, and it is my habit orders strictly
"I am not your 'dear sir,' Mr. Staff Officer, and you did not tell me to

in position?"
telling you to fire the bridge, when inflammable material had been put
smoothing his hair wet with perspiration with his plump hand, "wasn't I
"But, my dear sir," said Nesvitski as he drew up, taking off his cap and

nothing about firing it."
"You spoke to me of inflammable material," said he, "but you said

The colonel deliberately stopped the regiment and turned to Nesvitski.

themselves over there and one can't make anything out."
the bridge, and now someone has gone and blundered; they are all beside
"How's this, Colonel?" he shouted as he approached. "I told you to fire

weight.
came galloping up on a Cossack horse that could scarcely carry his
colonel of hussars with the same order. After him the stout Nesvitski
Zherkov was followed by an officer of the suite who rode up to the

must return quickly and fire the bridge.'"
"but the prince told me to 'go and tell the colonel that the hussars
"I don't myself know 'to who,'" replied the cornet in a serious tone,

"An order to who?" asked the colonel morosely.

and fire the bridge."
gravity and glancing round at his comrades, "there is an order to stop
"Colonel," he said, addressing Rostov's enemy with an air of gloomy

to his former chief with an order from the commander of the rear guard.
attaching himself as an orderly officer to Prince Bagration. He now came
get more rewards by doing nothing on the staff, and had succeeded in
saying he was not such a fool as to slave at the front when he could
dismissal from headquarters Zherkov had not remained in the regiment,
had but recently left their regiment, rode up to the colonel. After his
The high-shouldered figure of Zherkov, familiar to the Pavlograds as he

extend the hand of reconciliation.
Bogdanich would come up to him as he lay wounded and would magnanimously
just to punish him--Rostov. Then he imagined how, after the attack,
he thought that his enemy would send the squadron on a desperate attack
him that Bogdanich rode so near in order to show him his courage. Next
so he drew himself up and looked around him merrily; then it seemed to
notice him, and that his whole aim now was to test the cadet's courage,
neck. It seemed to Rostov that Bogdanich was only pretending not to
colonel's athletic back, his nape covered with light hair, and his red
admitted that he had been to blame, did not lift his eyes from the
that he was at the front and in the power of a man toward whom he now
first time since their encounter concerning Telyanin. Rostov, feeling
without taking any notice of him although they were now meeting for the
up to Denisov's squadron and rode at a footpace not far from Rostov,
hill one after the other. Their colonel, Karl Bogdanich Schubert, came
The two Pavlograd squadrons, having crossed the bridge, retired up the

of the river.
line followed them across and the last Cossacks quitted the farther side
having lost a single man. The second squadron that had been in the front
The squadron crossed the bridge and drew out of range of fire without

back."
here? Don't you see the skirmishers are retreating? Lead the squadron
face as if driving off a troublesome fly. "And why are you stopping
"Attack indeed!" said the colonel in a bored voice, puckering up his

"Your excellency! Let us attack them! I'll dwive them off."

galloped up to him.
perfectly happy. Just then the commander appeared on the bridge. Denisov
And he smiled approvingly, evidently pleased with the cadet. Rostov felt

last."
Wostov," he cried noticing the cadet's bright face, "you've got it at
"The devil only knows what they're about!" muttered Denisov. "Ah,

You'll see--we shall retire."
"Well, what about it?" said he to Denisov. "It won't come to a fight.

eyes were brighter than usual.
him. His face with its long mustache was serious as always, only his
staff captain on his broad-backed, steady mare came at a walk to meet
voice to the men to look to their pistols. He rode up to Kirsten. The
he galloped to the other flank of the squadron and shouted in a hoarse
horse, Bedouin, and sitting as though falling backwards in the saddle,
they drink, pressing his spurs mercilessly into the sides of his good
only redder than usual. With his shaggy head thrown back like birds when
especially toward evening when he had emptied his second bottle; he was
he held the hilt of his naked saber, looked just as it usually did,
sturdy figure with the sinewy hairy hand and stumpy fingers in which
The black, hairy, snub-nosed face of Vaska Denisov, and his whole short

his horse in front of the squadron.
me," cried Denisov who, unable to keep still on one spot, kept turning
"Who's that curtseying there? Cadet Miwonov! That's not wight! Look at

something new and stern showed round the mouth.
under fire. But despite himself, on his face too that same indication of
clear, bright expression, as if asking them to notice how calmly he sat
sure he will distinguish himself. He was glancing at everyone with a
called up before a large audience for an examination in which he feels
handsome horse despite its game leg--had the happy air of a schoolboy
time a ball flew past. Rostov on the left flank, mounted on his Rook--a
soldiers as if threatening to punish them. Cadet Mironov ducked every
around chin and mouth. The quartermaster frowned, looking at the
showed one common expression of conflict, irritation, and excitement,
comrades' impression. Every face, from Denisov's to that of the bugler,
without turning their heads glanced at one another, curious to see their
ball flew past, rose in the stirrups and sank back again. The soldiers
rows of faces so alike yet so different, holding its breath while the
of each shot, as at the word of command, the whole squadron with its
somewhere beyond them. The hussars did not look round, but at the sound
with rapid rhythmic whistle flew over the heads of the horsemen and fell
ball flew past. Evidently they were firing at the hussars, but the balls
commander, awaiting the word of command. A second and a third cannon
squadron. All were looking at the enemy in front and at the squadron
hussars began carefully aligning their horses. Silence fell on the whole
officers who had been standing together rode off to their places. The
and a ball flew whistling over the heads of the hussar squadron. The
On the high ground where the enemy was, the smoke of a cannon rose,

takes place at such moments.
particular glamour and glad keenness of impression to everything that
anyone who comes in sight of the enemy, and that feeling gives a
excitedly animated and healthy men." So thinks, or at any rate feels,
strong, healthy, cheerful, and excited, and are surrounded by other such
inevitably have to learn what lies the other side of death. But you are
be crossed and you will have to find out what is there, just as you will
and yet long to cross that line, and know that sooner or later it must
roof lit up by the sun? No one knows, but one wants to know. You fear
what is there? Who is there?--there beyond that field, that tree, that
the living from the dead lies uncertainty, suffering, and death. And
"One step beyond that boundary line which resembles the line dividing

two hostile armies was all the more clearly felt.
stern, threatening, inaccessible, and intangible line which separates
yards was all that separated them. The enemy ceased firing, and that
except a few scattered skirmishers. An empty space of some seven hundred
from the hill. There was no one now between the squadron and the enemy
intervals the bugle calls and the shouts of the enemy could be heard
upon the Danube and the dark hills around it. It was calm, and at
weather had cleared again since noon and the sun was descending brightly
appearing on the skyline, which they knew to be the enemy's troops. The
was there on the hilltop, and kept constantly looking at the patches
other things and to look in other directions, thought only of what
the officers and men of Denisov's squadron, though they tried to talk of
French. A group of Cossack scouts retired down the hill at a trot. All
ground, artillery and troops in blue uniform were seen. These were the
Cossack scouts were moving. Suddenly on the road at the top of the high
At the foot of the hill lay wasteland over which a few groups of our
river flowed was formed by the rising ground only half a mile away.
the bridge, for the horizon as seen from the valley through which the
be seen from the hill on the opposite bank but was not yet visible from
remained on the farther side of the bridge facing the enemy, who could
battalion came onto the bridge. Only Denisov's squadron of hussars
the baggage wagons had all crossed, the crush was less, and the last
together as they approached it as if passing through a funnel. At last
The last of the infantry hurriedly crossed the bridge, squeezing


CHAPTER VIII





hussar shouted back.
"Take a stick between your legs, that'll suit you for a horse!" the

weight of his knapsack.
said a corporal, chaffing a thin little soldier who bent under the
"There now, Zikin, they ought to put you on a horse. You'd look fine,"

than a man."
off his face with his sleeve. "Perched up there, you're more like a bird
cords would soon get a bit rubbed," said an infantryman, wiping the mud
"I'd like to put you on a two days' march with a knapsack! Your fine

horse had splashed mud over some foot soldiers.
"Don't kick up the dust, you infantry!" jested an hussar whose prancing

"What good are they? They're led about just for show!" remarked another.

"Smart lads! Only fit for a fair!" said one.

regular order.
encounter one another at the clean, smart hussars who moved past them in
estrangement, and ridicule with which troops of different arms usually
trampled mud and gazed with that particular feeling of ill-will,
The infantry who had been stopped crowded near the bridge in the

on his side of it.
front and men four abreast, spread across the bridge and began to emerge
resounded on the planks of the bridge, and the squadron, officers in
nearer. Then the clang of hoofs, as of several horses galloping,
ground, eager to rejoin its fellows, he watched his squadron draw
Carelessly holding in his stallion that was neighing and pawing the
Having cleared the way Denisov stopped at the end of the bridge.

and having done this he rode back.
bridge Nesvitski found the colonel to whom he had to deliver the order,
to the farther side of the bridge and stopped the infantry. Beside the
frantically, had such an effect that they managed to squeeze through
the determination of Denisov who flourished his sword and shouted
The imposing figure of Nesvitski followed by his Cossack, and

scented myself."
"Of course. I'm going into action! I've shaved, bwushed my teeth, and

a smell of perfume, and put it to Nesvitski's nose.
Denisov smiled, took out of his sabretache a handkerchief that diffused

cloak and saddlecloth.
"What a dandy you are today!" said Nesvitski, looking at Denisov's new

let's fight. But the devil knows what this is."
keep dwagging the wegiment to and fwo all day. If they mean to fight,
"They don't even give one time to dwink!" answered Vaska Denisov. "They

ridden up to him.
"How's it you're not drunk today?" said Nesvitski when the other had

Denisov joined Nesvitski.
The soldiers crowded against one another with terrified faces, and

flourishing it.
saber!" he shouted, actually drawing his saber from its scabbard and
us pass!... Stop there, you devil with the cart! I'll hack you with my
is this? They're like sheep! Just like sheep! Out of the way!... Let
apparently ready to jump over the railings had his rider let him. "What
from his bit, tramping the planks of the bridge with his hoofs, and
its ears as the bayonets touched it, and snorted, spurting white foam
teeth fiercely and spurring his black thoroughbred Arab, which twitched
"The squadwon can't pass," shouted Vaska Denisov, showing his white

"Ah, Vaska!" joyfully replied Nesvitski. "What's up with you?"

bare hand as red as his face.
whites glittering and rolling as he waved his sheathed saber in a small
evidently in a fit of rage, his coal-black eyes with their bloodshot
"Tell these devils, these fiends, to let me pass!" shouted Denisov

his shoulder.
his cap on the back of his black head and a cloak hanging jauntily over
the living mass of moving infantry, Vaska Denisov, red and shaggy, with
Nesvitski looked round and saw, some fifteen paces away but separated by

him.
"Nesvitski, Nesvitski! you numskull!" came a hoarse voice from behind

harder from behind.
nearest him were not to blame for they were themselves pressed still
for him, but again pressed on him so that they jammed his leg, and those
continually he moved on. The soldiers squeezed themselves to make way
With great difficulty he managed to get to his horse, and shouting

way! Make way!"
"Hey, Cossack, my horse!" he said. "Now, then, you there! get out of the

The crowd moved on again. Nesvitski realized that it was a cannon ball.

"Encouraging us to get along quicker," said another uneasily.

round at the sound.
"Just see where it carries to!" a soldier near by said sternly, looking

something big, that splashed into the water.
suddenly heard a sound new to him, of something swiftly approaching...
Looking down at the waters of the Enns under the bridge, Nesvitski

one another, and all pressed toward the exit from the bridge.
too"--different voices were saying in the crowd, as the men looked at
be worse if he fires the bridge. See, here's an officer jammed in
"Where are you shoving to? Devil take you! Can't you wait? It'll
"And why are they stopping? There's no proper order!" said the soldiers.

crowd had to wait.
a convoy wagon became restive at the end of the bridge, and the whole
kind of talk, and at last all stopped. As often happens, the horses of
they had gone by, the same stream of soldiers followed, with the same
bridge did not take his eyes off the women till they had passed. When
The girl smiled and took it. Nesvitski like the rest of the men on the

"Take it if you like," said the officer, giving the girl an apple.

The German closed his eyes, signifying that he did not understand.

apple, also half smiling as he looked at the handsome girl.
"Where are you going?" asked an infantry officer who was eating an

"I have seen as much before now, mate!"

"There, Fedotov, you should be quartered on them!"

"See how smart she's made herself! Oh, the devils!"

angry and frightened, strode energetically along with downcast eyes.
"Sell me the missis," said another soldier, addressing the German, who,

"Just see, the German sausage is making tracks, too!"

almost the same smile, expressing unseemly thoughts about the women.
all the soldiers' remarks related to the two young ones. Every face bore
turned toward the women, and while the vehicle was passing at foot pace
allowed to pass by special permission. The eyes of all the soldiers
were sitting on some feather beds. Evidently these fugitives were
baby, an old woman, and a healthy German girl with bright red cheeks
a large udder was attached to the cart behind. A woman with an unweaned
seemed loaded with a whole houseful of effects. A fine brindled cow with
before. It was a German cart with a pair of horses led by a German, and
That one also passed. Then followed a cart unlike any that had gone

bragging of having been frightened.
of fright. I did, 'pon my word, I got that frightened!" said he, as if
an enormous mouth, hardly refraining from laughing, "I felt like dying
"As it flies past me, Daddy, the ball I mean," said a young soldier with

be killed," a sergeant was saying angrily and reproachfully.
"Bah! How they scurry. He just sends a ball and they think they'll all

struck on the teeth, or what the ham had to do with it.
And they, too, passed on, so that Nesvitski did not learn who had been
"Yes, the ham was just delicious..." answered another with a loud laugh.

with a wide swing of his arm.
of his gun..." a soldier whose greatcoat was well tucked up said gaily,
"And then, old fellow, he gives him one in the teeth with the butt end

had evidently been drinking.
And he also passed on with the wagon. Then came some merry soldiers who

running behind the cart and fumbling in the back of it.
"Where the devil have the leg bands been shoved to?" said an orderly,

That soldier passed on, and after him came another sitting on a cart.

yourself."
said the old soldier dismally to a comrade, "you'll forget to scratch
"If he" (he meant the enemy) "begins popping at the bridge now,"

a wink, and passed on followed by another, an old man.
"A million all but one!" replied a waggish soldier in a torn coat, with

many more of you to come?"
"It's as if a dam had burst," said the Cossack hopelessly. "Are there

moved across the bridge.
baggage wagon, piled high, leather covered, and hemmed in on all sides,
sometimes like a log floating down the river, an officers' or company's
an orderly, or a townsman was carried through the waves of infantry; and
sometimes like a chip of wood whirling in the river, an hussar on foot,
a type of face different from that of the men, squeezed his way along;
white foam on the waves of the Enns, an officer, in a cloak and with
bridge. Sometimes through the monotonous waves of men, like a fleck of
feet that moved through the sticky mud that covered the planks of the
broad cheekbones, sunken cheeks, and listless tired expressions, and
knapsacks, bayonets, long muskets, and, under the shakos, faces with
uniform living waves of soldiers, shoulder straps, covered shakos,
the bridge chased each other along. Looking on the bridge he saw equally
little waves of the Enns, which rippling and eddying round the piles of
mass. Looking down over the rails Prince Nesvitski saw the rapid, noisy
shoulder, their bayonets interlocking, moved over the bridge in a dense
left! Wait a bit." But the soldiers, crowded together shoulder to
the soldiers who were blocking his way. "Hi there, boys! Keep to the
But the convoyman took no notice of the word "general" and shouted at

can't wait a moment! Don't you see the general wants to pass?"
crowded together close to his wheels and his horses. "What a fellow! You
soldier with a wagon, who was pressing onto the infantrymen who were
"What a fine fellow you are, friend!" said the Cossack to a convoy

pressed him against the railings, and all he could do was to smile.
Nesvitski tried to move on, soldiers and carts pushed him back again and
steps behind him holding two horses by their bridles. Each time Prince
railings. He looked back laughing to the Cossack who stood a few
alighted from his horse and whose big body was jammed against the
there was a crush. Halfway across stood Prince Nesvitski, who had
Two of the enemy's shots had already flown across the bridge, where


CHAPTER VII





spirited impression.
and the brilliance of the bright sunshine merged in a single joyous and
out from behind the clouds, and the clear sound of the solitary shot
approaching enemy farther off. At the same instant the sun came fully
visible as if but a stone's throw away, and the movements of the
up and began watching the movements of our troops below, as plainly
The faces of officers and men brightened up at the sound. Everyone got

showing the spot where it burst.
troops below the hill and fell far short of the enemy, a little smoke
metallic roar, and a whistling grenade flew above the heads of our
Number one jumped briskly aside. The gun rang out with a deafening

"One!" came the command.

loading.
In a moment the men came running gaily from their campfires and began

"Crew, to your guns!" commanded the officer.

time."
general, turning to an artillery officer. "Have a little fun to pass the
"Now then, let's see how far it will carry, Captain. Just try!" said the

him smilingly, and he rode off by the winding path down the hill.
"I'll really call in on the nuns," he said to the officers who watched

and flask, and swung his heavy person easily into the saddle.
He called the Cossack with his horse, told him to put away the knapsack

"Very good," answered Nesvitski.

inflammable material on the bridge must be reinspected."
they are to cross last and to fire the bridge as I ordered; and the
had already once been given in detail: "and tell the hussars that
"Yes, please do," answered the general, and he repeated the order that

"Hadn't I better ride over, your excellency?" asked Nesvitski.

have been wasting time."
"It's a bad business," said the general without answering him, "our men

"Would not your excellency like a little refreshment?" he said.

Nesvitski rose, puffing, and went up to the general, smiling.

a shot, and our troops could be seen hurrying to the crossing.
their battery a milk-white cloud arose. Then came the distant report of
On the opposite side the enemy could be seen by the naked eye, and from

crossing. And why are they dawdling there?"
glass and shrugging his shoulders, "so it is! They'll be fired on at the
"Yes, so it is, so it is," said the general angrily, lowering the field

the general, who looked through his field glass.
Meanwhile the staff officer standing in front pointed out something to

laughing.
"They must be feeling dull, too," said one of the bolder officers,

them. On my word I'd give five years of my life for it!"
"Just to flutter the nuns a bit. They say there are Italian girls among

The officers laughed.

"That would be fine, gentlemen!"

gleamed.
He pointed with a smile to a turreted nunnery, and his eyes narrowed and

over there."
munching a pie in his moist-lipped handsome mouth, "would be to slip in
"So they will," said Nesvitski. "No, but what I should like," added he,

They'll ransack that castle," he remarked with evident approval.
in the meadow behind the village, three of them are dragging something.
countryside--"See, our infantrymen have already got there. Look there
another pie but felt shy, and therefore pretended to be examining the
"Look, Prince," said another, who would have dearly liked to take

house!"
We passed close to the park and saw two deer... and what a splendid
be talking to a staff officer of such importance. "It's a lovely place!
"Thank you very much, Prince," answered one of the officers, pleased to

saying.
fine place! Why are you not eating anything, gentlemen?" Nesvitski was
"Yes, the Austrian prince who built that castle was no fool. It's a

knees, some squatting Turkish fashion on the wet grass.
doppelkummel. The officers gladly gathered round him, some on their
a flask, and Nesvitski was treating some officers to pies and real
carriage. A Cossack who accompanied him had handed him a knapsack and
rearguard by the commander in chief, was sitting on the trail of a gun
his fieldglass. A little behind them Nesvitski, who had been sent to the
the rearguard stood with a staff officer, scanning the country through
Among the field guns on the brow of the hill the general in command of

enemy's horse patrols could be discerned.
wild virgin pine forest, and far away on the other side of the Enns the
treetops and bluish gorges. The turrets of a convent stood out beyond a
Danube covered with pine forests, with a mystic background of green
the Enns and the Danube became visible, and the rocky left bank of the
and a castle with a park surrounded by the waters of the confluence of
masses of Russian troops. At the bend of the Danube, vessels, an island,
cathedral, and its bridge, on both sides of which streamed jostling
the little town could be seen with its white, red-roofed houses, its
be clearly seen glittering as though freshly varnished. Down below,
then, suddenly spread out in the sunlight, far-distant objects could
bridge was at times veiled by a diaphanous curtain of slanting rain, and
before the heights on which the Russian batteries stood guarding the
It was a warm, rainy, autumnal day. The wide expanse that opened out

through the town of Enns on both sides of the bridge.
baggage train, the artillery, and columns of troops were defiling
Russian troops were crossing the river Enns. At midday the Russian
the rivers Inn (at Braunau) and Traun (near Linz). On October 23 the
Kutuzov fell back toward Vienna, destroying behind him the bridges over


CHAPTER VI





"Well, thank God! We've been sitting here too long!"

"We're going into action, gentlemen!"

Zherkov. They were under orders to advance next day.
The regimental adjutant came in and confirmed the news brought by

"Oh, my dear fellow, we're in such a stew here these last two days."

of a hot bath."
arrival... What's the matter, Rostov? You look as if you'd just come out
An Austrian general complained of me. I congratulated him on Mack's
"I've been sent back to the regiment all on account of that devil, Mack.

you come here?"
"Into action! Into action! Bring him a bottle for such news! But how did

"What? Saw the real Mack? With hands and feet?"

"I've seen him myself!"

"It's not true!"

army."
"We're to go into action, gentlemen! Mack has surrendered with his whole

"What brings you here?" cried the officers turning to the newcomer.

Just then Zherkov entered the room.

Denisov in a bloodthirsty tone.
"Illness or not, he'd better not cwoss my path. I'd kill him!" shouted

staff captain.
"It is an illness, there's no other way of explaining it," said the

muttered Denisov.
"He has weported himself sick, he's to be stwuck off the list tomowwow,"

of that scoundrel?" he asked Denisov.
"Well, it's as you like," said the staff captain. "And what has become

can't..."
"No, on my word it's not obstinacy! I can't describe the feeling. I

obstinacy," said Kirsten.
"It'll be worse for you. Bogdanich is vindictive and you'll pay for your

Denisov began to laugh.

forgiveness?"
do what you will! How can I go and apologize like a little boy asking
Rostov in an imploring voice, "but I can't apologize, by God I can't,
"Gentlemen, I'll do anything. No one shall hear a word from me," said

apologize, your excellency. Yes, go!"
Rostov by his title, as if in recognition of his confession. "Go and
"That's better, Count," said the staff captain, beginning to address

"I tell you," shouted Denisov, "he's a fine fellow."

clapping Rostov on the shoulder with his big hand.
"Come, that's right, Count!" cried the staff captain, turning round and

round. Well, what else do you want?..."
of the flag... Well, never mind, it's true I'm to blame, to blame all
regiment I'd... Ah well, I'll show that in action, and for me the honor
wrong to think that of me... I... for me... for the honor of the
"No, gentlemen, no... you mustn't think... I quite understand. You're

officer and then at the other.
 Rostov, growing red and pale alternately, looked first at one

Wostov, now then!"
"That's twue, devil take it!" shouted Denisov, jumping up. "Now then,

And the staff captain rose and turned away from Rostov.

always stick to mother truth. It's not right!"
all this is not right, it's not right! You may take offense or not but I
regiment, and Bogdanich knows it. Oh, we do prize it, old fellow! And
willing, are going to die in the regiment, we prize the honor of the
the staff captain, "but we old fellows, who have grown up in and, God
"You value your own pride and don't wish to apologize," continued

his glittering black eyes at Rostov.
Denisov remained silent and did not move, but occasionally looked with

Am I not right, Denisov? It's not the same!"
thieves among the Pavlograd officers!' But it's not all the same to us!
adjutant somewhere and can snap your fingers when it is said 'There are
to no time, my lad, you're here today and tomorrow you'll be appointed
captain's voice began to tremble. "You have been in the regiment next
offense, but you don't mind disgracing the whole regiment!" The staff
anyway he is an honorable and brave old colonel! You're quick at taking
apologize to an old and honorable officer? Whatever Bogdanich may be,
affair public. You are offended at being put on duty a bit, but why not
conceit prevents your apologizing, and you wish to make the whole
yourself in it. And now, when one wants to smooth the thing over, some
It's not pleasant, but what's to be done, my dear fellow? You landed
Bogdanich was a brick: he told you you were saying what was not true.
scoundrel? Is that how you look at it? We don't see it like that. And
disgrace the whole regiment? Disgrace the whole regiment because of one
officers. Now what was the colonel to do? Have the officer tried and
advice; but no, you go and blurt it all straight out before the
case is this: you ought to have thought the matter over and taken
but to the whole regiment--all of us--you're to blame all round. The
severely. "You don't wish to apologize, but, man, it's not only to him
"I did not expect this of you," said the staff captain seriously and

"Not on any account!" exclaimed Rostov.

apologize."
"Well, have it so, and you talked a lot of nonsense to him and must

"He did not shut me up, he said I was telling an untruth."

called Bogdanich) "shuts you up."
officers," continued the staff captain, "and Bogdanich" (the colonel was
"You speak to the colonel about this nasty business before other

staff captain's question by a disapproving shake of his head.
conversation, evidently with no wish to take part in it. He answered the
Denisov sat gloomily biting his mustache and listening to the

satisfaction of his regimental commander?"
Ask Denisov whether it is not out of the question for a cadet to demand
"That's all right. No one thinks you a coward, but that's not the point.

me satisfaction..."
would not need finesse; and he tells me that I am lying--so let him give
a diplomatist. That's why I joined the hussars, thinking that here one
officers. Perhaps I ought not to have spoken before them, but I am not
"I'm not to blame that the conversation began in the presence of other

stolen..."
tell the colonel in the presence of other officers that an officer has
staff captain in his deep bass, calmly stroking his long mustache. "You
"You just wait a moment, my dear fellow, and listen," interrupted the

beneath his dignity to give me satisfaction, then..."
apologize, because if he, as commander of this regiment, thinks it
duty every day, or may place me under arrest, but no one can make me
lied, and I told him he lied. And there it rests. He may keep me on
"I will allow no one to call me a liar!" cried Rostov. "He told me I

affairs of honor and had twice regained his commission.
The staff captain, Kirsten, had twice been reduced to the ranks for

excitement.
many wrinkles on his large features, to Rostov who was crimson with
a tall, grizzly-haired staff captain, with enormous mustaches and
"And I tell you, Rostov, that you must apologize to the colonel!" said

officers in Denisov's quarters.
That same evening there was an animated discussion among the squadron's


CHAPTER V





money," and he threw the purse to him and ran out of the inn.
"Don't touch me," said Rostov, drawing back. "If you need it, take the

"Count..." said Telyanin drawing nearer to him.

steps. "O God," he said with tears in his eyes, "how could you do it?"
room without a word. But at the door he stopped and then retraced his
Rostov took the money, avoiding Telyanin's eyes, and went out of the

mother!..."
take it..." He threw it on the table. "I have an old father and
"Count!... Don't ruin a young fellow... here is this wretched money,

to Rostov's face, and his sobs were audible.
eyes still shifted from side to side but with a downward look not rising
Every muscle of Telyanin's pale, terrified face began to quiver, his

"I..."

"I know it and shall prove it," said Rostov.

explanation..."
taking up his cap and moving toward a small empty room. "We must have an
"Heaven only knows what the people here may imagine," muttered Telyanin,

completed.
miserable man who stood before him, but the task he had begun had to be
from him. He was glad, and at the same instant began to pity the
pardon. As soon as Rostov heard them, an enormous load of doubt fell
But these words came like a piteous, despairing cry and an entreaty for

"What? What? How dare you? What?" said Telyanin.

whispered just above Telyanin's ear.
dragging him to the window. "That money is Denisov's; you took it..." he
"Come here," said Rostov, catching hold of Telyanin's arm and almost

and back, and back again and again in an instant.
Some flash as of an electric spark shot from Telyanin's eyes to Rostov's

he glanced into Rostov's eyes.
"Well, young man?" he said with a sigh, and from under his lifted brows

pocket and that's quite simple and is no one else's business."
slightly open, as if to say, "Yes, yes, I am putting my purse in my
pocket of his riding breeches, with his eyebrows lifted and his mouth
it. Telyanin took the purse and began carelessly slipping it into the
He stretched out his hand to take hold of the purse. Rostov let go of

here," continued Telyanin. "Now then, let me have it."
"And you? Are you going to have lunch too? They feed you quite decently

Rostov did not speak.

it, young man, I'm going."
little towns there's nowhere to spend it," said he. "Well, let me have
"If we get to Vienna I'll get rid of it there but in these wretched

and suddenly seemed to grow very merry.
looked at Telyanin. The lieutenant was looking about in his usual way
Rostov took the purse in his hand, examined it and the money in it, and

added, "Look at it, young man."
"Yes, it's a nice purse. Yes, yes," he said, growing suddenly pale, and

purse.
With shifting eyes but eyebrows still raised, Telyanin handed him the

voice.
"Allow me to look at your purse," he said in a low, almost inaudible,

The coin was a new one. Rostov rose and went up to Telyanin.

"Please be quick," he said.

the waiter.
fingers, drew out a gold imperial, and lifting his eyebrows gave it to
purse and, drawing its rings aside with his small, white, turned-up
When Telyanin had finished his lunch he took out of his pocket a double

and the munching of the lieutenant.
room. No one spoke and the only sounds heard were the clatter of knives
Both were silent. There were two Germans and a Russian officer in the

he sat down at the nearest table.
"Yes," said Rostov as if it cost him a great deal to utter the word; and

eyebrows.
"Ah, you've come here too, young man!" he said, smiling and raising his

sausages and a bottle of wine.
In the second room of the inn the lieutenant was sitting over a dish of

it and saw Telyanin's horse at the porch.
an inn in the village which the officers frequented. Rostov rode up to
Rostov, without returning home, took a horse and rode there. There was
The headquarters were situated two miles away from Salzeneck, and

"You've only just missed him," said the orderly.

"No, nothing."

troubled face.
orderly. "Has something happened?" he added, surprised at the cadet's
"The master is not in, he's gone to headquarters," said Telyanin's

Rostov went to Telyanin's quarters.

heard.
"Ah, may the devil take you and evewybody," were the last words Rostov

He could not finish, and ran out of the room.

so, then..."
"There was no one else in the room except myself. So that if it is not
"Do you understand what you're saying?" he said in a trembling voice.

were his worst enemy, firmly fixed his eyes directly on his face.
But Rostov pulled away his arm and, with as much anger as though Denisov

the cadet to restrain him.
"And I tell you, don't you dahe to do it!" shouted Denisov, rushing at

went to the door.
"I know who has taken it," repeated Rostov in an unsteady voice, and

here! I'll flay this scoundwel alive, and it will be found."
like cords. "You are mad, I tell you. I won't allow it. The purse is
"Nonsense!" he cried, and the veins on his forehead and neck stood out

arm.
moment, and, evidently understanding what Rostov hinted at, seized his
toward the door without raising his eyes. Denisov paused, thought a
"Denisov, let him alone, I know who has taken it," said Rostov, going

orderly by the shoulders and knocking him against the wall.
"I must have that purse, I tell you," shouted Denisov, shaking his

his saber, and put on his cap.
Rostov, his eyes avoiding Denisov, began buttoning his coat, buckled on

you all."
threatening gesture. "If the purse isn't found I'll flog you, I'll flog
Denisov, suddenly, turning purple and rushing at the man with a
"Now then, you devil's puppet, look alive and hunt for it!" shouted

yourselves. It must be here somewhere," said Lavrushka.
"And there hasn't been anyone in the room except the lieutenant and

below his throat rushed to his face and eyes. He could not draw breath.
dropped them again. All the blood which had seemed congested somewhere
Rostov felt Denisov's gaze fixed on him, raised his eyes, and instantly

"Wostov, you've not been playing schoolboy twicks..."

Denisov glanced at Rostov.
latter threw up his arms in surprise saying it was nowhere to be found
room. Denisov silently watched Lavrushka's movements, and when the
the table, searched everywhere, and stood still in the middle of the
Lavrushka turned all the bedding over, looked under the bed and under

remember putting it there."
"No, if I hadn't thought of it being a treasure," said Rostov, "but I

Feel in your pockets."
"You're always like that; you thwow a thing down anywhere and forget it.

"But it isn't?..."

"I haven't been in the room. It must be where you put it."

Where is it?" he asked, turning to Lavrushka.
it under your head like a treasure," said Rostov. "I put it just here.
"Dear me, can I have forgotten? No, I remember thinking that you kept

He pulled off the quilt and shook it. The purse was not there.

at a time and shaking them.
"Wait, haven't you dropped it?" said Rostov, picking up the pillows one

"That's a miwacle."

Denisov threw both pillows on the floor. The purse was not there.

"It's not there."

"Under the lower pillow."

"Where have you put it, Wostov?"

And Denisov went to the bed to get the purse from under the pillow.

"No, I tell you."

me. Really I have some," Rostov repeated.
"But if you won't accept money from me like a comrade, you will offend

"Don't like bowwowing from my own fellows, I don't," growled Denisov.

Rostov, blushing.
"Please, Denisov, let me lend you some: I have some, you know," said

Call the quahtehmasteh," he shouted to Lavrushka.
"Oh, it's wetched! Well, what are you standing there for, you sca'cwow?

"Seven new and three old imperials."

puhse?" he asked, turning to Rostov.
"Wetched business," he muttered to himself. "How much is left in the

Denisov frowned and was about to shout some reply but stopped.

for the money."
"Who should it be? You yourself told him to come. It's the quartermaster

least abashed.
devil, I'm busy!" he shouted to Lavrushka, who went up to him not in the
pua' as on the first day of cweation... Who's that now? Send him to the
childwen of the dust... but one falls in love and one is a God, one is
"You see, my fwiend," he said, "we sleep when we don't love. We are

write, told Rostov the contents of his letter.
evidently glad of a chance to say quicker in words what he wanted to
He leaned his elbows on the table with his pen in his hand and,

her."
paper. He looked gloomily in Rostov's face and said: "I am witing to
table. Denisov was sitting there scratching with his pen on a sheet of
When Rostov went back there was a bottle of vodka and a sausage on the

explained how to rivet the hoof and went away to his own quarters.
They went through the porch and into the stable. The lieutenant

"I want to teach this young man how to shoe a horse," said Telyanin.

"Not yet. But where are you off to?"

order. Have you got it, Denisov?"
"Let us go ourselves. I only came round to ask Denisov about yesterday's

"I have."

looking carelessly about him.
"Have you told them to bring the horse?" asked Telyanin, getting up and

entered.
"Well there certainly are disgusting people," thought Rostov as he

him, rubbing his small white hands.
Telyanin was sitting in the same indolent pose in which Rostov had left

one to do?" and, having given his order, he returned to Telyanin.
Rostov shrugged his shoulders as much as to say: "Nor do I, but what's

quartermaster's presence.
"Ugh! I don't like that fellow," he said, regardless of the

shudder of disgust.
thumb to the room where Telyanin was sitting, he frowned and gave a
Denisov screwed up his face and pointing over his shoulder with his
facing the quartermaster who was reporting to him. On seeing Rostov,
In the passage Denisov, with a pipe, was squatting on the threshold

Telyanin, and he went out to give the order.
"Then I'll have it brought round," said Rostov wishing to avoid

you'll thank me for."
"I'll show you, I'll show you! It's not a secret. And it's a horse

"Yes, please do," said Rostov.

you what kind of rivet to use."
"The hoof's cracked! That's nothing. I'll teach you what to do and show

"He's begun to go a little lame on the left foreleg," he added.
for which he had paid seven hundred rubbles was not worth half that sum.
"Oh, he's all right, a good horse," answered Rostov, though the horse

"I saw you riding this morning..." he added.

face; his eyes continually wandered from one object to another.
The lieutenant never looked the man he was speaking to straight in the

young horse Telyanin had sold to Rostov.)
"Well, young cavalryman, how is my Rook behaving?" he asked. (Rook was a

unable to overcome or conceal his groundless antipathy to the man.
the regiment but was not liked; Rostov especially detested him and was
from the Guards just before this campaign. He behaved very well in
which was offered him. Telyanin for some reason had been transferred
Rostov thrust the purse under the pillow and shook the damp little hand

the room.
and Lieutenant Telyanin, a small officer of the same squadron, entered
"Where? At Bykov's, at the rat's... I knew it," replied a piping voice,

voice from the next room.
"Ah! Telyanin! How d'ye do? They plucked me last night," came Denisov's

in separate piles, began counting them.
Rostov took the money and, mechanically arranging the old and new coins

purse undah the pillow," he said, and went out to the quartermaster.
"Wostov, deah fellow, just see how much there is left and shove the
"Wetched!" he muttered, throwing down a purse with some gold in it.

Denisov's face puckered still more.

"The squadron quartermaster!" said Lavrushka.

clinking of spurs that came to a stop, and a respectful cough.
he said, turning to the door as he heard a tread of heavy boots and the
but dwink. If we could only get to fighting soon. Hullo, who's there?"
"If at least we had some women here; but there's nothing foh one to do

with his glittering, black eyes at Rostov.
Then he remained silent for a while, and all at once looked cheerfully
He scattered the burning tobacco, smashed the pipe, and threw it away.

gives the singles and snatches the doubles!"
"He lets one win the singles and collahs it as soon as one doubles it;

continued to shout.
fist, and tapped it on the floor, making the sparks fly, while he
He took the lighted pipe that was offered to him, gripped it in his

"Just fancy, he didn't let me win a single cahd, not one cahd."
rat") he said, rubbing his forehead and whole face with both hands.
"And what devil made me go to that wat?" (an officer nicknamed "the

tangled black hair.
teeth, he began with stubby fingers of both hands to ruffle up his thick
Puckering up his face though smiling, and showing his short strong

luck. As soon as you left, it began and went on. Hullo there! Tea!"
fool!" cried Denisov, not pronouncing his r's. "Such ill luck! Such ill
"Weally! And I've been losing, bwother. I lost yesterday like a damned

seen Fraulein Mathilde."
"Long ago," answered Rostov, "I have already been for the hay, and have

"Ah, you're up already," said Denisov, entering the room.

"Well, I am taking it off," replied Lavrushka's voice.

"Lavwuska!" he shouted loudly and angrily, "take it off, blockhead!"

of his head. He came up to the porch gloomily, hanging his head.
wide breeches hanging down in creases, and a crumpled shako on the back
eyes, and black tousled mustache and hair. He wore an unfastened cloak,
coming home. Denisov was a small man with a red face, sparkling black
he. "Now for trouble!" Rostov looked out of the window and saw Denisov
Ten minutes later Lavrushka brought the coffee. "He's coming!" said

"Yes, bring some."

back in a rage. Will you have coffee?"
it, but if he stays out till morning it means he's lost and will come
Lavrushka. "I know by now, if he wins he comes back early to brag about
"Hasn't been in since the evening. Must have been losing," answered

all the regiment knew for a rogue.
"What about your master?" he asked Lavrushka, Denisov's orderly, whom

to the cottage he occupied with Denisov.
and parted smiling, the German returning to his cowshed and Rostov going
brotherly love, wagged their heads in token of their mutual affection,
reason for rejoicing, they looked at each other with joyful delight and
cowshed nor Rostov back with his platoon from foraging for hay had any
"Und vivat die ganze Welt!" Though neither the German cleaning his
Rostov waved his cap above his head like the German and cried laughing,


    * "And hurrah for the whole world!"


"Und die ganze Welt hoch!" *

waving it above his head cried:
The German laughed, came out of the cowshed, pulled off his cap, and


     Hurrah for Emperor Alexander!"
    * (2) "Hurrah for the Austrians! Hurrah for the Russians!

    * "Busy already?"


German landlord.
Alexander hoch!" *(2) said he, quoting words often repeated by the
did not leave his eager face. "Hoch Oestreicher! Hoch Russen! Kaiser
"Schon fleissig?" * said Rostov with the same gay brotherly smile which


    * "A very good morning! A very good morning!"


greet the young man.
Morgen!" * he said winking with a merry smile, evidently pleased to
immediately brightened on seeing Rostov. "Schon gut Morgen! Schon gut
hand, was clearing manure from the cowhouse, looked out, and his face
porch. His landlord, who in a waistcoat and a pointed cap, pitchfork in
holding up his saber, his spurs jingling, he ran up the steps of the
"Splendid! What a horse he will be!" he thought with a smile, and

lingered for a moment.
to serve him. Rostov patted the horse's neck and then his flank, and
evident that the cadet was liberal with his tips and that it paid
thrown the reins of the snaffle bridle over the horse's head. It was
Another hussar also rushed toward the horse, but Bondarenko had already

"Mind, walk him up and down well!"

"Yes, your excellency," answered the Ukrainian gaily, tossing his head.

people show to everyone when they are happy.
continued, with that gay brotherly cordiality which goodhearted young
headlong to the horse. "Walk him up and down, my dear fellow," he
"Ah, Bondarenko, dear friend!" said he to the hussar who rushed up

part from his horse, and at last sprang down and called to his orderly.
youthful movement, stood for a moment in the stirrup as if loathe to
horse, rode up to the porch, swung his leg over the saddle with a supple
a foraging expedition. Rostov in his cadet uniform, with a jerk to his
had not yet come home when Rostov rode back early in the morning from
proceeding as usual. Denisov, who had been losing at cards all night,
of Mack's defeat, the camp life of the officers of this squadron was
On October 11, the day when all was astir at headquarters over the news

squadron commander.
ever since he had overtaken the regiment in Poland, had lived with the
throughout the whole cavalry division as Vaska Denisov. Cadet Rostov,
assigned to cavalry-captain Denisov, the squadron commander, known
the German village of Salzeneck. The best quarters in the village were
squadron in which Nicholas Rostov served as a cadet was quartered in
The Pavlograd Hussars were stationed two miles from Braunau. The


CHAPTER IV





and went out of the corridor.
He waited a moment to see whether the cornet would answer, but he turned


     you."
     of whom you have made a friend, but not for you, not for
     * (2) "It is all very well for that good-for-nothing fellow

     destroyed, and you find that a cause for jesting!"
     * "Forty thousand men massacred and the army of our allies


him.
word with a French accent--having noticed that Zherkov could still hear
amuse himself in this way," he added in Russian--but pronouncing the
ami, mais pas pour vous, pas pour vous. *(2) Only a hobbledehoy could
bien pour un garcon de rien comme cet individu dont vous avez fait un
he said, as if strengthening his views by this French sentence. "C'est
l'armee de nos allies detruite, et vous trouvez la le mot pour rire," *
nothing for their master's business. Quarante mille hommes massacres et
the misfortunes of our common cause, or we are merely lackeys who care
our Tsar and our country, rejoicing in the successes and grieving at
excitement. "Don't you understand that either we are officers serving
"What's the matter?" exclaimed Prince Andrew standing still in his

him.
"Come, what's the matter, old fellow?" said Nesvitski trying to soothe

taking Nesvitski's arm he left Zherkov, who did not know what to say.
"I am not jesting with you; please be silent!" cried Bolkonski, and

"What's the matter? I only congratulated them," said Zherkov.

at Bolkonski silently with wide-open eyes.
Nesvitski and Zherkov were so surprised by this outburst that they gazed

will teach you to behave yourself."
so; but I warn you that if you dare to play the fool in my presence, I
with a slight trembling of the lower jaw, "I can't prevent your doing
"If you, sir, choose to make a buffoon of yourself," he said sharply,

Russian army found vent in anger at Zherkov's untimely jest.
Mack, the news of his defeat, and the thought of what lay before the
turned to Zherkov. The nervous irritation aroused by the appearance of
Bolkonski, turning still paler, pushed him away with an angry look and
Nesvitski with a laugh threw his arms round Prince Andrew, but


     * "Good God, what simplicity!"


"Gott, wie naiv!" * said he angrily, after he had gone a few steps.

The general frowned, turned away, and went on.

beaming smile to his head.
well, only a little bruised just here," he added, pointing with a
"I have the honor to congratulate you. General Mack has arrived, quite

attention. He screwed up his eyes showing that he was listening.
the seriousness of his stupid smile, could not but give him a moment's
The member of the Hofkriegsrath looked at him severely but, seeing

other, awkwardly, like a child at a dancing lesson.
He bowed his head and scraped first with one foot and then with the

the Austrian general, "I have the honor to congratulate you."
"Your excellency," said he in German, stepping forward and addressing

appeared a stupid smile of glee which he seemed unable to suppress.
embarrassing attentions. On the face of the wag Zherkov there suddenly
The generals were passing by, looking as if they wished to avoid

make way!"
"They're coming!... they're coming!... Stand aside, make way, please

his arm, said in a breathless voice,
three officers quite easily, but Zherkov, pushing Nesvitski aside with
There was room enough in the wide corridor for the generals to pass the
the member of the Hofkriegsrath who had arrived the previous evening.
Kutuzov's staff in charge of the provisioning of the Russian army, and
from the other end of the corridor, Strauch, an Austrian general who on
Just as Prince Andrew met Nesvitski and Zherkov, there came toward them

"There's nothing to be gay about," answered Bolkonski.

face and glittering eyes.
"Why are you so glum?" asked Nesvitski noticing Prince Andrew's pale

were as usual laughing.
he met Nesvitski, with whom he shared a room, and the wag Zherkov; they
room to write to his father, to whom he wrote every day. In the corridor
Excited and irritated by these thoughts Prince Andrew went toward his

could not admit the idea of his hero being disgraced.
outweigh all the courage of the Russian troops, and at the same time
French since Suvorov met them. He feared that Bonaparte's genius might
perhaps, see and take part in the first Russian encounter with the
humiliation of arrogant Austria and that in a week's time he might,
play. Involuntarily he felt a joyful agitation at the thought of the
vividly imagined what awaited it and the part he would have to
understood all the difficulties of the Russian army's position, and
details of his disaster he understood that half the campaign was lost,
lay in the general progress of the war. When he saw Mack and heard the
Prince Andrew was one of those rare staff officers whose chief interest

inactive, would also soon have to meet the enemy.
orders which showed that the Russian troops, who had hitherto been
Within half an hour adjutants had been sent in various directions with
and that the whole army had surrendered at Ulm proved to be correct.
The report which had been circulated that the Austrians had been beaten

the door himself behind him.
closed his eyes, silently let Mack enter his room before him, and closed
and his forehead became smooth again, he bowed his head respectfully,
immobile for a few moments. Then wrinkles ran over his face like a wave
Kutuzov's face as he stood in the open doorway remained perfectly

"Vous voyez le malheureux Mack," he uttered in a broken voice.

thin legs, went up to Kutuzov.
running away from some danger, and, making long, quick strides with his
doorway. The general with the bandaged head bent forward as though
off. The door of the private room opened and Kutuzov appeared in the
began to hum to himself, producing a queer sound which immediately broke
intended to say something, but immediately, with affected indifference,
look at me?" Then he lifted his head, stretched his neck as if he
into a chair, gazing at those in the room as if asking, "Why do they
gave it to Kozlovski, stepped quickly to the window, and threw himself
a notebook, hurriedly scribbled something in pencil, tore out the leaf,
The general's face clouded, his lips quivered and trembled. He took out

"The commander in chief is engaged," repeated Kozlovski calmly.

rather short, as if surprised that anyone should not know him.
The unknown general looked disdainfully down at Kozlovski, who was

announce?"
to the unknown general and blocking his way to the door. "Whom shall I
"The commander in chief is engaged," said Kozlovski, going hurriedly up

straight toward the inner door.
quickly with a harsh German accent, looking to both sides and advancing
"Commander in Chief Kutuzov?" said the newly arrived general speaking

Prince Andrew stopped short.
who had evidently just arrived, entered quickly, slamming the door.
order of Maria Theresa on his neck and a black bandage round his head,
But at that instant a tall Austrian general in a greatcoat, with the

"Probably," said Prince Andrew moving toward the outer door.

"If it were true that he has been beaten, news would have come."

"No."

"Any news from Mack?"

Prince Andrew shrugged his shoulders.

"And why is it?"

advancing."
"I am ordered to write a memorandum explaining why we are not

"Well, Prince?" asked Kozlovski.

Kozlovski, who was sitting at the window with a book.
his hand Prince Andrew came up to his comrade, the aide-de-camp on duty,
Coming out of Kutuzov's room into the waiting room with the papers in

feared him.
Prince Andrew knew how to take his stand so that they respected and even
considered him conceited, cold, and disagreeable. But among these people
Andrew was natural and pleasant. Others, the majority, disliked him and
listened to him, admired, and imitated him, and with them Prince
from themselves and from everyone else, expected great things of him,
opposite reputations. Some, a minority, acknowledged him to be different
Prince Andrew had, as he had had in Petersburg society, two quite
On Kutuzov's staff, among his fellow officers and in the army generally,


subordinate by me.
firmness, and expedition. I consider myself fortunate to have such a
Your son bids fair to become an officer distinguished by his industry,


From Vienna Kutuzov wrote to his old comrade, Prince Andrew's father.
and had taken him to Vienna and given him the more serious commissions.
promised not to forget him, distinguished him above the other adjutants,
Kutuzov, whom he had overtaken in Poland, had received him very kindly,

and more attractive.
with himself and those around him, his smile and glance were brighter
agreeable and interesting work. His face expressed more satisfaction
to think of the impression he makes on others, but is occupied with
affected languor and indolence. He now looked like a man who has time
in his movements, in his walk, scarcely a trace was left of his former
had changed greatly during that period. In the expression of his face,
Though not much time had passed since Prince Andrew had left Russia, he

softly over the carpet and went out into the waiting room.
to tell him. He gathered up the papers and with a bow to both, stepped
first not only what had been said but also what Kutuzov would have liked
Prince Andrew bowed his head in token of having understood from the

army, and then give it to his excellency."
this, showing all the news we have had of the movements of the Austrian
handing him several papers, "make a neat memorandum in French out of all
from His Highness the Archduke Ferdinand and here are these," he said,
from our scouts. Here are two letters from Count Nostitz and here is one
Andrew. "Look here, my dear fellow, get from Kozlovski all the reports
"Excuse me, General," interrupted Kutuzov, also turning to Prince

aide-de-camp.
jests and to come to business. He involuntarily looked round at the
worst," said the Austrian general, evidently wishing to have done with
"But you know the wise maxim your excellency, advising one to expect the

member of the Hofkriegsrath mildly and attentively.
Kutuzov sighed deeply on finishing this paragraph and looked at the


it, easily find a way to prepare for the enemy the fate he deserves.
Russian army will be fully equipped, and shall then, in conjunction with
ally. We shall therefore confidently await the moment when the Imperial
intention should he try to direct his whole force against our faithful
of communications, recross the river lower down, and frustrate his
cross the Lech, we can cross the Danube, throw ourselves on his line
commanding both sides of the Danube, so that should the enemy not
as we are masters of Ulm, we cannot be deprived of the advantage of
which to attack and defeat the enemy should he cross the Lech. Also,
We have fully concentrated forces of nearly seventy thousand men with


German, from the Archduke Ferdinand's letter:
of his mouth read to the Austrian general the following passage, in
have a look at it"--and Kutuzov with an ironical smile about the corners
"Give me that letter," said Kutuzov turning to Prince Andrew. "Please

very favorable.
him of a victory and stated strategically the position of the army was
And, in fact, the last letter he had received from Mack's army informed
same expression, which seemed to say that he had a right to suppose so.
sounded much like irony. But Kutuzov went on blandly smiling with the
that were afloat, and so Kutuzov's suggestion of an Austrian victory
defeat, there were many circumstances confirming the unfavorable rumors
The general frowned. Though there was no definite news of an Austrian

our aid," said Kutuzov.
Mack, have by now already gained a decisive victory and no longer need
Austrian troops, under the direction of so skillful a leader as General
His Highness the Archduke Ferdinand has honored me, I imagine that the
"But that is my conviction, and judging by the last letter with which

Kutuzov bowed with the same smile.

prearranged sentence.
accustomed to win in their battles," he concluded his evidently
Russian troops and their commander of the laurels they have been
His Majesty; but we think the present delay is depriving the splendid
excellency's participation in the common action is highly valued by
contrasted with his flattering words, "on the contrary, your
"On the contrary," he said, in a querulous and angry tone that

in the same tone.
The Austrian general looked dissatisfied, but had no option but to reply

but you have no grounds for telling me so. And that is the whole point."
liberty not to believe me and I don't even care whether you do or not,
And Kutuzov smiled in a way that seemed to say, "You are quite at

too strong for us, General."
lay down all this heavy responsibility. But circumstances are sometimes
informed and more skillful general--of whom Austria has so many--and to
to hand over the supreme command of the army into the hands of a better
believe me on my honour that to me personally it would be a pleasure
been fulfilled long ago. I should long ago have joined the archduke. And
personal wishes, the will of His Majesty the Emperor Francis would have
own voice. "All I can say, General, is that if the matter depended on my
word. It was evident that Kutuzov himself listened with pleasure to his
and intonation that obliged one to listen to each deliberately spoken
"All I can say, General," said he with a pleasant elegance of expression

French.
was asking the adjutant to wait, and he went on with the conversation in
"Ah!..." said Kutuzov glancing at Bolkonski as if by this exclamation he

sitting at the table on which a plan was spread out.
papers. Kutuzov and the Austrian member of the Hofkriegsrath were
army. Prince Andrew Bolkonski came into the room with the required
had come from the Archduke Ferdinand, who was in command of the advanced
to the condition of the troops on their arrival, and the letters that
private room and, calling his adjutant, asked for some papers relating
On returning from the review, Kutuzov took the Austrian general into his


CHAPTER III





the company, and overtook the carriage, still keeping time to the song.
to foot uncertain with which to start, then settled down, galloped past
Zherkov touched his horse with the spurs; it pranced excitedly from foot


        To my native land..."
        "It's a long, long way.

"Good health..."

"Good-by."

"And I only..."

"Well, never mind; I only..."

take it!"
Dolokhov smiled. "Don't trouble. If I want anything, I won't beg--I'll

"Come if you need anything. One can at least be of use on the staff..."

They were again silent.

"We shall see."

"Well, that's only till the first engagement."

reinstated."
"I can't. I've sworn not to. I won't drink and won't play till I get

"Do come."

"Why, have you too much money?"

Zherkov.
"I say, come round some evening and we'll have a game of faro!" said

"I'm glad," answered Dolokhov briefly and clearly, as the song demanded.

"The devil only knows! They say so."

"Is it true that Austrians have been beaten?" asked Dolokhov.

that song.
conversation would probably have been different but for the effect of
arousing an involuntary sensation of courage and cheerfulness. Their
"She let the hawk fly upward from her wide right sleeve," went the song,

Both were silent.

"I was attached; I'm on duty."

staff?"
"All right. They are good fellows. And how have you wriggled onto the

"And how do you get on with the officers?" inquired Zherkov.

Dolokhov's reply.
gaiety with which Zherkov spoke, and to the intentional coldness of
The lively song gave a special flavor to the tone of free and easy

"How am I?" Dolokhov answered coldly. "I am as you see."

horse keep pace with the company.
"My dear fellow, how are you?" said he through the singing, making his

friend.
to the gentleman ranker, he addressed him with the cordiality of an old
and had not seen fit to recognize him. But now that Kutuzov had spoken
wild set led by Dolokhov. Zherkov had met Dolokhov abroad as a private
Hussar cornet Zherkov had at one time, in Petersburg, belonged to the

and rode up to Dolokhov.
who had mimicked the regimental commander, fell back from the carriage
moment marching with the company. The hussar cornet of Kutuzov's suite
looking at those driving past as if he pitied all who were not at that
marching with particular grace and boldness in time to the song and
a blue-eyed soldier involuntarily attracted notice. It was Dolokhov
from the right flank, beside which the carriage passed the company,
soldier and the gay and smartly marching men. In the second file
pleasure at the sound of the singing and the sight of the dancing
men should continue to march at ease, and he and all his suite showed
returning to the town. The commander in chief made a sign that the
and the tramp of horses' hoofs were heard. Kutuzov and his suite were
steps. Behind the company the sound of wheels, the creaking of springs,
swinging their arms and keeping time spontaneously, marched with long
flourished his castanets as if threatening someone. The soldiers,
and, walking backwards before the company, jerked his shoulders and
in spite of the burden of his equipment, rushed out to the front
"Oh, my bower new...!" chimed in twenty voices, and the castanet player,

"Oh, my bower, oh, my bower...!"

down and began:
above his head and, holding it there for some seconds, suddenly flung it
both arms as if carefully lifting some invisible but precious object
Then having satisfied himself that all eyes were fixed on him, he raised
soldier of forty--looked sternly at the singers and screwed up his eyes.
as if flinging something to the ground, the drummer--a lean, handsome
Having jerked out these last words as soldiers do and waved his arms

Kutuzov."
change being that the words "Father Kamenski" were replaced by "Father
composed in the Turkish campaign and now being sung in Austria, the only
brothers, on to glory, led by Father Kamenski." This song had been
words: "Morning dawned, the sun was rising," and concluding: "On then,
his arm, began a long-drawn-out soldiers' song, commencing with the
drummer, their leader, turned round facing the singers, and flourishing
And from the different ranks some twenty men ran to the front. A

"Singers to the front" came the captain's order.

Germans."
to be Poles--all under the Russian crown--but here they're all regular
"And here, friend, the people are quite beggarly. There they all seemed

are drawn along."
"Wasn't it fine when those Germans gave us lifts! You just sit still and

without eating."
"They might call a halt here or we'll have to do another four miles

well, never mind, here you are."
"And did you give me tobacco yesterday? That's just it, friend! Ah,

"Give me a biscuit, you devil!"

we reach our quarters."
into the village already... they will have their buckwheat cooked before
"What devils these quartermasters are! See, the fifth company is turning

better listen more carefully!"
begin. And he says Buonaparte is in Braunau! Shows you're a fool. You'd
them down. When they've been put down, the war with Buonaparte will
The Prussians are up in arms now. The Austrians, you see, are putting
"Buonaparte himself!... Just listen to the fool, what he doesn't know!

near him. Everybody said that Buonaparte himself was at Braunau."
"I say, Fedeshon!... Did he say when the battles are to begin? You were

the guns."
with chalk--as white as flour! I suppose they polish him up as they do
"And that other one with him, the Austrian, looked as if he were smeared

"When he looked at my feet, friend... well, thinks I..."

noticed everything..."
"No, friend, he is sharper-eyed than you are. Boots and leg bands... he

"And so he is! Quite blind!"

"And they said Kutuzov was blind of one eye?"

heard on every side.
soldiers. The company marched on gaily. The soldiers' voices could be
The cheerful mood of their officers after the inspection infected the

regimental commander was nicknamed King of Hearts).
"In a word, a hearty one..." said the subaltern, laughing (the

Timokhin to the subaltern beside him.
"Well, he's really a good fellow, one can serve under him," said

overtook the next one.
"I thank you all! God be praised!" and he rode past that company and
vodka for the men from me," he added so that the soldiers could hear.
"Well, that's all right," continued the regimental commander. "A cup of

smile on his lips change.
Dolokhov looked round but did not say anything, nor did the mocking

"After the next affair... epaulettes."

in his horse, said to him:
The regimental commander sought out Dolokhov in the ranks and, reining

"Well, of course, of course!"

understood his commander's wish.
"I will, your excellency," said Timokhin, showing by his smile that he

connections... Well, then, you just..."
have pity on a young man in misfortune. You know he has important
"Oh, well, well!" remarked the regimental commander. "Still, one must

beast.... In Poland, if you please, he nearly killed a Jew."
is sensible, well educated, and good-natured, and the next he's a wild
"It's different on different days," answered the captain. "One day he

"And what about his character?" asked the regimental commander.

but his character..." said Timokhin.
"As far as the service goes he is quite punctilious, your excellency;

himself, and in general..."
And tell me, please--I've been meaning to ask--how is he behaving
"And tell Mr. Dolokhov that I won't forget him--he may be quite easy.

Ismail.
teeth were missing that had been knocked out by the butt end of a gun at
his nose growing redder as he gave a smile which showed where two front
"Don't mention it, General, as if I'd be so bold!" replied the captain,

hand to the captain.
apologize, you know me!... He was very pleased!" And he held out his
helped... one is sometimes a bit hasty on parade... I am the first to
irrepressible delight.) "It's in the Emperor's service... it can't be
commander's face now that the inspection was happily over beamed with
riding up to Captain Timokhin who was walking in front. (The regimental
commander, overtaking the third company on its way to its quarters and
"You won't bear me a grudge, Prokhor Ignatych?" said the regimental

to rest after their hard marches.
quarters near Braunau, where they hoped to receive boots and clothes and
The regiment broke up into companies, which went to their appointed

carriage.
it and it was not at all what he wanted. He turned away and went to the
everything he could say had long been known to him, that he was weary of
a grimace as if to say that everything Dolokhov had said to him and
from Captain Timokhin again flitted over his face. He turned away with
Kutuzov turned away. The same smile of the eyes with which he had turned

and prove my devotion to His Majesty the Emperor and to Russia!"
ringing, deliberate voice. "I ask an opportunity to atone for my fault
"One thing I ask of your excellency," Dolokhov said in his firm,

so widely from a private.
to tear open the veil of convention that separates a commander in chief
they had looked at the regimental commander, seeming by their expression
The clear blue eyes looked at the commander in chief just as boldly as

The Emperor is gracious, and I shan't forget you if you deserve well."
"Ah!" said Kutuzov. "I hope this will be a lesson to you. Do your duty.

"This is Dolokhov," said Prince Andrew.

"Have you a complaint to make?" Kutuzov asked with a slight frown.

commander in chief, and presented arms.
with his clear blue eyes, stepped forward from the ranks, went up to the
not wait to be called. The shapely figure of the fair-haired soldier,
Dolokhov, who had already changed into a soldier's gray greatcoat, did

"Where is Dolokhov?" asked Kutuzov.

in this regiment."
"You told me to remind you of the officer Dolokhov, reduced to the ranks

suite and said in French:
to recollect something. Prince Andrew stepped forward from among the
The third company was the last, and Kutuzov pondered, apparently trying

a most serious, deferential, and innocent expression.
and while Kutuzov was turning managed to make a grimace and then assume
turned round. The officer evidently had complete control of his face,
with such exactitude that Nesvitski could not help laughing. Kutuzov
captain and his drawn-in stomach, and mimicked his expression and pose
not answer. The hussar at that moment noticed the face of the red-nosed
The regimental commander was afraid he might be blamed for this and did

him. "He used to have a predilection for Bacchus."
"We all have our weaknesses," said Kutuzov smiling and walking away from

"Highly satisfied, your excellency!"
officer as in a looking glass--started, moved forward, and answered:
And the latter--unconscious that he was being reflected in the hussar

with him?" he asked the regimental commander.
"Another Ismail comrade," said he. "A brave officer! Are you satisfied

scarred and puffy face.
quickly turned away, a scarcely perceptible smile flitting over his
who evidently understood his case and wished him nothing but good,
it had the commander in chief continued to look at him, and so Kutuzov,
himself up to such an extent that it seemed he could not have sustained
commander, but now that the commander in chief addressed him he drew
more than Timokhin had done when he was reprimanded by the regimental
One would have thought it impossible for a man to stretch himself

reprimanded on account of the blue greatcoat.
"Ah, Timokhin!" said he, recognizing the red-nosed captain who had been

involuntarily came closer to him.
third company he suddenly stopped. His suite, not having expected this,
starting from their sockets to watch their chief. On reaching the
Kutuzov walked slowly and languidly past thousands of eyes which were

wag.
manner. Nesvitski laughed and nudged the others to make them look at the
bent forward, the hussar started and bent forward in exactly the same
and mimicked his every movement. Each time the commander started and
expression of his fixed eyes, watched the regimental commander's back
This hussar, with a grave face and without a smile or a change in the
laughter provoked by a swarthy hussar officer who walked beside him.
smiling, handsome face and moist eyes. Nesvitski could hardly keep from
comrade Nesvitski, a tall staff officer, extremely stout, with a kindly,
handsome adjutant. This was Prince Bolkonski. Beside him was his
and sometimes laughed. Nearest of all to the commander in chief walked a
some twenty men of his suite. These gentlemen talked among themselves
distance that allowed every softly spoken word to be heard, followed
the commander in chief's regarding the regiment. Behind Kutuzov, at a
ran forward on each such occasion, fearing to miss a single word of
noticing what a bad state of things it was. The regimental commander
which seemed to say that he was not blaming anyone, but could not help
head sadly, pointing them out to the Austrian general with an expression
also to the soldiers. Looking at their boots he several times shook his
friendly words to officers he had known in the Turkish war, sometimes
Kutuzov walked through the ranks, sometimes stopping to say a few

the boots.
were only 217 sick and stragglers. Everything was in good order except
had reached Braunau at the same time, was in splendid condition. There
assiduity of its commander the regiment, in comparison with others that
greater zeal than his duty as a commander. Thanks to the strictness and
it was evident that he performed his duty as a subordinate with even
darted forward at every word or gesture of the commander in chief,
and hardly able to restrain his jerky movements, and from the way he
the way he walked through the ranks behind the generals, bending forward
devoured him with his eyes, drawing himself up obsequiously, and from
From the way the regimental commander saluted the commander in chief and

general in white, accompanied by the suite, walked between the ranks.
first Kutuzov stood still while the regiment moved; then he and the
to your ex... len... len... lency!" and again all became silent. At
voice of the commander in chief was heard. The regiment roared, "Health
jingling sound it presented arms. Then amidst a dead silence the feeble
The word of command rang out, and again the regiment quivered, as with a

breathlessly gazing at him and the regimental commander did not exist.
he stepped down from the carriage just as if those two thousand men
talking in low voices and Kutuzov smiled slightly as treading heavily
stopped in front of the regiment. Kutuzov and the Austrian general were
uniform that looked strange among the Russian black ones. The caleche
a convoy of Croats. Beside Kutuzov sat an Austrian general, in a white
by six horses at a smart trot. Behind the caleche galloped the suite and
light blue Viennese caleche, slightly creaking on its springs and drawn
Along the broad country road, edged on both sides by trees, came a high,

for the approaching chief.
which expressed joy for himself, severity for the regiment, and welcome
"Att-ention!" shouted the regimental commander in a soul-shaking voice

preening its plumage and became motionless.
his mouth awry, prepared to shout. The regiment fluttered like a bird
drew his saber, and with a happy and resolute countenance, opening
with trembling hands, threw his body across the saddle, righted himself,
The regimental commander, flushing, ran to his horse, seized the stirrup

"He's coming!" shouted the signaler at that moment.


CHAPTER II





turned away.
"I request you to have the goodness to change your coat," he said as he

angrily pulling down his tight scarf.
The eyes of the general and the soldier met. The general became silent,

tones.
"Not bound to endure insults," Dolokhov concluded in loud, ringing

"No talking in the ranks!... No talking, no talking!"

hurriedly interrupted.
"General, I must obey orders, but I am not bound to endure..." Dolokhov

ras..." he did not finish.
"Why a blue coat? Off with it... Sergeant major! Change his coat... the

clear, insolent eyes in the general's face.
Dolokhov slowly straightened his bent knee, looking straight with his

five men between him and Dolokhov with his bluish-gray uniform.
commander with a tone of suffering in his voice, while there were still
"H-o-o-w are you standing? Where's your leg? Your leg?" shouted the

because his line was not straight, he reached the third company.
wrath. Having snapped at an officer for an unpolished badge, at another
anger and walking up to the regiment wished to find a further excuse for
steps down the line. He was evidently pleased at his own display of
And the commander, turning to look at the adjutant, directed his jerky

you to dress your men decently."
a word to you and you... What?" he added with renewed irritation, "I beg
regimental commander cooling down a little. "Leave indeed.... One says
"Gave him leave? Leave? That's just like you young men," said the

"Your excellency, you gave him leave yourself, on the march."

a soldier, he should be dressed in regulation uniform like the others."
"Well? Has he been degraded into a field marshal, or into a soldier? If

ranks," said the captain softly.
"Your excellency, it's the officer Dolokhov, who has been reduced to the

excellency?... nobody knows."
"Well, your excellency, what? Your excellency! But what about your

"Your excellency..."

Hungarian?" said the commander with an austere gibe.
"Well, why don't you speak? Whom have you got there dressed up as a

pressure lay his only hope of salvation.
pressed two fingers more and more rigidly to his cap, as if in this
The commander of the company, with his eyes fixed on his superior,

you to dress the men in fancy coats for a parade.... Eh...?"
commander in chief is expected and you leave your place? Eh? I'll teach
cloth, which contrasted with the others. "What have you been after? The
at a soldier in the ranks of the third company in a greatcoat of bluish
shouted the regimental commander, thrusting forward his jaw and pointing
"You will soon be dressing your men in petticoats! What is this?"

came up panting, slackening his pace as he approached.
twitched nervously. The general looked the captain up and down as he
the redness of which was evidently due to intemperance, and his mouth
told to repeat a lesson he has not learned. Spots appeared on his nose,
general. The captain's face showed the uneasiness of a schoolboy who is
the habit of running, trotted awkwardly stumbling on his toes toward the
from behind his company and, though he was a middle-aged man and not in
cry of: "The general to the third company," the missing officer appeared
When the eager but misrepeated words had reached their destination in a

the lines and an adjutant ran to look for the missing officer.
the general... third company to the commander." The words passed along
"Commander of the third company wanted by the general!... commander to

third company!"
"Whatever is this? This!" he shouted and stood still. "Commander of the

to the front of the regiment and examined it from a distance.
instead of black. The regimental commander walked with his jerky steps
In half an hour all was again in order, only the squares had become gray

with upraised arms.
over their heads, unstrapping their overcoats and drawing the sleeves on
up their knapsacks with a jerk of their shoulders and pulling the straps
hum with voices. On all sides soldiers were running to and fro, throwing
to then been in regular order and silent began to sway and stretch and
were not in very good condition), and instantly the squares that had up
to their companies, the sergeants major began bustling (the greatcoats
soldiers to change into their greatcoats. The company commanders ran off
The regimental commander, going up to the line himself, ordered the

"I don't know, General...."

"Shall we have time to change clothes?"

"In an hour's time, I should say."

personage he was referring to.
aide-de-camp with a respectful politeness evidently relating to the
command. "Sergeants major!... How soon will he be here?" he asked the
forward. "Company commanders!" he shouted in a voice accustomed to
the battalion commander. "Oh, my God!" he added, stepping resolutely
'on the march' it meant in greatcoats?" said he reproachfully to
"There now! Didn't I tell you, Michael Mitrich, that if it was said

"A fine mess we've made of it!" he remarked.

spread out his arms with a choleric gesture.
regimental commander hung his head, silently shrugged his shoulders, and
commander in chief would otherwise be dissatisfied. On hearing this the
men should be in their greatcoats and in marching order, and that the
circumstances, he nevertheless delivered the definite order that the
in chief would be. Though the aide-de-camp did not know these
so the worse the condition it was in, the better pleased the commander
arrived from Russia. With this object he intended to meet the regiment;
to show the Austrian general the wretched state in which the troops
junction advisable, meant, among other arguments in support of his view,
of the Archduke Ferdinand and Mack, and Kutuzov, not considering this
before with proposals and demands for him to join up with the army
A member of the Hofkriegsrath from Vienna had come to Kutuzov the day

whatever.
the march: in their greatcoats, and packs, and without any preparation
wished to see the regiment just in the state in which it had been on
clearly worded the day before, namely, that the commander in chief
The aide-de-camp was sent to confirm the order which had not been

followed by a Cossack.
posted, two men appeared on horse back. They were an aide-de-camp
At that moment, on the road from the town on which signalers had been

"What?" asked the commander.

"It would not be turned off the field even on the Tsaritsin Meadow."

The battalion commander perceived the jovial irony and laughed.

regiment is not a bad one, eh?"
felt happy). "We had our hands full last night. However, I think the
commanders who smilingly pressed forward (it was plain that they both
"Well, Michael Mitrich, sir?" he said, addressing one of the battalion

thoughts.
matters, social interests and the fair sex occupied no small part of his
engrossed by it, yet his strut seemed to indicate that, besides military
admired his regiment, rejoiced in it, and that his whole mind was
himself up, slightly arching his back. It was plain that the commander
his life. He walked about in front of the line and at every step pulled
had the air of a man happily performing one of the most solemn duties of
which seemed to stand rather than lie down on his massive shoulders. He
showing the creases where it had been folded and thick gold epaulettes
chest to back than across the shoulders. He had on a brand-new uniform
thick-set general with grizzled eyebrows and whiskers, and wider from
The commander of the regiment was an elderly, choleric, stout, and

some seven hundred miles.
been issued by the Austrian commissariat, and the regiment had marched
regimental commander, for in spite of repeated demands boots had not
boots were in holes. But this defect was not due to any fault of the
ease. It was the state of the soldiers' boots. More than half the men's
say. There was only one circumstance concerning which no one could be at
appointed number of articles, "awl, soap, and all," as the soldiers
would have found on every man a clean shirt, and in every knapsack the
but had it pleased the commander in chief to look under the uniforms he
and shone with cleanliness. And not only externally was all in order,
knew his place and his duty, had every button and every strap in place,
before--presented a well-ordered array of two thousand men each of whom
straggling, disorderly crowd it had been on its last march the day
calculated and reckoned, and by morning the regiment--instead of the
without closing their eyes, while the adjutants and company commanders
after a twenty-mile march, were kept mending and cleaning all night long
always better to "bow too low than not bow low enough." So the soldiers,
to present the regiment in parade order, on the principle that it is
not, it was decided at a consultation between the battalion commanders
the question arose whether the troops were to be in marching order or
the words of the order were not clear to the regimental commander, and
the commander in chief would inspect the regiment on the march. Though
On the evening of the last day's march an order had been received that

inspection anywhere in the heart of Russia.
had just the appearance of any Russian regiment preparing for an
gazed with curiosity at the soldiers) were not Russians, the regiment
hills in the distance--and despite the fact that the inhabitants (who
locality and surroundings--fruit gardens, stone fences, tiled roofs, and
by the commander in chief. Despite the un-Russian appearance of the
Braunau had halted half a mile from the town, waiting to be inspected
On October 11, 1805, one of the infantry regiments that had just reached

the commander-in-chief, Kutuzov.
inhabitants on whom they were quartered. Braunau was the headquarters of
Russia were settling near the fortress of Braunau and burdening the
the Archduchy of Austria, and yet other regiments freshly arriving from
In October, 1805, a Russian army was occupying the villages and towns of


CHAPTER I





BOOK TWO: 1805





the door.
unconscious little princess, he shook his head reprovingly and slammed
"Gone? That's all right!" said he; and looking angrily at the

dressing gown looked out.
door opened quickly and the stern figure of the old man in the white
angrily blowing his nose. Hardly had Prince Andrew gone when the study
the study, like pistol shots, came the frequent sound of the old man
Andrew had gone and made the sign of the cross in his direction. From
with her beautiful eyes full of tears at the door through which Prince
her temples. Princess Mary, supporting her sister-in-law, still looked
The little princess lay in the armchair, Mademoiselle Bourienne chafing

kissing her, and then he left the room with rapid steps.
"Adieu, Mary," said he gently to his sister, taking her by the hand and

and carefully placed her in an easy chair.
He cautiously released the shoulder she leaned on, looked into her face,

He embraced her. She screamed and fell unconscious on his shoulder.

with dismay at her husband.
"Andrew, already!" said the little princess, turning pale and looking

through your performance."
And this "Well!" sounded coldly ironic, as if he were saying,: "Now go

"Well!" he said, turning to his wife.

Prince Andrew sighed and made no reply.

gown, spectacled and wigless, shouting in an angry voice.
the door Prince Andrew and the figure of the old man in a white dressing
"What is it? What?" asked both princesses when they saw for a moment at

opening his door.
"We've said good-by. Go!" he suddenly shouted in a loud, angry voice,

old prince's face.
fixed straight on his son's. Something twitched in the lower part of the
They stood silent, facing one another. The old man's sharp eyes were

"Not let the wife have him?" said the old man, and laughed.

yesterday... let him grow up with you.... Please."
and if I have a son, do not let him be taken away from you--as I said
"I also wanted to ask you," continued Prince Andrew, "if I'm killed

The old man was silent.

"You need not have said that to me, Father," said the son with a smile.

son of Nicholas Bolkonski, I shall be ashamed!"
voice suddenly shrieked: "but if I hear that you have not behaved like a
your old father..." he paused unexpectedly, and then in a querulous
him. "Remember this, Prince Andrew, if they kill you it will hurt me,
"Well, now, good-by!" He gave his son his hand to kiss, and embraced

"I will do it all, Father," he said.

yet. He felt that he must not say it.
Andrew did not tell his father that he would no doubt live a long time

when I am gone. You will find them useful."
wars. Send it to the Academy. Here are some jottings for you to read
a letter; it is a premium for the man who writes a history of Suvorov's
hand them to the Emperor after my death. Now here is a Lombard bond and
"I shall probably die before you. So remember, these are my memoirs;

bold, tall, close handwriting.
lid, drew out a drawer, and took out an exercise book filled with his
was accustomed to understand him. He led him to the desk, raised the
He spoke so rapidly that he did not finish half his words, but his son


     *Kutuzov.


disfavor. Now come here."
him. Nicholas Bolkonski's son need not serve under anyone if he is in
Write and tell me how he receives you. If he is all right--serve
long as an adjutant: a bad position! Tell him I remember and like him.
written that he should make use of you in proper places and not keep you
be. Now listen! Give this letter to Michael Ilarionovich. * I have
"Listen!" said he; "don't worry about your wife: what can be done shall

understood him. The old man got up and gave the letter to his son.
Andrew did not speak; he was both pleased and displeased that his father

easy," said he in abrupt sentences while sealing his letter.
"What's to be done? She's pretty! I will do everything. Make your mind

down the wax, the seal, and the paper, with his accustomed rapidity.
old man continued to fold and seal his letter, snatching up and throwing
The son sighed, thus admitting that his father had understood him. The

him, and again laughed his frigid laugh.
straight into his son's face with keen eyes which seemed to see through
He seized his son by the hand with small bony fingers, shook it, looked

yourself."
one can't unmarry. Don't be afraid; I won't tell anyone, but you know it
"No, it can't be helped, lad," said the prince. "They're all like that;

"I don't understand!" said Prince Andrew.

"The wife!" said the old prince, briefly and significantly.

"What is bad, Father?"

"It's a bad business, eh?"

laugh.
He signed with a flourish and suddenly turning to his son began to

writing. "I'll do it."
"Hm... Hm..." muttered the old prince to himself, finishing what he was

telling her things. She has had a dream and is frightened."
only one goes wrong, but it is her fancy and mine. They have been
Prince Andrew, evidently confused. "I know that out of a million cases
"I know that no one can help if nature does not do her work," said

stern eyes on his son.
The old prince stopped writing and, as if not understanding, fixed his

him be here...."
"When her confinement is due, send to Moscow for an accoucheur.... Let

"Why talk nonsense? Say what you want."

"About my wife... I am ashamed as it is to leave her on your hands..."

say it. These two things can be done together," he added.
that his quill spluttered and squeaked. "If you have anything to say,
Service before everything. Thanks, thanks!" And he went on writing, so
"For not dilly-dallying and not hanging to a woman's apron strings. The

"What do you thank me for?"

"Kiss me here," and he touched his cheek: "Thanks, thanks!"

"I've come to say good-by."

"Going?" And he went on writing.

son, sat at the table writing. He glanced round.
spectacles and white dressing gown, in which he received no one but his
When Prince Andrew entered the study the old man in his old-age

were waiting for them to come out.
father's study as the latter wished to say good-by to him alone. All
Mary, and the little princess. Prince Andrew had been called to his
the reception hall: Michael Ivanovich, Mademoiselle Bourienne, Princess
the young prince. The members of the household were all gathered in
domestic serfs were crowding in the hall, waiting to bid good-by to
house was brilliant with lights shining through its lofty windows. The
Servants with lanterns were bustling about in the porch. The immense
night, so dark that the coachman could not see the carriage pole.
The coach with six horses was waiting at the porch. It was an autumn

their journey. She answered him and continued her chatter.
Andrew came up, stroked her hair, and asked if she felt rested after
incessantly, repeating Petersburg reminiscences and even phrases. Prince
rosy, was sitting in an easy chair with her work in her hands, talking
five times. He entered the room softly. The little princess, plump and
Andrew had already heard from his wife in the presence of others some
This very sentence about Countess Zubova and this same laugh Prince

ha! Mary!"
full of false teeth, as if she were trying to cheat old age.... Ha, ha,
"No, but imagine the old Countess Zubova, with false curls and her mouth

up for lost time.
usual in French, and as if after long self-restraint she wished to make
one word after another, came through the open door. She was speaking as
sister's room his wife was already awake and her merry voice, hurrying
Frenchwoman blushed and went away without a word. When he reached his
and hair, without looking at her eyes, with such contempt that the
came over his face. He said nothing to her but looked at her forehead
Prince Andrew looked sternly at her and an expression of anger suddenly

blushing and dropping her eyes.
"Oh! I thought you were in your room," she said, for some reason

artless smile, she had met him in secluded passages.
sweetly. It was the third time that day that, with an ecstatic and
wing with the other, Prince Andrew met Mademoiselle Bourienne smiling
On the way to his sister's room, in the passage which connected one

"Well, may be!" said Prince Andrew. "Go, Masha; I'll come immediately."

answered."
to give you the love you do not feel, and your prayer would have been
"Andrew, if you had faith you would have turned to God and asked Him
Princess Mary rose and moved to the door, then stopped and said:

away. Put this on the seat and this to the right."
in a moment. Petrushka!" he called to his valet: "Come here, take these
"Let us go to her, I must say good-by. Or--go and wake and I'll come

her head toward the darkness of the open doorway.
unaccustomed brightness, but he was looking not at his sister but over
her forehead. His fine eyes lit up with a thoughtful, kindly, and
As he said this he rose, went to his sister, and, stooping, kissed

is so I don't know..."
you want to know whether I am happy? No! Is she happy? No! But why this
circumstances I may be placed. But if you want to know the truth... if
with anything in regard to her; and that always will be so in whatever
shall reproach my wife with anything, and I cannot reproach myself
"Know this, Masha: I can't reproach, have not reproached, and never

asleep. Prince Andrew felt sorry for his sister.
fate, her father-in-law, and her husband. After crying she had fallen
about her confinement, and how she dreaded it, and had complained of her
princess had been crying after dinner and had spoken of her forebodings
say something but could not. Her brother had guessed right: the little
The patches grew deeper on her forehead, neck, and cheeks. She tried to

am sorry for that," he went on.
"I have said nothing to you, but you have already been talked to. And I

she felt guilty.
Red patches appeared on Princess Mary's face and she was silent as if

her. Why do you say all this to me?"
"I do not think I have complained of my wife to you, Masha, or blamed

good-natured, and her position now is a very hard one."
used to be. Don't judge Lise harshly," she began. "She is so sweet, so
"As I was saying to you, Andrew, be kind and generous as you always

on the sofa. They were silent for a while.
"Thank you, my dear." She kissed him on the forehead and sat down again

he was touched, but also a gleam of irony on his face.
crossed himself and kissed the icon. There was a look of tenderness, for
would have taken the icon, but she stopped him. Andrew understood,
up the whole of her thin, sickly face and made it beautiful. Her brother
Rays of gentle light shone from her large, timid eyes. Those eyes lit

"Please, Andrew, for my sake!..."

She crossed herself, kissed the icon, and handed it to Andrew.

setting, on a finely wrought silver chain.
brother a small, oval, antique, dark-faced icon of the Saviour in a gold
trembling with emotion, solemnly holding up in both hands before her
to Himself, for in Him alone is truth and peace," said she in a voice
"Against your will He will save and have mercy on you and bring you

added: "I am glad; really, dear, I am very glad."
expression his joke had brought to his sister's face, he repented and
please you..." said Prince Andrew. But immediately, noticing the pained
"If it does not weigh a hundredweight and won't break my neck... To

never take it off. Do you promise?"
"Andrew, I bless you with this icon and you must promise me you will

"Of course. What is it?"

she was holding in her reticule.) "So you promise?"
grandfather, wore it in all his wars." (She still did not take out what
you please, but do this for my sake! Please do! Father's father, our
"Think what you please! I know you are just like Father. Think as

if guessing what it was about.
"Even if it were a great deal of trouble..." answered Prince Andrew, as

She looked timidly at her brother.

granted.
the subject of her request and must not be shown before the request was
taking out what she was holding inside it, as if what she held were
Andrusha!..." said she, putting her hand in her reticule but not yet
and is nothing unworthy of you, but it will comfort me. Promise,
"No--promise that you will not refuse! It will give you no trouble

"What is it, dear?"

of you."
she said timidly after a moment's silence, "I have a great favor to ask
"Ah! mon ami, I only pray, and hope that God will hear me. Andrew..."

said Prince Andrew banteringly yet tenderly.
"Ah! my dear, I am afraid you and your monk are wasting your powder,"

monk he received and had a long talk with."
improvement. His satire has been less bitter of late, and there was a
that makes me unhappy. But even in this I can see lately a shade of
as clear as day, and can go so far astray. That is the only thing
understand how a man of his immense intellect can fail to see what is
Andrew... is Father's way of treating religious subjects. I don't
"The only thing that is hard for me... I will tell you the truth,

Her brother shook his head incredulously.

and happy with him. I only wish you were all as happy as I am."
veneration could such a man as my father evoke? And I am so contented
How can one judge Father? But even if one might, what feeling except
rather than the trend of the conversation--"and that's a great sin.
pride," said the princess, following the train of her own thoughts
"You are good in every way, Andrew, but you have a kind of intellectual

in order to puzzle or test his sister.
trying," said Prince Andrew, apparently speaking lightly of their father
"He always was rather harsh; and now I should think he's getting very

"For me? For me?... Trying for me!..." said she.

Princess Mary was first surprised and then aghast at this question.

things trying for you, doesn't it?" Prince Andrew asked suddenly.
"To be quite frank, Mary, I expect Father's character sometimes makes

reading. She reads to him in the evenings and reads splendidly."
own father. She is very good-natured, and my father likes her way of
have done them.' Father took her when she was homeless after losing her
love people so much for the good they have done us, as for the good we
because he has been a benefactor to them both. As Sterne says: 'We don't
Ivanovich are the two people to whom he is always gentle and kind,
so. I like being alone.... Father likes her very much. She and Michael
even in my way. You know I always was a savage, and now am even more
She has no one, no one. To tell the truth, I don't need her, and she's
"No? She is very nice and kind and, above all, she's much to be pitied.

"I don't like your Mademoiselle Bourienne at all," said Prince Andrew.

There is only Mademoiselle Bourienne...."
resources I have for entertaining a woman used to the best society.
all alone--for Papa is always busy, and I... well, you know what poor
woman to be buried in the country during the best years of her life,
and can't, for I know no other. But think, Andrew: for a young society
"I... that's different. Why speak of me? I don't want any other life,

"You live in the country and don't think the life terrible," he replied.

think we thoroughly understand.
Prince Andrew smiled as he looked at his sister, as we smile at those we


     * To understand all is to forgive all.


condition! It's very hard."
to be parted from her husband and be left alone in the country, in her
what it must be for her, poor thing, after what she has been used to,
everyone's situation. Tout comprendre, c'est tout pardonner. * Think
society, and so her position now is not a rosy one. We should enter into
Andrew? Don't forget that she has grown up and been educated in
"One must be indulgent to little weaknesses; who is free from them,

contemptuous look that showed itself on his face.
Prince Andrew was silent, but the princess noticed the ironical and

child. I have grown so fond of her."
the sofa, facing her brother. "She is quite a child: such a dear, merry
Andrew! What a treasure of a wife you have," said she, sitting down on
"She was so tired that she has fallen asleep on the sofa in my room. Oh,

"And where is Lise?" he asked, answering her question only by a smile.

childhood.
Andrusha--the slender mischievous boy who had been her playfellow in
strange to her to think that this stern handsome man should be
She smiled as she uttered his pet name, "Andrusha." It was obviously

explain such a question.
with me for coming? You have changed so, Andrusha," she added, as if to
you alone! God knows how long we may again be parted. You are not angry
apparently been running), "and I did so wish to have another talk with
"I hear you have given orders to harness," she cried, panting (she had

expression. It was the heavy tread of Princess Mary that he heard.
cover of the small box, and assumed his usual tranquil and impenetrable
hurriedly unclasped his hands, stopped at a table as if tying the
wish to be seen in that mood, for hearing footsteps in the passage he
he sad at leaving his wife?--perhaps both, but evidently he did not
and thoughtfully shaking his head. Did he fear going to the war, or was
briskly from corner to corner of the room, looking straight before him
looked very thoughtful and tender. With his hands behind him he paced
one reviews the past and plans for the future. Prince Andrew's face
of reflection are generally in a serious frame of mind. At such moments
When starting on a journey or changing their mode of life, men capable

cloth covers carefully tied with tapes.
effects of Prince Andrew's were in very good order: new, clean, and in
father who had brought it from the siege of Ochakov. All these traveling
silver plate, two Turkish pistols and a saber--a present from his
with him remained in his room; a small box, a large canteen fitted with
ordered the horses to be harnessed. Only those things he always kept
After inspecting the carriage himself and seeing the trunks put in, he
epaulettes had been packing with his valet in the rooms assigned to him.
in her sister-in-law's room. Prince Andrew in a traveling coat without
his routine, retired as usual after dinner. The little princess was
Prince Andrew was to leave next evening. The old prince, not altering


CHAPTER XXVIII





"Oh, he is so kind!" answered Princess Mary.

afraid of him."
"What a clever man your father is," said she; "perhaps that is why I am

took her sister-in-law's arm and drew her into another room.
father-in-law and now at Princess Mary. When they left the table she
the dinner sat silent, glancing with a frightened look now at her
The little princess during the whole discussion and the rest of

laugh still more so, he quitted the table.
"Dieu sait quand reviendra..." hummed the prince out of tune and, with a

"You know, Prince, I am not a Bonapartist!"

excellent French.
another admirer of that powder-monkey emperor of yours," he exclaimed in
"Well, then go to your Buonaparte! Mademoiselle Bourienne, here's

"That would take too long to tell," answered the son.

skill?" he concluded.
at night. Come now, where has this great commander of yours shown his
affairs?" concluded his father. "But it troubles me. I don't sleep
"You think I'm an old man and don't understand the present state of

political events.
discuss so minutely and acutely all the recent European military and
old man, living alone in the country for so many years, could know and
listened, refraining from a reply, and involuntarily wondered how this
presented he was as little able as his father to change his opinion. He
son made no rejoinder, but it was evident that whatever arguments were
him, Bonaparte had made in his campaigns and even in politics. His
And the prince began explaining all the blunders which, according to

his reputation fighting them."
has beaten the Germans. They beat no one--except one another. He made
idlers have failed to beat the Germans. Since the world began everybody
splendid soldiers. Besides he began by attacking Germans. And only
"Buonaparte was born with a silver spoon in his mouth. He has got

The prince again laughed his frigid laugh.

"To be sure, your excellency," replied the architect.

Buonaparte was a great tactician? Here, he says the same thing."
with his roast meat, hoped he had been forgotten: "Didn't I tell you
"Michael Ivanovich!" cried the old prince to the architect who, busy

you like, but all the same Bonaparte is a great general!"
am only surprised at your opinion of Bonaparte. You may laugh as much as
"I don't at all say that all the plans are good," said Prince Andrew, "I

will happen. Buonaparte has become a great commander among them! Hm!..."
your wits, or I have outlived mine. May God help you, but we'll see what
Suvorovs, and Orlovs Germans? No, lad, either you fellows have all lost
to enter the Russian service.... "Wonderful!... Were the Potemkins,
Moreau," he said, alluding to the invitation made that year to Moreau
Pahlen, has been sent to New York in America, to fetch the Frenchman,
French, so that birds of a feather may fight together. The German,
generals won't get on against Buonaparte; you'll have to call in the
has Michael Kutuzov? No, my dear boy," he continued, "you and your
Hofs-kriegs-wurst-Raths are! Suvorov couldn't manage them so what chance
the devil himself! When you get there you'll find out what those
Hofs-kriegs-wurst-schnapps-Rath on his hands. It would have puzzled
have been a prisoner if Suvorov had had a free hand; but he had the
Prince Andrew. Two... Frederick and Suvorov; Moreau!... Moreau would
away his plate, which Tikhon briskly caught. "Suvorov!... Consider,
"Who told you that? Who?" cried the prince. "Suvorov!" And he jerked

escape?"
fall into a trap Moreau set him, and from which he did not know how to
"The past always seems good," said he, "but did not Suvorov himself

with evident pleasure.
father's ridicule of the new men, and drew him on and listened to him
pretending to do something real. Prince Andrew gaily bore with his
only a sort of puppet show at which the men of the day were playing,
there were no political difficulties in Europe and no real war, but
Potemkins or Suvorovs left to oppose him; but he was also convinced that
little Frenchy, successful only because there were no longer any
A B C of war or of politics, and that Bonaparte was an insignificant
only that all the men of the day were mere babies who did not know the
generals and statesmen of the day. The old prince seemed convinced not
And the conversation again turned on the war, on Bonaparte, and the

architect.
"He is a great tactician!" said the prince to his son, pointing to the

young prince, wondering what would follow.
which to hang the prince's favorite topic, he looked inquiringly at the
things about Bonaparte, but understanding that he was wanted as a peg on
Michael Ivanovich did not at all know when "you and I" had said such

thought much of him."
me what forces are being collected against him! While you and I never
Prince Andrew" (he always spoke thus of his son) "has been telling
"Well, Michael Ivanovich, our Bonaparte will be having a bad time of it.

definite idea of her, he turned away and addressed Michael Ivanovich.
and suddenly, as if he had studied her sufficiently and had formed a
As she became animated the prince looked at her more and more sternly,

her eyes out," she said, growing more and more lively.
"Countess Apraksina, poor thing, has lost her husband and she has cried

from various people and retailing the town gossip.
she became still more animated and chattered away giving him greetings
she began to smile and talk. He asked about mutual acquaintances, and
silent and seemed confused. The prince asked her about her father, and
The little princess did not, or did not wish to, hear his words. She was

"You must walk, walk as much as possible, as much as possible," he said.

and not with his eyes.
He laughed in his usual dry, cold, unpleasant way, with his lips only

"You've been in a hurry. That's bad!"
"Ho, ho!" said the old man, casting his eyes on her rounded figure.

the chair for her.
He indicated a place beside him to his daughter-in-law. A footman moved

down! Sit down, Michael Ianovich!"
eyes, and then quickly went to his place and sat down. "Sit down, sit
"I'm glad, glad, to see you," he said, looking attentively into her

her neck.
him. He stroked her hair and then patted her awkwardly on the back of
sensation of fear and respect which the old man inspired in all around
the little princess. She felt, as courtiers do when the Tsar enters, the
their thick, bushy eyebrows sternly scanned all present and rested on
room. The prince stood still; his lively glittering eyes from under
struck two and another with a shrill tone joined in from the drawing
with the strict formality of his house. At that moment the great clock
his wont, as if intentionally contrasting the briskness of his manners
coming from the study. The prince walked in quickly and jauntily as was
criticism and was about to reply, when the expected footsteps were heard
Princess Mary could not understand the boldness of her brother's

his powerful mind, indulging in such nonsense!"
"Everyone has his Achilles' heel," continued Prince Andrew. "Fancy, with

reverence and was beyond question.
what he was laughing at. Everything her father did inspired her with
Princess Mary looked at her brother in surprise. She did not understand

come up to him.
"How thoroughly like him that is!" he said to Princess Mary, who had

a portrait so characteristic of the original as to be amusing.
genealogical tree, shook his head, laughing as a man laughs who looks at
ancestor of the Bolkonskis. Prince Andrew, looking again at that
of a ruling prince, in a crown--an alleged descendant of Rurik and
portrait (evidently by the hand of the artist belonging to the estate)
Bolkonski, opposite which hung another such frame with a badly painted
gilt frame, new to him, containing the genealogical tree of the Princes
by which the prince was to enter. Prince Andrew was looking at a large
signs to the footmen, and anxiously glancing from the clock to the door
butler, napkin on arm, was scanning the setting of the table, making
behind each chair--stood waiting for the prince to enter. The head
exceedingly lofty, the members of the household and the footmen--one
In the dining room, which like all the rooms in the house was

taciturn Michael Ivanovich more often than to anyone else.
a whit worse than you or I." At dinner the prince usually spoke to the
more than once impressed on his daughter that Michael Ivanovich was "not
handkerchief) to illustrate the theory that all men are equals, and had
Ivanovich (who always went into a corner to blow his nose on his checked
government officials to his table, had unexpectedly selected Michael
very strictly to social distinctions and rarely admitted even important
not have caused him to expect that honor. The prince, who generally kept
position of that insignificant individual was such as could certainly
by a strange caprice of his employer's was admitted to table though the
Bourienne were already awaiting him together with his architect, who
dining room where his daughter-in-law, Princess Mary, and Mademoiselle
At the appointed hour the prince, powdered and shaven, entered the


CHAPTER XXVII





"Dieu sait quand reviendra. Go to the dining room."

meditatively and rapidly:
"Well, you've told me nothing new," and the old man repeated,

this one."
you what it is. Napoleon has also formed his plan by now, not worse than
"I don't say it's a plan I approve of," said the son; "I am only telling

His son only smiled.


     return."
     * "Marlborough is going to the wars; God knows when he'll


"Malbrook s'en va-t-en guerre. Dieu sait quand reviendra." *
description. The old man began to sing, in the cracked voice of old age:
The third interruption came when Prince Andrew was finishing his

said: "That's bad! Go on, go on."
"And will she soon be confined?" and shaking his head reproachfully

Another time he interrupted, saying:
This meant that Tikhon was not handing him the waistcoat he wanted.

white one, the white one!"
times unexpectedly interrupted. Once he stopped it by shouting: "The
not listening to it continued to dress while walking about, and three
not evince the least interest during this explanation, but as if he were
men was to attack the French from different sides. The old prince did
were to land at Naples, and how a total force of five hundred thousand
Italy and on the Rhine; how fifty thousand Russians and as many English
thousand Austrians, with a hundred thousand Russians, were to operate in
to join some Swedish forces at Stralsund; how two hundred and twenty
of her neutrality and draw her into the war; how part of that army was
ninety thousand strong, was to threaten Prussia so as to bring her out
the plan of operation for the coming campaign. He explained how an army,
changing unconsciously from Russian to French as he went on--to explain
reluctantly, but gradually with more and more animation, and from habit
Prince Andrew, seeing that his father insisted, began--at first

clothing. "What of Sweden? How will they cross Pomerania?"
followed by Tikhon, who ran after him, handing him different articles of
Austria?" said he, rising from his chair and pacing up and down the room
the southern army to do? Prussia is neutral... I know that. What about
I understand--Tolstoy's too... a simultaneous expedition.... But what's
way! I am glad to have her. Sit down and talk. About Mikhelson's army
over, and they'll talk nineteen to the dozen. That's their woman's
for your wife is ready. Princess Mary will take her there and show her
whether it was firmly plaited, and grasping his by the hand. "The house
"Nonsense, nonsense!" cried the old man, shaking his pigtail to see

honoring him. "Why, I have not yet had time to settle down!"
showed that his father's foibles did not prevent his son from loving and
"Give me time to collect my wits, Father," said he, with a smile that

Prince Andrew smiled.

by this new science you call 'strategy.'"
his hobby; "tell me how the Germans have taught you to fight Bonaparte
"God has nothing to do with it! Well, go on," he continued, returning to

"Thank God," said his son smiling.

morning till night and abstemious, so of course I am well."
"Only fools and rakes fall ill, my boy. You know me: I am busy from

an eager and respectful look. "How is your health?"
said Prince Andrew, following every movement of his father's face with
"Yes, Father, I have come to you and brought my wife who is pregnant,"

of Bonaparte.
topic--making fun of the military men of the day, and more particularly
spot indicated to him. He made no reply on his father's favorite
eyebrows. Prince Andrew went up and kissed his father on the
He cast happy, sidelong glances at his son from under his thick, bushy
to say that a nap "after dinner was silver--before dinner, golden.")
The old man was in a good temper after his nap before dinner. (He used

his cheek.
he'll soon have us, too, for his subjects! How are you?" And he held out
"You at least must tackle him properly, or else if he goes on like this

holding fast to plait, would allow.
man, shaking his powdered head as much as the tail, which Tikhon was
"Ah! here's the warrior! Wants to vanquish Buonaparte?" said the old

chair, wrapped in a powdering mantle, entrusting his head to Tikhon.
he talked to Pierre), the old man was sitting on a large leather-covered
manner he wore in drawing rooms, but with the animated face with which
entered his father's dressing room (not with the contemptuous look and
style, wearing an antique coat and powdered hair; and when Prince Andrew
he dressed for dinner. The old prince always dressed in old-fashioned
son's arrival: he gave orders to admit him to his apartments while
The old man made a departure from his usual routine in honor of his
prince to get up, Tikhon came to call the young prince to his father.
When the twenty minutes had elapsed and the time had come for the old

geometry were among the greatest delights of her life.
geometry lessons," said Princess Mary gleefully, as if her lessons in
"The hours are the same, and the lathe, and also the mathematics and my

aware of his weaknesses.
showed that, in spite of all his love and respect for his father, he was
lathe?" asked Prince Andrew with a scarcely perceptible smile which
"And are the hours the same? And the walks in the avenues? And the

answered the princess joyfully.
"Yes, just the same. Though I don't know what your opinion will be,"

Take her to your room and I'll go to Father. How is he? Just the same?"
"She needs rest," said Prince Andrew with a frown. "Don't you, Lise?

unexpectedly again began to cry.
Her lip descended. She brought her face close to her sister-in-law's and

quite certain. Ah! it is very dreadful..."
The face of the little princess changed. She sighed and said: "Yes,

"Is it certain?" she said.

thought turned to her sister-in-law with a tender glance at her figure.
Princess Mary did not listen to the end, but continuing her train of

promotion..."
"He is leaving me here, God knows why, when he might have had

"Yes, and even tomorrow," replied her brother.

Lise sighed too.

"So you are really going to the war, Andrew?" she said sighing.

description of the last Petersburg fete she addressed her brother:
thought independent of her sister-in-law's words. In the midst of a
of love and sadness. It was plain that she was following a train of
still looking silently at her brother and her beautiful eyes were full
a real one, but that they would talk of that later. Princess Mary was
Odyntsova had married an old man, and that there was a suitor for Mary,
to dress in here; and that Andrew had quite changed, and that Kitty
all her clothes in Petersburg and that heaven knew what she would have
condition, and immediately after that informed them that she had left
had on the Spasski Hill which might have been serious for her in her
glittering teeth and sparkling eyes. She told of an accident they had
and drawing up again next moment when her face broke into a smile of
continually and rapidly touching her rosy nether lip when necessary
The little princess talked incessantly, her short, downy upper lip

rested on Prince Andrew's face.
gentle look of her large luminous eyes, very beautiful at that moment,
turned toward her brother, and through her tears the loving, warm,
he told her she was still the same crybaby as ever. Princess Mary had
Prince Andrew and his sister, hand in hand, kissed one another, and

see you."
"And I had no idea!..." exclaimed Princess Mary. "Ah, Andrew, I did not

"I knew the princess at once," put in Mademoiselle Bourienne.

you have got thinner?..." "And you have grown stouter!..."
"I dreamed last night..."--"You were not expecting us?..." "Ah! Mary,
"Ah! my dear!... Ah! Mary!" they suddenly exclaimed, and then laughed.

heads that it could have been otherwise at this meeting.
natural that they should cry, and apparently it never entered their
Andrew evidently felt ill at ease, but to the two women it seemed quite
cry and kissed again. Mademoiselle Bourienne also began to cry. Prince
other on the face, and then to Prince Andrew's surprise both began to
hands, kissing them and pulling them away, and again began kissing each
another, and then, as if afraid of being too late, seized each other's
of music do when they hear a false note. The two women let go of one
laugh. Prince Andrew shrugged his shoulders and frowned, as lovers
heart, with a beatific smile and obviously equally ready to cry or to
touch. Mademoiselle Bourienne stood near them pressing her hand to her
arms warmly pressing their lips to whatever place they happened to
met once before for a short time at his wedding, were in each other's
of kissing. When Prince Andrew went in the two princesses, who had only
middle, a cry was heard, then Princess Mary's heavy tread and the sound
The little princess entered the room. The passage broke off in the

made a grimace, as if expecting something unpleasant.
of the oft-repeated passage of the sonata. Prince Andrew stopped and
They went up to the door of the sitting room from which came the sound

friendship for you. She was not expecting us?"
princess, kissing her. "I know you already through my sister-in-law's
"No, no, please not... You are Mademoiselle Bourienne," said the little

know."
"Ah! what joy for the princess!" exclaimed she: "At last! I must let her

rushed out apparently beside herself with delight.
came, the pretty, fair haired Frenchwoman, Mademoiselle Bourienne,
Before they reached the room from which the sounds of the clavichord

kissed his hand.
"You've grown older, Tikhon," he said in passing to the old man, who

Prince Andrew followed her with a courteous but sad expression.

"Is that Mary practicing? Let's go quietly and take her by surprise."

her husband, and at the footman who accompanied them.
come, quick, quick!" And with a glance round, she smiled at Tikhon, at
the expression with which people compliment their host at a ball. "Let's
"Why, this is a palace!" she said to her husband, looking around with

merrily and prettily as ever.
and her short, downy, smiling lip lifted when she began to speak just as
The little princess had grown stouter during this time, but her eyes

said.
"He will get up in twenty minutes. Let us go across to Mary's room," he

wife.
last, and, having assured himself that they had not, he turned to his
ascertain whether his father's habits had changed since he was at home
apparently knew this as well as Tikhon; he looked at his watch as if to
must be allowed to disturb the appointed order of the day. Prince Andrew
Tikhon knew that neither the son's arrival nor any other unusual event
a whisper that the prince was sleeping, and hastily closed the door.
a wig, put his head out of the door of the antechamber, reported in
alight, and let her pass into the house before him. Old Tikhon, wearing
porch. Prince Andrew got out of the carriage, helped his little wife to
Just then a closed carriage and another with a hood drove up to the

times repeated--of a sonata by Dussek.
through the closed doors came the sound of difficult passages--twenty
the prince, who was in his large study. From the far side of the house
The gray-haired valet was sitting drowsily listening to the snoring of


CHAPTER XXVI





clavichord.
day was mapped out, the prince rested and the princess played the
room with a look of alarm. Between twelve and two o'clock, as the
late in starting her practice on the clavichord, went into the sitting
The princess glanced at her watch and, seeing that she was five minutes

and would not have others do so."
warn me of the humor my father is in. I do not allow myself to judge him
"Ah, dear friend," replied Princess Mary, "I have asked you never to

a very bad humor, very morose. Be prepared."
grasseyement, "the prince has been scolding Michael Ivanovich. He is in
listening to herself with pleasure, and speaking with exaggerated
"Princess, I must warn you," she added, lowering her voice and evidently

quite different atmosphere, careless, lighthearted, and self-satisfied.
She brought into Princess Mary's strenuous, mournful, and gloomy world a
Bourienne rapidly, in her pleasant mellow tones and with guttural r's.
mine. I have written to my poor mother," said the smiling Mademoiselle
"Ah, you are sending off a letter, Princess? I have already dispatched


MARY

Mother keep you in their holy and all-powerful care!
Adieu, dear and kind friend; may our divine Saviour and His most Holy

one another.
injuries--and that men attribute the greatest merit to skill in killing
laws of its divine Saviour, Who preached love and forgiveness of
have heard the sobs. It seems as though mankind has forgotten the
the mothers, wives, and children of the men who were going and should
people and starting to join the army. You should have seen the state of
heartrending scene.... It was a convoy of conscripts enrolled from our
before yesterday during my daily walk through the village I witnessed a
countermarches, things of which I understand nothing; and the day
and painfully felt. My father talks of nothing but marches and
consider characteristic of the country--rumors of war are heard
war, even here amid fieldwork and the calm of nature--which townsfolk
are--at the heart of affairs and of the world--is the talk all of
into which we have been drawn, God knows how or why. Not only where you
however, for he will leave, us again to take part in this unhappy war
at Bald Hills with his wife. This pleasure will be but a brief one,
I have had a letter from my brother, who announces his speedy arrival

toward him whom He may give me for husband.
faithfully as I can, without disquieting myself by examining my feelings
the duties of wife and mother upon me I shall try to perform them as
conform. However painful it may be to me, should the Almighty lay
friend, that I look on marriage as a divine institution to which we must
regard to this project of marriage for me, I will tell you, dear sweet
he has received a letter and is expecting a visit from Prince Vasili. In
My father has not spoken to me of a suitor, but has only told me that

vouchsafe its revelation to us through His divine Spirit.
what He has been pleased to conceal from us, the sooner will He
knowledge that does not come from Him; and the less we seek to fathom
human minds roam, the better we shall please God, who rejects all
follow them, and let us be persuaded that the less we let our feeble
left for our guidance here below. Let us try to conform to them and
ourselves to studying those sublime rules which our divine Saviour has
an impenetrable veil between us and the Eternal? Let us rather confine
holy secrets of Providence while we remain in this flesh which forms
for how can we, miserable sinners that we are, know the terrible and
and Gospels. Let us not seek to penetrate what mysteries they contain;
quite contrary to Christian simplicity. Let us rather read the Epistles
doubts and excite their imagination, giving them a bent for exaggeration
their minds by dwelling on mystical books that merely awaken their
I never could understand the fondness some people have for confusing
time in reading what is unintelligible and can therefore bear no fruit.
human understanding cannot grasp, it seems to me rather useless to spend
tell me that among some good things it contains others which our weak
you have sent me and which has such success in Moscow. Yet since you
than the poorest beggar. A thousand thanks, dear friend, for the volume
If I were asked what I desire most on earth, it would be to be poorer
and burdened with such riches--to what temptations he will be exposed!
true. I pity Prince Vasili but am still more sorry for Pierre. So young,
a needle than for a rich man to enter the Kingdom of God, are terribly
Saviour's words, that it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of
Vasili, it is very sad for both. Ah, my dear friend, our divine
most in people. As to his inheritance and the part played by Prince
seemed to me to have an excellent heart, and that is the quality I value
I cannot agree with you about Pierre, whom I knew as a child. He always

possible. God preserve us from that terrible misfortune!
turn now, but that he will do all he can to let his turn come as late as
representative but one of the great century, and that it is his own
my father was much affected by it. He says the count was the last
The news of Count Bezukhov's death reached us before your letter and

inspire in a romantic and loving young girl like yourself.
and better than the feelings which the beautiful eyes of a young man can
love, love of one's neighbor, love of one's enemy, is worthier, sweeter,
them, neither do I condemn them. Only it seems to me that Christian
feelings in others, and if never having felt them I cannot approve of
man? On such matters I am only severe with myself. I understand such
suppose that I should look severely on your affection for that young
we had not religion to console us life would be very sad. Why do you
dared complain, I who am deprived of all who are dear to me? Ah, if
on you. You complain of our separation. What then should I say, if I
you say so much that is bad, does not seem to have had its usual effect
delight. So you still love me, my romantic Julie? Separation, of which
Dear and precious Friend, Your letter of the 13th has given me great


also in French:
paper and her hand moved rapidly over it. This is the reply she wrote,
rose and with her heavy tread went up to the table. She took a sheet of
eyes lit up so that her face was entirely transformed. Then she suddenly
The princess pondered awhile with a thoughtful smile and her luminous


P.S. Let me have news of your brother and his charming little wife.

JULIE

Bourienne. I embrace you as I love you.
my respects to monsieur your father and my compliments to Mademoiselle
is an admirable book which calms and elevates the soul. Adieu! Give
there are things in it difficult for the feeble human mind to grasp, it
mystical book I am sending you; it has an enormous success here. Though
and Mamma has sent for me to go and dine at the Apraksins'. Read the
But enough of gossip. I am at the end of my second sheet of paper,

scapegrace. That is all I have been able to find out about him.
let you know of it. He is said to be very handsome and a terrible
I don't know what you will think of it, but I consider it my duty to
and distinguee, and it is on you that his relations' choice has fallen.
son Anatole, whom they wish to reform by marrying him to someone rich
marriage for you. It is neither more nor less than with Prince Vasili's
Anna Mikhaylovna told me, under the seal of strict secrecy, of a plan of
propos of marriages: do you know that a while ago that universal auntie
Bezukhova. But you will understand that I have no desire for the post. A
matchmaking chronicles of Moscow now speak of me as the future Countess
by finding husbands for me (most of whom I don't even know), the
of fellow. As for the past two years people have amused themselves
him, though, between you and me, he always seemed to me a poor sort
marriageable daughters, and of the young ladies themselves, toward
watch the change in the tone and manners of the mammas burdened by
owner of one of the largest fortunes in Russia, I am much amused to
to know as plain Monsieur Pierre, has become Count Bezukhov and the
inheritance; but I do know that since this young man, whom we all used
I confess I understand very little about all these matters of wills and

quite crestfallen.
a very despicable part in this affair and that he returned to Petersburg
of the finest fortune in Russia. It is rumored that Prince Vasili played
recognized as legitimate; so that he is now Count Bezukhov and possessor
Pierre who has inherited all the property and has besides been
have received very little, Prince Vasili nothing, and it is Monsieur
old Count Bezukhov, and his inheritance. Fancy! The three princesses
this! The chief news, about which all Moscow gossips, is the death of
this poetic and pure intimacy, were what my heart needed. But enough of
young ever to be more to me than a friend, but this sweet friendship,
generally the stronger! I know very well that Count Nicholas is too
these poignant joys and sorrows. You are fortunate, for the latter are
That is still too fresh. Ah, dear friend, you are happy not to know
Someday I will tell you about our parting and all that was said then.
sweetest comforts to my poor heart, which has already suffered so much.
my relations with him, transient as they were, have been one of the
he is so frank and has so much heart. He is so pure and poetic that
one seldom finds nowadays among our old men of twenty and, particularly,
last summer, is so noble-minded and full of that real youthfulness which
the army was a great grief to me. This young man, of whom I spoke to you
you, dear Mary, that in spite of his extreme youth his departure for
inactive and has left the university to join the army. I will confess to
young Nicholas Rostov, who with his enthusiasm could not bear to remain
war has deprived me of one of the associations nearest my heart. I mean
goodness, to give us as sovereign! To say nothing of my brothers, this
be overthrown by the angel whom it has pleased the Almighty, in His
that the Corsican monster who is destroying the peace of Europe may
intends to expose his precious person to the chances of war. God grant
to the frontier. Our dear Emperor has left Petersburg and it is thought
abroad, the other is with the Guards, who are starting on their march
All Moscow talks of nothing but war. One of my two brothers is already


reading:
unnatural expression as soon as she looked in a glass. She went on
was not thinking of herself. As with everyone, her face assumed a forced
the beautiful expression of her own eyes--the look they had when she
attraction more powerful than that of beauty. But the princess never saw
that very often in spite of the plainness of her face they gave her an
times there radiated from them shafts of warm light)--were so beautiful
friend, the princess' eyes--large, deep and luminous (it seemed as if at
turning away and continuing to read. But Julie did not flatter her
at her reflection in the glass. "She flatters me," thought the princess,
thin face. Her eyes, always sad, now looked with particular hopelessness
which stood on her right. It reflected a weak, ungraceful figure and
Having read thus far, Princess Mary sighed and glanced into the mirror


as I write?
calm, and penetrating, a look I loved so well and seem to see before me
three months ago, draw fresh moral strength from your look, so gentle,
study, on the blue sofa, the confidential sofa? Why cannot I now, as
we parted. Why are we not together as we were last summer, in your big
overcome a certain secret sorrow that has been in my heart ever since
fate and in spite of the pleasures and distractions around me I cannot
our hearts are united by indissoluble bonds, my heart rebels against
are wrapped up in you, and that in spite of the distance separating us
separation! Though I tell myself that half my life and half my happiness
Dear and precious Friend, How terrible and frightful a thing is


Julie wrote in French:

name-day party.
childhood; that same Julie Karagina who had been at the Rostovs'
the seal of her letter. It was from her most intimate friend from
her father was tidy. She put down the geometry book and eagerly broke
which was littered with books and papers. The princess was as untidy as
sat down at her writing table, on which stood miniature portraits and
rarely left her and which made her plain, sickly face yet plainer. She
Princess Mary went back to her room with the sad, scared expression that

He patted her on the shoulder and himself closed the door after her.

at it. Take it. Well, now go. Go."
you. Religious! I don't interfere with anyone's belief... I have looked
"Here is some sort of Key to the Mysteries that your Heloise has sent

book from the high desk.
She turned to go, but he stopped her with a gesture and took an uncut

head."
and he patted her cheek. "It will drive all the nonsense out of your
to have you like our silly ladies. Get used to it and you'll like it,"
was about to leave: "Mathematics are most important, madam! I don't want
having taken and closed the exercise book with the next day's lesson,
"This won't do, Princess; it won't do," said he, when Princess Mary,

He drew up his chair, and continued to explain.

lightly touched his daughter's hair and sat down again.
and turning sharply away; but rising immediately, he paced up and down,
"Well now, isn't she a fool!" shouted the prince, pushing the book aside

The princess gave a wrong answer.

flung the exercise book away.
vehement, but almost always did become vehement, scolded, and sometimes
backward and forward, made efforts to control himself and not become
was beside himself: moved the chair on which he was sitting noisily
quickly to her own room to make out the problem in peace. The old man
breath and the smell of him, and could think only of how to get away
only conscious of her stern father's withered face close to her, of his
eyes grew dim, she could not see and could not hear anything, but was
fault or the pupil's, this same thing happened every day: the princess'
explanations, however clear they might be. Whether it was the teacher's
fear would prevent her understanding any of her father's further
plain that she understood nothing and was so frightened that her
close to her; the red patches on her face came and went, and it was
The princess looked in a scared way at her father's eyes glittering

are equal; please note that the angle ABC..."
and tobacco, which she had known so long. "Now, madam, these triangles
she felt herself surrounded on all sides by the acrid scent of old age
and placing an arm on the back of the chair on which she sat, so that
"Well, madam," he began, stooping over the book close to his daughter

exercise book containing geometrical figures.
letter away, and leaning his elbows on the table he drew toward him the
"The third, I said the third!" cried the prince abruptly, pushing the

and holding out the letter.
"Read this if you like, Father," said the princess, blushing still more

third!"
prince sternly; "I'm afraid you write much nonsense. I'll read the
"I'll let two more letters pass, but the third I'll read," said the

timid smile.
"Yes, it's from Julie," replied the princess with a timid glance and a

sound, yellowish teeth.
"From Heloise?" asked the prince with a cold smile that showed his still

princess' face. She took it quickly and bent her head over it.
At the sight of the letter red patches showed themselves on the

onto which he threw it.
a letter addressed in a woman's hand from a bag hanging above the table,
"Wait a bit, here's a letter for you," said the old man suddenly, taking

The princess bent over the exercise book on the table.

from one paragraph to another with his hard nail.
"For tomorrow!" said he, quickly finding the page and making a scratch

with his foot.
containing lessons in geometry written by himself and drew up a chair
"Quite well? All right then, sit down." He took the exercise book

her tenderly and attentively, said severely:
so he simply held out his bristly cheek (as yet unshaven) and, regarding
the table, summoned his daughter. He never gave his children a blessing,
dropped it into a leather pouch attached to the lathe, and, approaching
of the lathe he removed his foot from the pedal, wiped his chisel,
tenacious endurance and vigor of hardy old age. After a few more turns
of the lean sinewy hand, showed that the prince still possessed the
shod in a Tartar boot embroidered with silver, and the firm pressure
continuous, varied, and orderly activity. The motion of the small foot
tools laid ready to hand and shavings scattered around--all indicated
standing up, on which lay an open exercise book, and the lathe with
bookcases with keys in the locks, the high desk for writing while
The large table covered with books and plans, the tall glass-fronted
The enormous study was full of things evidently in constant use.

continued his work.
entrance. The prince was working at the lathe and after glancing round
opened the door which moved noiselessly and easily. She paused at the
Through the door came the regular hum of a lathe. The princess timidly

quietly and said in a whisper: "Please walk in."
An old powdered manservant who was sitting in the antechamber rose

prayed that the daily interview might pass off well.
silent prayer. Every morning she came in like that, and every morning
morning greeting, crossing herself with trepidation and repeating a
Mary entered the antechamber as usual at the time appointed for the
On the morning of the day that the young couple were to arrive, Princess

youthfully glittering eyes.
eyebrows which, when he frowned, sometimes hid the gleam of his shrewd,
small old man, with powdered wig, small withered hands, and bushy gray
the enormously high study door opened and showed the figure of a rather
antechamber experienced the same feeling of respect and even fear when
appeared punctually to the appointed hour. Everyone sitting in this
just as the architect, gardener, or Princess Mary did, till the prince
considered it his duty to visit him and waited in the lofty antechamber
official appointed to the province in which the prince's estate lay
in retirement and had now no influence in political affairs, every high
and respect as few hardhearted men would have aroused. Although he was
exacting, so that without being a hardhearted man he inspired such fear
him, from his daughter to his serfs, the prince was sharp and invariably
and not only at the same hour but at the same minute. With those about
exactitude. He always came to table under precisely the same conditions,
regularity in his household was carried to the highest point of
at his estate. As regularity is a prime condition facilitating activity,
in the garden, or superintending the building that was always going on
problems in higher mathematics, turning snuffboxes on a lathe, working
occupied. He was himself always occupied: writing his memoirs, solving
till she was twenty, and arranged her life so that her whole time was
cardinal virtues in her gave her lessons in algebra and geometry
himself undertook his daughter's education, and to develop these two
superstition, and only two virtues--activity and intelligence. He
say that there are only two sources of human vice--idleness and
Bald Hills, while he himself needed no one and nothing. He used to
anyone who wanted to see him could come the hundred miles from Moscow to
capitals, he still continued to live in the country, remarking that
Bourienne. Though in the new reign he was free to return to the
with his daughter, Princess Mary, and her companion, Mademoiselle
Paul had exiled him to his country estate had lived there continuously
(nicknamed in society, "the King of Prussia") ever since the Emperor
old prince's household. General in Chief Prince Nicholas Andreevich
this expectation did not upset the regular routine of life in the
arrival of young Prince Andrew and his wife was daily expected, but
At Bald Hills, Prince Nicholas Andreevich Bolkonski's estate, the


CHAPTER XXV





whispers and as a great secret.
the eldest princess and Prince Vasili she spoke disapprovingly, but in
men as the old count and his worthy son," said she. Of the behavior of
"It is painful, but it does one good. It uplifts the soul to see such
though he tried hard to hide it in order not to sadden his dying father.
Pierre, whom it had been pitiful to see, so stricken was he with grief,
and everybody at last and had spoken such pathetic words to the son, or
during those awful moments--the father who so remembered everything
not think of it without tears, and did not know which had behaved better
last meeting between father and son, it was so touching that she could
wish to die, that his end was not only touching but edifying. As to the
Count Bezukhov's death. She said the count had died as she would herself
morning she told the Rostovs and all her acquaintances the details of
Mikhaylovna returned to the Rostovs' and went to bed. On waking in the
silence at Princess Anna Mikhaylovna. After her talk with Pierre, Anna
Pierre understood nothing of all this and coloring shyly looked in

time. I hope, my dear friend, you will carry out your father's wish?"
me only the day before yesterday not to forget Boris. But he had no
there, God only knows what would have happened! You know, Uncle promised
"Perhaps later on I may tell you, my dear boy, that if I had not been

Pierre was silent.

duties on you, and you must be a man."
enough to be sure that this will not turn your head, but it imposes
an immense fortune. The will has not yet been opened. I know you well
God will support you: you are young, and are now, I hope, in command of
"Yes, my dear, this is a great loss for us all, not to speak of you. But

In the morning Anna Mikhaylovna said to Pierre:

fast asleep with his head on his arm.
see his face. Anna Mikhaylovna left him, and when she returned he was
She led him into the dark drawing room and Pierre was glad no one could

tears."
"Come, I will go with you. Try to weep, nothing gives such relief as

Pierre looked at her over his spectacles.

"He is no more...."

forehead, wetting him with her tears. Then after a pause she said:
Pierre gave her an inquiring look. She kissed the young man on his

"Pierre!" she said.

steps.
Anna Mikhaylovna came out last. She approached Pierre with slow, quiet

awful..." and he burst into tears.
near sixty, dear friend... I too... All will end in death, all! Death is
before. "How often we sin, how much we deceive, and all for what? I am
in his voice a sincerity and weakness Pierre had never observed in it
"Ah, my friend!" said he, taking Pierre by the elbow; and there was

ague.
noticed that he was pale and that his jaw quivered and shook as if in an
sitting and dropped onto it, covering his face with his hand. Pierre
Prince Vasili came next. He staggered to the sofa on which Pierre was

handkerchief and rushed from the room.
waiting for." And bursting into tears she hid her face in her
"Yes, now you may be glad!" said she; "this is what you have been

irrepressible hatred.
biting her underlip. At sight of Pierre her expression showed an
minutes later the eldest sister came out with a pale hard face, again
princess and Prince Vasili, recovering themselves, followed her. A few
caught up the object of contention and ran into the bedroom. The eldest
Her sister dropped the portfolio. Anna Mikhaylovna, stooping, quickly

me alone with him!"
"What are you doing!" she cried vehemently. "He is dying and you leave

wringing her hands.
against the wall, and the second of the three sisters rushed out
and which had always opened so quietly, burst noisily open and banged
At this moment that terrible door, which Pierre had watched so long

Prince Vasili bent his head and spread out his hands.

Mikhaylovna and snatching the portfolio from her.
"Vile woman!" shouted the princess, darting unexpectedly at Anna

severely. "You don't know what you are doing."
"Remember that you will answer for the consequences," said Prince Vasili

dignity, and at the twitching cheeks of Prince Vasili.
with astonishment at the angry face of the princess which had lost all
she, turning to the young man who, having come quite close, was gazing
allow him a moment's peace! Here, Pierre, tell them your opinion," said
"But, Prince," said Anna Mikhaylovna, "after such a solemn sacrament,

and ask him, I!... does that satisfy you?"
"Let go, I tell you! I will take the responsibility. I myself will go

But Anna Mikhaylovna did not obey him.

"And you too!"

The princess let go.

absurd! Come, let go I tell you."
Prince Vasili rose. "Oh!" said he with reproach and surprise, "this is

portfolio, and changed her grip.
But Anna Mikhaylovna went forward a step or two to keep her hold on the

hissed viciously, and tugged with all her might at the portfolio.
a scene on the very threshold of a dying man's room? Intriguer!" she
remain silent when heaven knows who permits herself to interfere, making
that those in the drawing room heard her and were startled. "Why do you
"Why don't you speak, cousin?" suddenly shrieked the princess so loud

family consultation; is it not so, Prince?"
"Pierre, my dear, come here. I think he will not be out of place in a

of its honeyed firmness and softness.
Mikhaylovna. Though the latter held on tenaciously, her voice lost none
the princess did speak, her words would not be flattering to Anna
portfolio were the only sounds audible, but it was evident that if
The princess did not reply. Their efforts in the struggle for the

conjure..."
"Dear princess, I beg and implore you, have some pity on him! Je vous en
portfolio so firmly that it was plain she would not let go easily.
"I know, my dear, kind princess," said Anna Mikhaylovna, seizing the

her path.
She tried to pass Anna Mikhaylovna, but the latter sprang so as to bar

table, and this is a paper he has forgotten...."
held in her hand. "All I know is that his real will is in his writing
ladies, addressing Prince Vasili and pointing to an inlaid portfolio she
"I don't even know what is in this paper," said the younger of the two

how fond the count is of her."
"Come, my dear Anna Mikhaylovna, let Catiche do as she pleases. You know

the air of a man little concerned in what the two ladies were saying.
that they looked heavier below, were twitching violently; but he wore
one leg crossed high above the other. His cheeks, which were so flabby
Prince Vasili was seated in an easy chair in his familiar attitude, with

prepared..."
needs repose? Worldly conversation at a moment when his soul is already
from passing, "won't this be too much for poor Uncle at a moment when he
impressively, blocking the way to the bedroom and preventing the other
"But, my dear princess," answered Anna Mikhaylovna blandly but

state of excitement as when she had slammed the door of her room.
necessary," said the younger of the two speakers, evidently in the same
"Permit me, Princess, to know what is necessary and what is not

princess, and they were both speaking in excited whispers.
short interval followed her. Anna Mikhaylovna was standing beside the
princess. Pierre concluded that this also was essential, and after a
to the reception room where they had left Prince Vasili and the eldest
inquiringly at his monitress and saw that she was again going on tiptoe
not eat anything though he would very much have liked to. He looked
was happening and what was about to happen in the bedroom. Pierre did
betraying by every word and movement that they none of them forgot what
of people sat there, not merrymaking, but somberly whispering, and
stood in disorder, and in the middle of the night a motley throng
lighted by two candles. On one small table tea things and supper dishes
repeated their reflections several times. Now this same room was dimly
shoulders, looked at themselves in the brilliantly lighted mirrors which
through in their ball dresses with diamonds and pearls on their bare
had liked sitting in this room to watch the ladies who, as they passed
During balls given at the house Pierre, who did not know how to dance,
this small circular drawing room with its mirrors and little tables.
that night had gathered to fortify themselves. Pierre well remembered
circular room. Around the table all who were at Count Bezukhov's house
cup before a table on which tea and a cold supper were laid in the small
animation as he stood sipping tea from a delicate Chinese handleless
delicious Russian tea," Lorrain was saying with an air of restrained
"There is nothing so refreshing after a sleepless night as a cup of this

drawing room.
below the shoulder. Pierre went with Anna Mikhaylovna into the small
To Pierre he said nothing, merely giving his arm a sympathetic squeeze

Mikhaylovna, or you will not hold out."
Vasili to Anna Mikhaylovna. "Go and take something, my poor Anna
"Catiche has had tea served in the small drawing room," said Prince

"I can't bear the sight of that woman."

something as she whispered:
they became silent, and Pierre thought he saw the princess hide
Great and talking eagerly. As soon as they saw Pierre and his companion
eldest princess, who were sitting under the portrait of Catherine the
There was now no one in the reception room except Prince Vasili and the


CHAPTER XXIV





Pierre went out.

princesses was coming to take her turn at watching. "Let us go."
"He is dozing," said Anna Mikhaylovna, observing that one of the

sick man was turned on to his side with his face to the wall. He sighed.
in his breast and a tickling in his nose, and tears dimmed his eyes. The
helplessness. At sight of this smile Pierre felt an unexpected quivering
quite out of keeping with his features, that seemed to deride his own
and again at the arm, and on his face a feeble, piteous smile appeared,
rate he glanced at the refractory arm, at Pierre's terror-stricken face,
or whether some other thought flitted across his dying brain, at any
noticed the look of terror with which Pierre regarded that lifeless arm,
helplessly and he made a fruitless effort to pull it forward. Whether he
While the count was being turned over, one of his arms fell back

Pierre rose to help him.

turn the count's heavy body toward the wall.
"Wants to turn on the other side," whispered the servant, and got up to

stood constantly at the head of the bed.
sick man showed impatience. He made an effort to look at the servant who
inquiring whisper, then pointed to the quilt. The eyes and face of the
first to Pierre, then to some drink, then named Prince Vasili in an
at the sick man's eyes, trying to guess what he wanted; she pointed
issued an indistinct, hoarse sound. Anna Mikhaylovna looked attentively
realize how near death his father was), and from that distorted mouth
increased, the handsome mouth was drawn to one side (only now did Pierre
muscles and lines of the count's face began to twitch. The twitching
about two minutes, which to Pierre seemed an hour. Suddenly the broad
of these last moments of meeting between the father and son. This lasted
indicated by her attitude her consciousness of the pathetic importance
spot where Pierre's face had been before he sat down. Anna Mikhaylovna
as small as possible. He looked at the count, who still gazed at the
stout and clumsy body took up so much room and doing his utmost to look
symmetrical pose of an Egyptian statue, evidently distressed that his
Anna Mikhaylovna nodded approvingly. Again Pierre fell into the naively
Pierre obediently sat down, his eyes asking if he were doing right.
Mikhaylovna with her eyes indicated a chair that stood beside the bed.
questioningly at Anna Mikhaylovna to see what he was to do next. Anna
single muscle of the count's face stirred. Once more Pierre looked
lips to the large boned, fleshy hand. Neither the hand nor a
so as not to touch the quilt, followed her suggestion and pressed his
her lips as if to send it a kiss. Pierre, carefully stretching his neck
a hurried sign with her eyes, glancing at the sick man's hand and moving
what to do, and glanced inquiringly at his guide. Anna Mikhaylovna made
must look somewhere, or it meant too much. Pierre hesitated, not knowing
Either this look meant nothing but that as long as one has eyes they
look the significance of which could not be understood by mortal man.
When Pierre came up the count was gazing straight at him, but with a
were symmetrically placed on the green silk quilt, the palms downward.
completed. He lay with his head propped high on the pillows. His hands
man had been laid in a stately pose in keeping with the ceremony just
and said, "Come." Pierre went with her to the bed on which the sick
carried the sick man dispersed. Anna Mikhaylovna touched Pierre's hand
After a few minutes' bustle beside the high bedstead, those who had

nothing.
movements of the bearers, and the cold listless gaze fixed itself upon
Petersburg. But now this head was swaying helplessly with the uneven
remembered it three months before, when the count had sent him to
not disfigured by the approach of death. It was the same as Pierre
its handsome, sensual mouth, and its cold, majestic expression, was
leonine head. This head, with its remarkably broad brow and cheekbones,
those who were holding him under the armpits, and of his gray, curly,
man's high, stout, uncovered chest and powerful shoulders, raised by
he caught a momentary glimpse between their heads and backs of the dying
As the bearers, among whom was Anna Mikhaylovna, passed the young man

were carrying were too much for them.
the shuffling of their feet grew more hurried, as if the weight they
exclaimed different voices; and the heavy breathing of the bearers and
say in a frightened whisper. "Catch hold from underneath. Here!"
"Catch hold of my arm or you'll drop him!" he heard one of the servants

lifted the dying man and were moving him.
movements of those who crowded round the invalid chair that they had
for a single moment during the whole service. He judged by the cautious
mane--which, though he saw other faces as well, he had not lost sight of
that Pierre could no longer see the reddish-yellow face with its gray
The sick man was so surrounded by doctors, princesses, and servants

"Certainly he must be moved onto the bed; here it will be impossible..."

Pierre heard her say:

Anna Mikhaylovna's was the most distinct.
him everyone began to stir: steps were audible and whispers, among which
sacrament. The dying man lay as lifeless and immovable as before. Around
heard respectfully congratulating the dying man on having received the
The chanting of the service ceased, and the voice of the priest was

happening around him that evening was in some way essential.
what went on, having made up his mind once for all that what he saw
Pierre paid no more attention to this occurrence than to the rest of
to their places one after the other before the service was concluded.
Prince Vasili and the princess passed out by a back door, but returned
the high bedstead with its silken hangings. On leaving the bed both
eldest princess, and moved with her to the side of the room where stood
for them--did not go up to the dying man, but passed by him, joined the
was about and if others did not understand him it was so much the worse
had been leaning, and--with an air which intimated that he knew what he
interval Pierre noticed that Prince Vasili left the chair on which he
the people resumed their places and the service continued. During this
sick man was given something to drink, there was a stir around him, then
free, and turning sideways felt the pulse and reflected a moment. The
delicate white fingers raised from the green quilt the hand that was
sick man with the noiseless step of one in full vigor of life, with his
now being performed and even approved of it. He now approached the
of all differences of faith, understood the full importance of the rite
columns in a respectful attitude implying that he, a foreigner, in spite
back. The French doctor held no taper; he was leaning against one of the
and, stooping over the dying man, beckoned to Lorrain from behind her
up and said something to the ladies. Anna Mikhaylovna stepped forward
to one another, and the old servant who was holding the count's hand got
of the service the voices of the priests suddenly ceased, they whispered
temptation she slipped quietly behind one of the columns. In the midst
without laughing, but could not resist looking at him: so to be out of
again began to laugh. She evidently felt unable to look at him
with it hidden for awhile; then looking up and seeing Pierre she
watched him. She smiled, hid her face in her handkerchief, and remained
Sophie, the rosy, laughter-loving, youngest princess with the mole,

crossing himself with the hand that held the taper.
a taper. He lit it and, distracted by observing those around him, began
about, went across the room to where Pierre was standing and gave him
air of importance that showed that she felt she quite knew what she was
feet were the only sounds that could be heard. Anna Mikhaylovna, with an
of deep bass voices, and in the intervals sighs and the shuffling of
themselves, and the reading of the church service, the subdued chanting
the men and women had separated as in church. All were silently crossing
Behind him stood the aide-de-camp, the doctors, and the menservants;

sentiments," he seemed to be saying, "so much the worse for you!"
and resignation to the will of God. "If you do not understand these
each time he touched his forehead. His face wore a calm look of piety
and was crossing himself with his right hand, turning his eyes upward
the carved back of a velvet chair he had turned round for the purpose,
invalid chair, a wax taper in his left hand, was leaning his left arm on
near the strange lady. Prince Vasili in front of the door, near the
sorrowful, and all-forgiving expression on her face, stood by the door
for herself should she glance round. Anna Mikhaylovna, with a meek,
the icons, as though declaring to all that she could not answer
sister, Catiche, with a vicious and determined look steadily fixed on
handkerchiefs to their eyes, and just in front of them their eldest
service. A little behind them stood the two younger princesses holding
with lighted tapers in their hands, slowly and solemnly conducting the
their long hair falling over their magnificent glittering vestments,
behind the chair, held it in position. By the chair stood the priests,
between forefinger and thumb, and an old servant, bending over from
right hand, which was lying palm downwards, a wax taper had been thrust
just under the icons; his large thick hands outside the quilt. Into the
characteristically noble wrinkles of his handsome, ruddy face. He lay
hair above his broad forehead which reminded one of a lion, and the deep
majestic figure of his father, Count Bezukhov, with that gray mane of
saw--covered to the waist by a bright green quilt--the familiar,
on snowy-white smooth pillows, evidently freshly changed, Pierre
the gleaming icons stood a long invalid chair, and in that chair
with red light like a Russian church during evening service. Under
on the other an immense case containing icons, was brightly illuminated
columns, with a high silk-curtained mahogany bedstead on one side and
walls hung round with Persian carpets. The part of the room behind the
Pierre well knew this large room divided by columns and an arch, its


CHAPTER XXIII





enter that room.
followed him in, as if there were now no further need for permission to
that the strange lady, the aide-de-camp, and some of the servants, all
Pierre went in at the door, stepping on the soft carpet, and noticed

Come."
"The divine mercy is inexhaustible! Unction is about to be administered.

said:
in the discharge of duty, ran out and touching Pierre lightly on the arm
last Anna Mikhaylovna, still with the same expression, pale but resolute
Through that door was heard a noise of things being moved about, and at
the priests and deacons and some servants also went in at the door.
whole body jerked at each step. The eldest princess followed him, and
through the door on tiptoe. He could not walk well on tiptoe and his
illness. Prince Vasili said something to Lorrain in passing and went
in perplexity, and only later grasped that a stroke was an attack of
suggested to him a blow from something. He looked at Prince Vasili
Pierre's mind was in such a confused state that the word "stroke"

"He had another stroke about half an hour ago. Courage, my friend..."

yet ashamed to call him "father."
knowing whether it would be proper to call the dying man "the count,"
But Pierre thought it necessary to ask: "How is..." and hesitated, not

and he turned to go.
"Courage, courage, my friend! He has asked to see you. That is well!"

fixed on.
and drew it downwards as if wishing to ascertain whether it was firmly
Pierre. He went up to him, took his hand (a thing he never used to do),
his eyes seemed larger than usual when he glanced round and noticed
stars on his breast. He seemed to have grown thinner since the morning;
majestically entered the room. He was wearing his long coat with three
Not two minutes had passed before Prince Vasili with head erect

those who were guiding him.
own ideas tonight, but must yield himself up entirely to the will of
order not to lose his head and do foolish things he must not act on his
and decided in his own mind that all was as it should be, and that in
symmetrically on his knees in the naive attitude of an Egyptian statue,
aide-de-camp, and sat down in the lady's chair, placing his huge hands
to accept their services. He took the glove in silence from the
rite which everyone expected of him, and that he was therefore bound
that tonight he was a person obliged to perform some sort of awful
even in his way; but all at once he felt that this would not do, and
pick up the glove himself and to pass round the doctors who were not
wished to take another seat so as not to trouble the lady, and also to
silent as he passed by, and moved to make way for him. At first Pierre
and returned a glove Pierre had dropped; the doctors became respectfully
the priests, rose and offered him her seat; an aide-de-camp picked up
received was shown him. A strange lady, the one who had been talking to
of awe and even servility. A deference such as he had never before
whispered to one another, casting significant looks at him with a kind
with something more than curiosity and sympathy. He noticed that they
disappeared he noticed that the eyes of all in the room turned to him
toward the sofa she had indicated. As soon as Anna Mikhaylovna had
Pierre, having made up his mind to obey his monitress implicitly, moved

watching and it creaked very slightly as she disappeared behind it.
and wait for her, she went silently toward the door that everyone was
"Trust in His mercy!" and pointing out a small sofa for him to sit

tenderly sad voice, she said:
from the doctor to Pierre. To him, in a particularly respectful and
shoulders and eyes, almost closing the latter, sighed, and moved away
shoulders. Anna Mikhaylovna with just the same movement raised her
The doctor cast a rapid glance upwards and silently shrugged his

any hope?"
"Dear doctor," said she, "this young man is the count's son. Is there

Having said this she went up to the doctor.

count's son," she added more softly. "What a terrible moment!"
"all we relatives have been in such anxiety. This young man is the
"God be thanked that you are in time," said she to one of the priests;

first of one and then of another priest.
seeming to grow suddenly smaller, and respectfully received the blessing
there, she glided up to him with a sort of amble, not exactly bowing yet
glance at all those in the room and noticing the count's confessor
dying man wished to see, her own admission was assured. Casting a rapid
that afternoon. She felt that as she brought with her the person the
keeping Pierre close beside her, entered the room even more boldly than
moment had arrived. With the air of a practical Petersburg lady she now,
Anna Mikhaylovna's face expressed a consciousness that the decisive

meekly followed her.
entered, and at the big stout figure of Pierre who, hanging his head,
silent and turned to look at the pale tear-worn Anna Mikhaylovna as she
the same positions as before, whispering to one another. All became
Catherine the Great. The same people were still sitting here in almost
into the conservatory, with its large bust and full length portrait of
the reception room familiar to Pierre, with two Italian windows opening
a servant who passed out on tiptoe without heeding them. They went into
spilled on the carpet. They were met by a deacon with a censer and by
even in this room there now stood an empty bath, and water had been
but cold apartments known to Pierre only from the front approach, but
room adjoining the count's reception room. It was one of those sumptuous
things had to be. From the passage they went into a large, dimly lit
"watching over his interests" meant, but he decided that all these
Pierre could not make out what it was all about, and still less what

reply to his look, and went still faster along the passage.
"Be a man, my friend. I will look after your interests," said she in

if to say that this was no more than she had expected.
Mikhaylovna evinced no surprise, she only smiled faintly and sighed, as
stopped and glanced inquiringly over his spectacles at his guide. Anna
on Prince Vasili's face so out of keeping with his dignity that Pierre
This action was so unlike her usual composure and the fear depicted

her might.
jumped up and with a gesture of desperation slammed the door with all
Prince Vasili drew back with obvious impatience, while the princess
eldest princess were sitting close together talking. Seeing them pass,
passing instinctively glanced into the room, where Prince Vasili and the
was done in haste at that time), and Pierre and Anna Mikhaylovna in
decanter in her haste had not closed the door (everything in the house
door on the left led into the princesses' apartments. The maid with the
princess' health and then led Pierre along a stone passage. The first
with a decanter on a tray as "my dear" and "my sweet," asked about the
these rooms. Anna Mikhaylovna, addressing a maid who was hurrying past
in this part of the house and did not even know of the existence of
princesses, sat in a corner knitting a stocking. Pierre had never been
This door led into a back anteroom. An old man, a servant of the

already opening a door.
to be grew stronger, and he meekly followed Anna Mikhaylovna who was
Pierre did not understand a word, but the conviction that all this had

me, Pierre. I shall not forget your interests."
sighed. "I have loved you like a son from the first. Trust yourself to
Think that he is your father... perhaps in the agony of death." She
"Ah, my dear friend! Forget the wrongs that may have been done you.

over his spectacles.
"But really, hadn't I better go away?" he asked, looking kindly at her

you do, but be a man!"
when speaking to him that afternoon, "believe me I suffer no less than
"Ah, my friend!" she said, touching his arm as she had done her son's

Anna Mikhaylovna paused and waited for him to come up.

landing. "I'd better go to my own room."
"Perhaps the count did not ask for me," said Pierre when he reached the

permissible; "the door to the left, ma'am."
"Yes," replied a footman in a bold loud voice, as if anything were now

of one of them.
"Is this the way to the princesses' apartments?" asked Anna Mikhaylovna

and did not evince the least surprise at seeing them there.
men pressed close to the wall to let Pierre and Anna Mikhaylovna pass
carrying pails, came running downstairs, their boots clattering. These
Halfway up the stairs they were almost knocked over by some men who,
and haste, Pierre concluded that it was all absolutely necessary.
by the back stairs, yet judging by Anna Mikhaylovna's air of assurance
necessary for him to go to the count at all, still less why he had to go
who was lagging behind, to follow. Though he did not see why it was
ascended the narrow dimly lit stone staircase, calling to Pierre,
right," Pierre concluded, and followed Anna Mikhaylovna. She hurriedly
seeing these people, took any notice of them. "It seems to be all
Anna Mikhaylovna nor the footman nor the coachman, who could not help
same kind hiding in the shadow of the house on both sides. But neither
the wall. Pausing for a moment, Pierre noticed several other men of the
tradespeople, ran hurriedly from the entrance and hid in the shadow of
was getting down from the carriage steps two men, who looked like
had not come to the front entrance but to the back door. While he
interview with his dying father which awaited him. He noticed that they
Mikhaylovna out of the carriage, and only then began to think of the
his corner and woke him up. Rousing himself, Pierre followed Anna
words of comfort to her companion, realized that he was asleep in
over the straw beneath the windows, Anna Mikhaylovna, having turned with
into the court of Count Bezukhov's house. As the wheels rolled softly
Anna Mikhaylovna (who found it necessary to accompany him) was driving
princess' room, a carriage containing Pierre (who had been sent for) and
While these conversations were going on in the reception room and the


CHAPTER XXII





here for? But I will give her a piece of my mind. The time will come!"
princess, now quite changed. "And what does she come worming herself in
a great sin, it is hatred of that vile woman!" almost shrieked the
princess, ignoring his question. "Now I know! Yes; if I have a sin,
"It's in the inlaid portfolio that he keeps under his pillow," said the

"We've got to it at last--why did you not tell me about it sooner?"

vile, infamous paper, but I thought the thing was invalid."
would not see us for a whole fortnight. I know it was then he wrote this
Sophie--I can't repeat them--that it made the count quite ill and he
told the count such vile, disgraceful things about us, especially about
"Ah, don't talk to me! Last winter she wheedled herself in here and

"Do not let us lose any time..."

woman!"
Mikhaylovna whom I would not take for a housemaid... the infamous, vile
"It's that protege of yours, that sweet Princess Drubetskaya, that Anna

"That's not the point, my dear."

princess.
"Now I see it all! I know who has been intriguing--I know!" cried the

only reason for being here. I came simply to help him and you."
my sole desire is conscientiously to carry out his wishes; that is my
no doubt, forgotten it and will wish to destroy it. You understand that
You must know. We will take it at once and show it to the count. He has,
hour.... Tell me all you know about the will, and above all where it is.
us talk sensibly while there is still time, be it a day or be it but an
wish you to have as good an opinion of me. Don't upset yourself, and let
"I know your heart," repeated the prince. "I value your friendship and

"No, I have a wicked heart."

"Now come, come! Be reasonable. I know your excellent heart."

to be cunning and cruel."
in this world there is neither honor nor justice. In this world one has
shall always remember that in this world one must expect no reward, that
never could appreciate it. No, mon cousin," she added with a sigh, "I
again have risen had not the prince still held her fast, "though he
"Who sacrificed everything for him," chimed in the princess, who would

him die feeling that he is rendering unhappy those who..."
last moments by not letting him commit this injustice, and not to let
forgotten. Our duty, my dear, is to rectify his mistake, to ease his
all done casually in a moment of anger, of illness, and was afterwards
"There is still time, my dear. You must remember, Catiche, that it was

She gave her companion an angry glance.
had the air of one who has suddenly lost faith in the whole human race.
The princess wished to rise, but the prince held her by the hand. She

been intriguing!"
sacrificed myself. But only the base, the vile succeed! I know who has
"Yes, I was a fool! I still believed in people, loved them, and

his cheeks twitching more than ever.
"Do you or do you not know where that will is?" insisted Prince Vasili,

blackest ingratitude--in this house..."
nothing but meanness, deceit, envy, intrigue, and ingratitude--the
"Yes, I knew it long ago but had forgotten. I knew that I could expect

But the princess did not listen to him.

Prince Vasili.
"Yes, but you are not the only one. There are your sisters..." replied

don't want anything, Prince."
sacrificed everything for his sake!" she cried. "It's splendid! Fine! I
"And this is gratitude--this is recognition for those who have

She pushed the little dog off her lap and smoothed her dress.

don't now."
"That would be a fine thing!" said she. "I never wanted anything and I

evidently did not expect.
when she began to speak passed through such transitions as she herself
thin lips grew white, though her eyes did not change, and her voice
At this a sudden change evidently took place in the princess' ideas; her

solicitor) "and he says the same."
an expert. I have just been talking to Dmitri Onufrich" (the family
sisters are not heiresses! If you don't believe me, then believe
favor are among the count's papers, then, my dear girl, you and your
tenth time that if the letter to the Emperor and the will in Pierre's
as with a kinswoman, a good, kind, true relation. And I tell you for the
"I came here not to wrangle with you, but to talk about your interests
"My dear Princess Catherine Semenovna," began Prince Vasili impatiently,

witty and stinging.
the expression women assume when they suppose they are saying something
mon cousin, seem to consider me a perfect fool," said the princess with
"I know the will was made, but I also know that it is invalid; and you,


     * And all that follows therefrom.


dutiful et tout ce qui s'ensuit! * That's certain."
destroyed, then you will have nothing but the consolation of having been
inherit everything under the will? And if the will and letter are not
Pierre will not be Pierre but will become Count Bezukhov, and will then
Emperor begging him to recognize Pierre as legitimate, it follows that
how is it you don't see that if the count has written a letter to the
"Well, really, Catiche! Can't you understand! You are so intelligent,


     * A bastard.


contention.
word would effectively prove to Prince Vasili the invalidity of his
batard!" * she added, as if supposing that this translation of the
all stupid; but I know this: an illegitimate son cannot inherit... un
changing the expression of her eyes. "I am a woman, and you think we are
"What next?" the princess interrupted, smiling sardonically and not

ought to know where they are, and must find them, because..."
been destroyed or not. And if they have somehow been overlooked, you
dear, whether the will and letter were written, and whether they have
legal heir to everything and you won't get anything. You must know, my
"But, my poor Catiche, it is as clear as daylight! He will then be the

might happen, only not that.
"And our share?" asked the princess smiling ironically, as if anything

be granted. Pierre will get everything as the legitimate son."
letter will be delivered to the Emperor, and the petition will certainly
the words all is over, "and the count's papers are opened, the will and
as all is over," and Prince Vasili sighed to intimate what he meant by
The only question is, has it been destroyed or not? If not, then as soon
letter was written, though it was not sent, and the Emperor knew of it.
"I can tell you more," continued Prince Vasili, seizing her hand, "that

subject under discussion than those they are talking with.
The princess smiled as people do who think they know more about the

services, his request would be granted?..."
legitimation? Do you understand that in consideration of the count's
has been written to the Emperor in which the count asks for Pierre's
and becoming more animated and talking more rapidly: "what if a letter
"But, my dear," said Prince Vasili suddenly, clutching the little table

cannot leave the estate to Pierre. Pierre is illegitimate."
"He has made wills enough!" quietly remarked the princess. "But he

property, not to us his direct heirs, but to Pierre."
that last winter the count made a will by which he left all his
he had pushed away. "But... in short, the fact is... you know yourself
his bald head and angrily pulling back toward him the little table that
"Yes, yes, of course," interrupted Prince Vasili impatiently, rubbing

noble soul peacefully to leave this..."
replied, "and it is that He would be merciful to him and would allow his
"There is one thing I constantly pray God to grant, mon cousin," she

simply looking at him.
out whether she was considering what he had just said or whether she was
Prince Vasili looked questioningly at the princess, but could not make

"definitely demanded that he should be called."
you know I have sent for Pierre? The count," pointing to his portrait,
my dear, I am getting on for sixty and must be prepared for anything. Do
for you to talk or think of such matters. It is no easier for me; but,
wife--are the count's only direct heirs. I know, I know how hard it is
"You know, Catiche, that we--you three sisters, Mamontov, and my
went on, testily pushing away a little table without looking at her.
"And then of course my family has also to be considered," Prince Vasili

dull expression.
The princess continued to look at him without moving, and with the same

all, like children of my own, as you know."
everything. One must think of the future, of all of you... I love you
without an inner struggle; "at such a moment as this one must think of
continued Prince Vasili, returning to his theme, apparently not
"Well, you see, my dear princess and cousin, Catherine Semenovna,"

not to be the first to break silence, if she had to wait till morning.
hands, looked attentively into Prince Vasili's eyes evidently resolved
The princess, holding her little dog on her lap with her thin bony

glanced round in alarm.
strange; at one moment they looked impudently sly and at the next
which was never to be seen on it in a drawing room. His eyes too seemed
on one side, now on the other, giving his face an unpleasant expression
Prince Vasili said no more and his cheeks began to twitch nervously, now

serious talk."
as a post horse, but still I must have a talk with you, Catiche, a very
"And I?" he said; "do you think it is easier for me? I am as worn out

understood it as an expression of weariness.
devotion, or of weariness and hope of resting before long. Prince Vasili
with a sigh. This might have been taken as an expression of sorrow and
prominent gray eyes. Then she shook her head and glanced up at the icons
legs, looked directly at Prince Vasili with no sign of emotion in her
The princess, who had a straight, rigid body, abnormally long for her

understood without naming.
It was plain that this "well?" referred to much that they both

downwards as was his habit.
"Well, my dear?" said Prince Vasili, taking her hand and bending it

"I wished to get a nap, mon cousin, but I can't."

prepared to listen.
stonily severe expression; and, sitting down opposite the prince, she
"I thought perhaps something had happened," she said with her unchanging


     *Catherine.


remarked. "Well, sit down: let's have a talk."
she had just vacated. "You have made the place warm, I must say," he
Catiche," * muttered the prince, seating himself wearily on the chair
"No, there is no change. I only came to have a talk about business,

"Has anything happened?" she asked. "I am so terrified."

varnish.
that it seemed to be made of one piece with her head and covered with
She rose and smoothed her hair, which was as usual so extremely smooth

"Ah, is it you, cousin?"

just visible behind a screen. A small dog began to bark.
cupboards, and little tables. The quilt of a high, white feather bed was
The room was crowded with small pieces of furniture, whatnots,
the icons and there was a pleasant scent of flowers and burnt pastilles.
In this room it was almost dark; only two tiny lamps were burning before

Meanwhile Prince Vasili had opened the door into the princess' room.


and state the patient's condition.
decorous smile of self-satisfaction at being able clearly to understand
"Tonight, not later," said he in a low voice, and he moved away with a

his nose.
Lorrain, pursing up his lips, waved a severely negative finger before

Lorrain in French which he pronounced badly.
"Do you think he can last till morning?" asked the German, addressing

instructions. The German doctor went up to Lorrain.
princess went in with the drink she had prepared according to Lorrain's
Everyone again looked toward the door, which creaked as the second

"It von't go begging," replied the German with a smile.

who will inherit his wealth?" he added in a whisper.
"And what a well-preserved man he was!" remarked the aide-de-camp. "And

aide-de-camp, "dat one liffs after de sird stroke."
"Dere has neffer been a gase," a German doctor was saying to an

he indicated with his delicate fingers what he meant by a pinch.
"Take a glass of boiled water and put a pinch of cream of tartar," and

The doctor glanced at his watch.

"Yes."

"Has he taken his medicine?"

Lorrain considered.

something to drink?"
"Yes, indeed," replied the princess with a sigh. "So he may have

if one were in the country."
"The weather is beautiful, Princess; and besides, in Moscow one feels as
"Beautiful," said the doctor in answer to a remark about the weather.

table.
graceful pose under a portrait of Catherine, leaning his elbow on a
from weeping and sat down beside Dr. Lorrain, who was sitting in a
The second princess had just come from the sickroom with her eyes red

"I knew someone who received that sacrament seven times."

anyone. They wished to administer the sacrament of unction."
"Yes, and he is over sixty. I hear the count no longer recognizes

other side of the room. "How young-looking he is!"
"Who was that? The Military Governor himself?" was being asked at the

head.
hand over the thin grizzled strands of hair combed back across his bald
"Ah, madam, it is a great sacrament," replied the priest, passing his

on the subject.
adding the priest's clerical title, as if she had no opinion of her own
"I wonder, is it not too late to administer unction?" asked the lady,

listening naively to his words.
said an old priest to a lady who had taken a seat beside him and was
"The limits of human life... are fixed and may not be o'erpassed,"

his door, which creaked slightly when opened.
room, grew silent and gazed with eyes full of curiosity or expectancy at
whispers, and, whenever anyone went into or came from the dying man's
Those who were in the dimly lit reception room spoke in nervous

back of the house, to the room of the eldest princess.
went with unusually hurried steps down the long corridor leading to the
so for a while he rose, and, looking about him with frightened eyes,
his elbow on his knee and covering his face with his hand. After sitting
a chair in the ballroom, crossing one leg high over the other, leaning
When the Military Governor had gone, Prince Vasili sat down all alone on

low tones.
escorted him to the door, repeating something to him several times in
Vasili, who had grown thinner and paler during the last few days,
on him by the doctors, clergy, and relatives of the family. Prince
bows and trying to escape as quickly as possible from the glances fixed
hour alone with the dying man, passed out, slightly acknowledging their
respectfully when the Military Governor, having stayed about half an
The magnificent reception room was crowded. Everyone stood up

Bezukhov.
last farewell to the celebrated grandee of Catherine's court, Count
inquire after the count's health, came himself that evening to bid a
Governor of Moscow, who had been assiduous in sending aides-de-camp to
expectation of an important order for an expensive funeral. The Military
a group of undertakers, who hid whenever a carriage drove up, waited in
of suspense usual at such moments. Outside the house, beyond the gates,
sacrament of unction, and in his house there was the bustle and thrill
communion was administered to the dying man, preparations made for the
The doctors pronounced recovery impossible. After a mute confession,
cooks were getting the supper, Count Bezukhov had a sixth stroke.
tune in which the weary musicians blundered, and while tired footmen and
While in the Rostovs' ballroom the sixth anglaise was being danced, to a


CHAPTER XXI





sleeves and puffing heavily.
"That was a Daniel Cooper!" exclaimed Marya Dmitrievna, tucking up her

"That's how we used to dance in our time, ma chere," said the count.

and wiping their faces with their cambric handkerchiefs.
laughter led by Natasha. Both partners stood still, breathing heavily
and making a wide sweep with his arm, amid a thunder of applause and
raising his soft foot backwards, bowing his perspiring head, smiling
turning his partner round to her seat, he executed the final pas,
round Marya Dmitrievna, now on his toes, now on his heels; until,
lightly, more lightly, and yet more lightly whirled the count, flying
shouted to the musicians to play faster. Faster, faster, and faster;
In the intervals of the dance the count, breathing deeply, waved and
at Papa!" though as it was they never took their eyes off the couple.
Natasha kept pulling everyone by sleeve or dress, urging them to "look
even try to do so. All were watching the count and Marya Dmitrievna.
not attract a moment's attention to their own evolutions and did not
severity. The dance grew livelier and livelier. The other couples could
foot--which everyone appreciated in view of her size and habitual
to move her shoulders or bend her arms when turning, or stamp her
produced no less impression by slight exertions--the least effort
agility with which he capered about on his light feet, Marya Dmitrievna
the spectators by the unexpectedness of his adroit maneuvers and the
But if the count, getting more and more into the swing of it, charmed
expression only in her more and more beaming face and quivering nose.
by the whole of the count's plump figure, in Marya Dmitrievna found
stern but handsome face really joined in the dance. What was expressed
hanging down (she had handed her reticule to the countess), and only her
want to dance well. Her enormous figure stood erect, her powerful arms
The count danced well and knew it. But his partner could not and did not

nurse, as she stood in one of the doorways.
"Just look at the master! A regular eagle he is!" loudly remarked the

other--who with beaming faces had come to see their master making merry.
filled by the domestic serfs--the men on one side and the women on the
dance) began to sound, all the doorways of the ballroom were suddenly
strains of Daniel Cooper (somewhat resembling those of a merry peasant
onlookers for what was to follow. As soon as the provocatively gay
a smile that broadened his round face more and more, prepared the
shoulders, turned out his toes, tapped gently with his foot, and, by
Marya Dmitrievna, curved his arms, beat time, straightened his
jovial old gentleman, who standing beside his tall and stout partner,
And indeed everybody in the room looked with a smile of pleasure at the

curly head to her knees and made the whole room ring with her laughter.
forgetting that she was dancing with a grown-up partner she bent her
"Look at Papa!" shouted Natasha to the whole company, and quite

(Strictly speaking, Daniel Cooper was one figure of the anglaise.)
This was the count's favorite dance, which he had danced in his youth.

"Semen! Do you know the Daniel Cooper?"

addressing the first violin:
he clapped his hands to the musicians and shouted up to their gallery,
up his face and as soon as the last figure of the ecossaise was ended,
Marya Dmitrievna. He drew himself up, a smile of debonair gallantry lit
with playful ceremony somewhat in ballet style, offered his bent arm to
Marya Dmitrievna and the count, both with merry countenances. The count,
replacing their purses and pocketbooks, entered the ballroom. First came
visitors. They now, stretching themselves after sitting so long, and
been playing cards with the majority of the more distinguished and older
pushed back in the sitting room where the count and Marya Dmitrievna had
In the midst of the third ecossaise there was a clatter of chairs being


"Well, really, Mamma! Why should you? What is there to be surprised at?"

Natasha blushed and laughed.

the ballroom, pointing to Natasha.
"Dear, dear! Just look at her!" exclaimed the countess as she crossed

smiling over the fan.
she had learned it) she talked with her partner, fanning herself and
Assuming quite the pose of a society woman (heaven knows when and where
She had a fan in her hand that one of the ladies had given her to hold.
sitting in a conspicuous place and talking to him like a grown-up lady.
she was dancing with a grown-up man, who had been abroad. She was
Pierre sat down with his little partner. Natasha was perfectly happy;
While the couples were arranging themselves and the musicians tuning up,

little girl.
be my teacher..." And lowering his big arm he offered it to the slender
"I am afraid of mixing the figures," Pierre replied; "but if you will

"Mamma told me to ask you to join the dancers."

blushing:
Natasha came in and walking straight up to Pierre said, laughing and
which several others joined but which bored Pierre. When the music began
as a man recently returned from abroad, in a political conversation in
Pierre was sitting in the drawing-room where Shinshin had engaged him,


coughing of the musicians were heard from the gallery.
get ready to dance in the large hall, and the sound of the feet and the
He had not finished the last verse before the young people began to


     But oh! till then I cannot live!...
   A day or two, then bliss unspoilt,

     Sighing its message out to thee...
   It is for thee thus swells her heart,
     Wafting sweet music o'er the lea,
   That while her fingers touch the harp

     Who still is thinking but of thee!
   To feel that in this world there's one
     How sweet, as fancies wander free,
   At nighttime in the moon's fair glow


Nicholas sang a song he had just learned:
the quartette, "The Brook," with which everyone was delighted. Then
and light, joyous steps. At the visitors' request the young people sang
after Natasha down the passage into the sitting room with flushed face
verses in the bosom of her dress close to her bony little chest, ran
Sonya, shaking off some down which clung to her and tucking away the

And she set off at a run along the passage.

Natasha, stopping suddenly. "I feel so happy!"
"Do you know, that fat Pierre who sat opposite me is so funny!" said

"Come along!"

"Well, let's go and sing 'The Brook.'"

Both laughed.

strayed from under her friend's plaits.
"Really, truly!" answered Natasha, pushing in a crisp lock that had

frock and hair.
"Do you think so?... Really? Truly?" she said, quickly smoothing her

playing with the ball of worsted as a kitten should.
seemed ready to lift its tail, jump down on its soft paws, and begin
Sonya sat up. The little kitten brightened, its eyes shone, and it

Natasha kissed her on the hair.

Nicholas will tell her himself, and he doesn't care at all for Julie."
mind her! And all will come right and she won't say anything to Mamma.
darling Sonya!" and she kissed her and laughed. "Vera's spiteful; never
clever and so good!" said Natasha. "Don't you cry, Sonya, dear love,
is quite possible. You know I have told him all about it. And he is so
cousin. And we are only second cousins, you know. And Boris says it
it all was? There's Uncle Shinshin's brother has married his first
how, but don't you remember that it could all be arranged and how nice
supper? Why, we settled how everything was to be. I don't quite remember
how we and Nicholas, all three of us, talked in the sitting room after
"Sonya, don't believe her, darling! Don't believe her! Do you remember

her.
her up, hugged her, and, smiling through her tears, began comforting
And again she began to sob, more bitterly than before. Natasha lifted

Natasha, what have I done to deserve it?..."
but that he'll marry Julie. You see how he's been with her all day...
I was ungrateful, and that Mamma would never allow him to marry me,
she found them on my table and said she'd show them to Mamma, and that
"Yes, these verses Nicholas wrote himself and I copied some others, and

dinner? Hasn't she?"
of her friend's sorrow, "I'm sure Vera has said something to you since
"Sonya," she suddenly exclaimed, as if she had guessed the true reason

understood all the gravity of her friend's trouble.
feather bed. Natasha began consoling her, but her face showed that she
Sonya could not continue, and again hid her face in her hands and in the

that I would willingly sacrifice everything, only I have nothing...."
Vera... And what for? What have I done to her? I am so grateful to you
made the sign of the cross, "I love her so much, and all of you, only
heartless and ungrateful, while truly... God is my witness," and she
mother and called her so) "that I am spoiling Nicholas' career and am
And besides, if she tells Mamma" (Sonya looked upon the countess as her
have to... the Metropolitan himself... and even then it can't be done.
no difficulties in your way.... But Nicholas is my cousin... one would
also," she went on, gaining a little strength; "he is nice... there are
"It's all very well for you... I am not envious... I love you and Boris

And she began to cry again because he had such a noble soul.

a soul he has!"
"still, I should not cry, but you can't... no one can understand... what
a paper she held in her hand--with the verses Nicholas had written,
he told me himself... but still I should not cry," and she showed
"Nicholas is going away in a week's time, his... papers... have come...

began wiping her eyes and explaining.
feather bed and hugging her friend. With an effort Sonya sat up and
still deeper in the bed. Natasha wept, sitting on the blue-striped
Sonya tried to lift her head to answer but could not, and hid her face
to wail like a baby without knowing why, except that Sonya was crying.
Natasha's large mouth widened, making her look quite ugly, and she began
"Sonya! What is it? What is the matter?... Oo... Oo... Oo...!" And

her mouth drooped.
fixed, and then a shiver passed down her broad neck and the corners of
radiantly happy all that saint's day, suddenly changed: her eyes became
that her bare little shoulders shook. Natasha's face, which had been so
hiding her face with her slender fingers, and sobbing so convulsively
bed on the top of the chest, crumpling her gauzy pink dress under her,
And there in fact was Sonya lying face downward on Nurse's dirty feather
of mourning for the younger female generation in the Rostov household.
be on the chest in the passage. The chest in the passage was the place
nursery, but Sonya was not there either. Natasha concluded that she must
Running into Sonya's room and not finding her there, Natasha ran to the

look for her.
She looked round and seeing that her friend was not in the room ran to

is Sonya?"
"Well, then, let's be quick. Boris, come here," said Natasha. "But where

"'The Brook,'" suggested Nicholas.

"What shall we sing?" she said.

same time felt shy.
though she were grown up, was evidently very proud of this but at the
their musical talent, to sing something. Natasha, who was treated as
other young ladies in begging Natasha and Nicholas, who were noted for
had played a little air with variations on the harp, she joined the
clavichord and harp. Julie by general request played first. After she
The young people, at the countess' instigation, gathered round the
dropping into his usual after-dinner nap, and laughed at everything.
The count, holding his cards fanwise, kept himself with difficulty from

sitting room, some in the library.
visitors settled themselves, some in the two drawing rooms, some in the
The card tables were drawn out, sets made up for boston, and the count's


CHAPTER XX





returned to the drawing room and to the count's study.
same order in which they had entered but with redder faces, the guests
one another. Again the footmen rushed about, chairs scraped, and in the
the table to clink glasses with the count, with the children, and with
their seats, went up to "congratulate" the countess, and reached across
again struck up, the count and countess kissed, and the guests, leaving
pineapple ice. Before the ices, champagne was served round. The band
Natasha only desisted when she had been told that there would be

treat Marya Dmitrievna in this fashion.
incredible boldness and smartness of this little girl who had dared to
joined in. Everyone laughed, not at Marya Dmitrievna's answer but at the
Marya Dmitrievna and the countess burst out laughing, and all the guests

want to know!"
"No! What kind, Marya Dmitrievna? What kind?" she almost screamed; "I

"Carrot ices."

"Marya Dmitrievna! What kind of ice pudding? I don't like ice cream."

Marya Dmitrievna.
Natasha saw there was nothing to be afraid of and so she braved even

"Ice pudding, but you won't get any," said Marya Dmitrievna.

Pierre, glancing at him again.
"You see! I have asked," whispered Natasha to her little brother and to

Sonya and fat little Petya doubled up with laughter.

with saucy gaiety, confident that her prank would be taken in good part.
"Mamma! What sweets are we going to have?" Natasha again cried boldly,

"You had better take care!" said the countess.

elders.
Most of the guests, uncertain how to regard this sally, looked at the

"Cossack!" she said threateningly.

fat finger.
The countess tried to frown, but could not. Marya Dmitrievna shook her

still more firm and resolute.
"Mamma! What sweets are we going to have?" and Natasha's voice sounded

The conversation was hushed.

threatening and forbidding movement of her head.
face that it was only mischief, she shook a finger at her sternly with a
"What is it?" asked the countess, startled; but seeing by her daughter's

audible the whole length of the table.
"Mamma!" rang out the clear contralto notes of her childish voice,

was coming, and turning to her mother:
rose, by a glance inviting Pierre, who sat opposite, to listen to what
Her face suddenly flushed with reckless and joyous resolution. She half

"I will," replied Natasha.

ask!"
"You won't ask," Natasha's little brother was saying; "I know you won't

the men's at the other.
Once more the conversations concentrated, the ladies' at the one end and

"That's true!"

length of the table.
replied Marya Dmitrievna's deep voice, which easily carried the whole
God's hands. You may die in your bed or God may spare you in a battle,"
"I have four sons in the army but still I don't fret. It is all in

son's going, Marya Dmitrievna? My son is going."
"It's all about the war," the count shouted down the table. "You know my

"I am speaking ze truce," replied the hussar with a smile.

you exciting yourself? Do you think the French are here?"
you thumping the table for?" she demanded of the hussar, "and why are
deep voice suddenly inquired from the other end of the table. "What are
"What are you making such a noise about over there?" Marya Dmitrievna's

table.
"The young man's a real hussar!" shouted the colonel, again thumping the

"That's fine," said he.

Pierre listened to the colonel's speech and nodded approvingly.

to her neck and shoulders while Nicholas was speaking.
Sonya trembled all over and blushed to her ears and behind them and down

"What you said just now was splendid!" said his partner Julie.

awkward.
were too enthusiastic and emphatic for the occasion and were therefore
conscious--as were others--after the words were uttered that his remarks
"I am convinced that we Russians must die or conquer," he concluded,
desperation as though he were at that moment facing some great danger.
plate round and moving his wineglasses about with as much decision and
"I am quite of your opinion," replied Nicholas, flaming up, turning his

intent on the colonel.
war was being discussed had turned from his partner with eyes and ears
judge of it?" he added, addressing Nicholas, who when he heard that the
an end of it! And how do you, a young man and a young hussar, how do you
turning to the count. "Zat is how ve old hussars look at it, and zere's
particularly on the word possible... "as po-o-ossible," he ended, again
pe vell. And ve must discuss it as little as po-o-ossible"... he dwelt
thumping the table; "and ve must tie for our Emperor, and zen all vill
"Ve must vight to the last tr-r-op of our plood!" said the colonel,


     *(4) I just ask you that.

     *(3) Hollow.

     *(2) That suits us down to the ground.

     *Do you know the proverb?


from French to Russian.
Suvorovs now? Je vous demande un peu,"*(4) said he, continually changing
about; yet they beat him a plate couture,*(3) and where are we to find
"Cela nous convient a merveille.*(2) Suvorov now--he knew what he was
spindles at home!'?" said Shinshin, puckering his brows and smiling.
"Connaissez-vous le Proverbe: * 'Jerome, Jerome, do not roam, but turn

with dignity and looking to the count for approval.
"Zat, my dear sir, is vy..." he concluded, drinking a tumbler of wine

for the attainment of that purpose.
him to despatch part of the army abroad and to create a new condition
aim--to establish peace in Europe on firm foundations--has now decided
... and the wish, which constitutes the Emperor's sole and absolute

repeated from the opening words of the manifesto:
Then with the unerring official memory that characterized him he

if in it lay the gist of the matter.
of its alliances..." he spoke this last word with particular emphasis as
Russia and zat ze safety and dignity of ze Empire as vell as ze sanctity
manifessto zat he cannot fiew wiz indifference ze danger vreatening
accent, "for the reasson zat ze Emperor knows zat. He declares in ze
"It is for the reasson, my goot sir," said he, speaking with a German

the service and patriotically Russian. He resented Shinshin's remark.
The colonel was a stout, tall, plethoric German, evidently devoted to

"He has stopped Austria's cackle and I fear it will be our turn next."
"And why the deuce are we going to fight Bonaparte?" remarked Shinshin.

forwarded by courier to the commander in chief.
Petersburg and that a copy, which he had himself seen, had that day been
colonel told them that the declaration of war had already appeared in
At the men's end of the table the talk grew more and more animated. The


CHAPTER XIX





knowledge.
greediness that he wanted it, but simply from a conscientious desire for
no one would understand that it was not to quench his thirst or from
appear as if he did not want any of that wine, but was mortified because
with a bottle wrapped in a napkin passed him by. He frowned, trying to
to his people in Germany; and he felt greatly offended when the butler
and kinds of dessert, in order to send a full description of the dinner
children. The German tutor was trying to remember all the dishes, wines,
uneasily as if preparing to resent any slight that might be put upon the
and Julie were saying to one another. The governess kept looking round
pale, now blushed and strained every nerve to overhear what Nicholas
a company smile but was evidently tormented by jealousy; now she turned
whom he was again talking with the same involuntary smile. Sonya wore
Nicholas sat at some distance from Sonya, beside Julie Karagina, to

him inclined to laugh without knowing why.
same look fell on Pierre, and that funny lively little girl's look made
are in love with and have just kissed for the first time. Sometimes that
opposite, was looking at Boris as girls of thirteen look at the boy they
ever-increasing amiability at the other guests. Natasha, who sat
Pierre held out one at random and drank with enjoyment, gazing with
engraved with the count's monogram that stood before his plate,
or "Rhine wine" as the case might be. Of the four crystal glasses
the next man's shoulders and whispered: "Dry Madeira"... "Hungarian"...
the butler thrust mysteriously forward, wrapped in a napkin, from behind
game without omitting a single dish or one of the wines. These latter
Of the two soups he chose turtle with savory patties and went on to the
Pierre spoke little but examined the new faces, and ate a great deal.
were and exchanging glances with Natasha, who was sitting opposite.
heavenly feeling. Boris was telling his new friend Pierre who the guests
with tender smiles was saying to Vera that love is not an earthly but a
much that the count held him up as a pattern to the other guests. Berg
colonel of hussars who, growing more and more flushed, ate and drank so
men's end the voices sounded louder and louder, especially that of the
ladies' end an even chatter of voices was heard all the time, at the
by their redness to contrast more than usual with his gray hair. At the
behind the pineapples at her husband whose face and bald head seemed
without omitting her duties as hostess, threw significant glances from
neighbors' glasses, not neglecting his own. The countess in turn,
and her tall cap with its light-blue ribbons, and busily filled his
crystal decanters and fruit vases the count kept glancing at his wife
the other side, the children, tutors, and governesses. From behind the
grownup young people: Vera beside Berg, and Pierre beside Boris; and on
visitors on his right. Midway down the long table on one side sat the
with the hussar colonel on his left and Shinshin and the other male
other lady visitors were farther down. At the other end sat the count,
Marya Dmitrievna on her right and Anna Mikhaylovna on her left, the
steps of the footmen. At one end of the table sat the countess with
the clatter of knives and forks, the voices of visitors, and the soft
places. Then the strains of the count's household band were replaced by
band struck up in the gallery, and the guests settled down in their
followed singly. The footmen began moving about, chairs scraped, the
whole dining hall, and last of all the children, tutors, and governesses
went in with Nicholas. After them other couples followed, filling the
with Shinshin. Berg gave his arm to Vera. The smiling Julie Karagina
Nicholas was to go with him to the regiment; then came Anna Mikhaylovna
on the arm of a colonel of hussars, a man of importance to them because
The count went in first with Marya Dmitrievna, the countess followed

"Well, I suppose it is time we were at table?" said Marya Dmitrievna.

from laughing.
She turned away and gave her hand to the count, who could hardly keep

for shame! It would be better if you went to the war."
he amuses himself setting a policeman astride a bear! For shame, sir,
"A fine lad! My word! A fine lad!... His father lies on his deathbed and

follow, for this was clearly only a prelude.
evident duty." She paused. All were silent, expectant of what was to
your father the truth when he was in favor, and in your case it's my
"Come nearer, come nearer, friend! I used to be the only one to tell

way through his spectacles.
sleeves still higher. Pierre approached, looking at her in a childlike
of voice. "Come here, my friend..." and she ominously tucked up her
"Eh, eh, friend! Come here a bit," said she, assuming a soft high tone

Pierre.
of her saint's-day fete, turned away at once and addressed herself to
having given them to the rosy Natasha, who beamed with the pleasure
She took a pair of pear-shaped ruby earrings from her huge reticule and,

I like her."
fearless and gay to kiss her hand. "I know she's a scamp of a girl, but
Natasha a Cossack) and she stroked the child's arm as she came up
"Well," said she, "how's my Cossack?" (Marya Dmitrievna always called

look for husbands for them whether you like it or not...."
these nestlings are growing up," and she pointed to the girls. "You must
to hunt with your dogs? But what is to be done, old man? Just see how
was kissing her hand, "you're feeling dull in Moscow, I daresay? Nowhere
others. "Well, you old sinner," she went on, turning to the count who
children," she said, in her loud, full-toned voice which drowned all
"Health and happiness to her whose name day we are keeping and to her

rolling them up. Marya Dmitrievna always spoke in Russian.
surveying the guests, and leisurely arranged her wide sleeves as if
holding high her fifty-year-old head with its gray curls, she stood
oldest rose. Marya Dmitrievna paused at the door. Tall and stout,
All the unmarried ladies and even the married ones except the very

entered the room.
"Herself," came the answer in a rough voice, and Marya Dmitrievna

"Marya Dmitrievna?" came her voice from there.

sides. The countess rose and went into the ballroom.
charming... You are very kind... Countess Apraksina..." was heard on all
guests were all conversing with one another. "The Razumovskis... It was
answered her, as he had the countess, only in monosyllables. The other
sitting down beside him she began to speak about his father; but he
understood that she was being asked to entertain this young man, and
The countess exchanged glances with Anna Mikhaylovna. The latter

"Very interesting."

interesting."
"You have been in Paris recently, I believe? I suppose it's very

"Non, madame." He smiled quite inappropriately.

"You have not yet seen my husband?"

"Oui, madame," replied he, looking around him.

"You have only lately arrived?" the countess asked him.

could have played such a prank on a policeman.
this big, stout, quiet man, wondering how such a clumsy, modest fellow
guests, knowing of the affair with the bear, looked with curiosity at
the way and was the only one who did not notice the fact. Most of the
of somebody and answered all her questions in monosyllables. He was in
he went on naively looking around through his spectacles as if in search
blocking the way for everyone. The countess tried to make him talk, but
middle of the drawing room on the first chair he had come across,
Pierre had come just at dinnertime and was sitting awkwardly in the


     * Hors d'oeuvres.


that is not yet ready.
waiting for--some important relation who has not yet arrived, or a dish
and the visitors try to guess from these glances who, or what, they are
hostess look toward the door, and now and then glance at one another,
to show that they are not at all impatient for their food. The host and
conversation but think it necessary to move about and talk, in order
expecting the summons to zakuska, * avoid engaging in any long
It was just the moment before a big dinner when the assembled guests,

room.
Berg smiled joyously. The count, by his guests, went into the drawing

feet off the sofa.
I'll warrant," said Shinshin, patting him on the shoulder and taking his
"Well, my boy, you'll get along wherever you go--foot or horse--that

disarmed his hearers.
sedate, and the naivete of his youthful egotism was so obvious, that he
too, might have their own interests. But all he said was so prettily
enjoyed narrating all this, and did not seem to suspect that others,
the regiment, and how satisfied his father was with him. Berg evidently
might easily succeed to the post; how popular he was with everyone in
the company commander might get killed and he, as senior in the company,
gained a step on his old comrades of the Cadet Corps; how in wartime
continued to explain how by exchanging into the Guards he had already
talking came up to listen. Berg, oblivious of irony or indifference,
The count burst out laughing. The other guests seeing that Shinshin was


      * So that squares matters.


his mouth and winking at the count.
proverb says," remarked Shinshin, moving his pipe to the other side of
"La balance y est... * A German knows how to skin a flint, as the

ring.
aside and to send something to my father," he went on, emitting a smoke
done with two hundred and thirty rubles! I even manage to put a little
much more frequently in the Foot Guards. Then just think what can be
be in a more prominent position," continued Berg, "and vacancies occur
"Besides that, Peter Nikolaevich, by exchanging into the Guards I shall

desire of everyone else.
as if it were obvious to him that his success must always be the chief
he, looking at Shinshin and the count with a joyful, pleasant smile,
rank of lieutenant; but as it is I receive two hundred and thirty," said
get not more than two hundred rubles every four months, even with the
"Consider my position, Peter Nikolaevich. Were I in the cavalry I should

circumstantially and with evident satisfaction.
soon as the conversation concerned himself he would begin to talk
out of countenance himself or making others uncomfortable, but as
on himself. He could remain silent for hours without being at all put
and silent when the talk related to any topic that had no direct bearing
conversation always related entirely to himself; he would remain calm
Berg always spoke quietly, politely, and with great precision. His

position now, Peter Nikolaevich..."
advantages are far less than in the infantry. Just consider my own
"No, Peter Nikolaevich; I only want to show that in the cavalry the


     * You expect to make an income out of the government.


to make something out of your company?"
his speech. "Vous comptez vous faire des rentes sur l'etat; * you want
expressions with the choicest French phrases--which was a peculiarity of
Shinshin, laughing ironically and mixing the most ordinary Russian
"Well, then, old chap, mon tres honorable Alphonse Karlovich," said

two loquacious talkers at one another.
fond of, was that of listener, especially when he succeeded in setting
favorite occupation when not playing boston, a card game he was very
"intended." The count sat between them and listened attentively. His
whom Natasha had, teased her elder sister Vera, speaking of Berg as her
regiment with whom Boris was to travel to join the army, and about
mouth in rings. This was Lieutenant Berg, an officer in the Semenov
red lips gently inhaled the smoke, letting it escape from his handsome
brushed, and buttoned, held his pipe in the middle of his mouth and with
The latter, a fresh, rosy officer of the Guards, irreproachably washed,
said in Moscow society. He seemed to be condescending to his companion.
Shinshin, a cousin of the countess', a man with "a sharp tongue" as they
smoke spasmodically and screwing up his eyes. This was an old bachelor,
having stuck an amber mouthpiece far into his mouth, was inhaling the
young man. He sat with his legs up on the sofa as if quite at home and,
face, already growing old, though he was dressed like a most fashionable
One of them was a sallow, clean-shaven civilian with a thin and wrinkled

against each other.
and listened to the conversation of his two neighbors, whom he egged on
side and then to the other watched the smokers with evident pleasure
talking. He neither smoked nor talked, but bending his head first to one
The count sat on the sofa between two guests who were smoking and
of them had yet seen the manifesto, but they all knew it had appeared.
that had been announced in a manifesto, and about the recruiting. None
In the count's room, which was full of tobacco smoke, they talked of war

and feared her.
stories about her, while none the less all without exception respected
wondered at her, laughed privately at her rudenesses, and told good
Imperial family as well as to all Moscow and Petersburg, and both cities
sense and frank plainness of speech. Marya Dmitrievna was known to the
dragon, a lady distinguished not for wealth or rank, but for common
expecting Marya Dmitrievna Akhrosimova, known in society as le terrible
From time to time he went out to ask: "Hasn't she come yet?" They were
his study and showed them his choice collection of Turkish pipes.
already seated in the drawing room. The count took the gentlemen into
Countess Rostova, with her daughters and a large number of guests, was


CHAPTER XVIII





But those tears were pleasant to them both.
about such a base thing as money, and because their youth was over....
kindhearted, and because they--friends from childhood--had to think
wept too. They wept because they were friends, and because they were
Anna Mikhaylovna was already embracing her and weeping. The countess

"This is for Boris from me, for his outfit."

to embrace the countess at the appropriate moment.
Anna Mikhaylovna instantly guessed her intention and stooped to be ready

she took the money from under the handkerchief.
blush that looked very strange on her thin, dignified, elderly face, and
"Annette, for heaven's sake don't refuse me," the countess began, with a

ill! I was only there a few moments and hardly said a word..."
"Oh, what a terrible state he is in! One would not know him, he is so

"Well, my dear?" asked the countess.

her.
little table, and Anna Mikhaylovna noticed that something was agitating
in clean notes, was lying ready under a handkerchief on the countess'
When Anna Mikhaylovna returned from Count Bezukhov's the money, all

and having kissed his wife's hand he went back to his study.
"You, my little countess, are a notorious spendthrift," said the count,

the countess. "But I am in great need of this sum."
"Ah, money, Count, money! How much sorrow it causes in the world," said

That's a thing I hate! Everything is possible."
the young man had departed. "There is never any 'impossible' with him.
"What a treasure that Dmitri is," added the count with a smile when

"Yes, yes; just so! Bring it. Give it to the countess."

approaching anger. "I was forgetting... Do you wish it brought at once?"
was beginning to breathe heavily and quickly which was always a sign of
inform you... But, don't be uneasy," he added, noticing that the count
"When would you like them, your excellency?" asked Dmitri. "Allow me to

"Yes, Dmitri, clean ones, please," said the countess, sighing deeply.

countess."
tattered and dirty notes as last time, but nice clean ones for the
bring me seven hundred rubles, yes! But mind, don't bring me such
young man who had entered. "Bring me..." he reflected a moment, "yes,
"This is what I want, my dear fellow," said the count to the deferential

house and now managed all his affairs, stepped softly into the room.
Dmitri, a man of good family who had been brought up in the count's

to obey the summons. "Send Dmitri to me!"
tone only used by persons who are certain that those they call will rush
"Yes, immediately, immediately! Hey, who's there?" he called out in a

her cambric handkerchief she began wiping her husband's waistcoat.
"I want a great deal, Count! I want five hundred rubles," and taking out

pocketbook.
"Oh, little countess!"... and the count began bustling to get out his

Her face became sad.

you see, Count, I want some money."
waistcoat. "It's the saute, most likely," she added with a smile. "Well,
"You see, my dear... What's that mess?" she said, pointing to his

"What are your commands, little countess?"

his gray hair.
He sat down by his wife, his elbows on his knees and his hands ruffling

ill-spent. He is worth it!"
my dear! I tasted it. The thousand rubles I paid for Taras were not
"Well, little countess? What a saute of game au madere we are to have,

usual.
The count came waddling in to see his wife with a rather guilty look as

"Ask the count to come to me."

"I am very sorry, ma'am," answered the maid.

exaggerated politeness.
found expression in calling her maid "my dear" and speaking to her with
and was therefore out of sorts, a state of mind which with her always
The countess was upset by her friend's sorrow and humiliating poverty,

find you another place."
kept her waiting some minutes. "Don't you wish to serve me? Then I'll
"What is the matter with you, my dear?" she said crossly to the maid who

applying her handkerchief to her eyes. At last she rang.
Vladimirovich Bezukhov, Countess Rostova sat for a long time all alone
After Anna Mikhaylovna had driven off with her son to visit Count Cyril


CHAPTER XVII





"Oh, Heaven! How ill he is!" exclaimed the mother.

"Well, that is hardly a sufficient reason, Mamma..."

"Ah, my dear! He is so rich, and we are so poor!"

"But why do you expect that he will leave us anything?"

"The will will show that, my dear; our fate also depends on it."

son.
"I don't understand, Mamma--what is his attitude to Pierre?" asked the

were in the carriage. "He hardly recognizes anybody."
"Oh, he is in a dreadful state," said the mother to her son when they

"Adieu, ma bonne," answered Prince Vasili turning away from her.

Prince! May God support you..."
it off. Perhaps God will help me to find a way to prepare him!... Adieu,
like this. Every moment is precious. I can't think why his nieces put
shall do my duty. I will come and spend the night. He must not be left
"It is dreadful, dreadful!" she was saying, "but cost me what it may I

and her face was tearful.
Prince Vasili saw the princess off. She held a handkerchief to her eyes

his mind that they would be friends.
life, he felt an unaccountable tenderness for this young man and made up
As often happens in early youth, especially to one who leads a lonely

intelligent, and resolute young man.
his imaginary sword, but smiling at the remembrance of that pleasant,
the room for a long time, no longer piercing an imaginary foe with
into Boris' eyes. After he had gone Pierre continued pacing up and down
and warmly pressing his hand looked affectionately over his spectacles
order to make Boris' better acquaintance, promised to come to dinner,
A footman came in to summon Boris--the princess was going. Pierre, in

Boulogne expedition.
same mind he began explaining the advantages and disadvantages of the
Pierre saw that Boris wished to change the subject, and being of the

Boris with a smile.
"And so you think Napoleon will manage to get an army across?" asked

sent for me.... I am sorry for him as a man, but what can one do?"
hand. "Do you know, I have not once been in to see the count. He has not
what of it! I hope we'll get better acquainted," and he pressed Boris'
a pause, "that you should have suspected me!" He began to laugh. "Well,
am very glad to have made your acquaintance. It's queer," he added after
done it myself, I should not have had the courage, but it's splendid. I
might think that I... I understand, quite understand. I could not have
We have not met for such a long time... not since we were children. You
What you have just said is good, very good. Of course you don't know me.
"No, but I say," said Pierre, calming down, "you are a wonderful fellow!

became quite pleasant again.
extricated himself from an awkward situation and placed another in it,
And Boris, having apparently relieved himself of an onerous duty and

dinner at the Rostovs'?"
a rule to speak out... Well, what answer am I to take? Will you come to
at ease by him, "but I hope I have not offended you. I always make it
must excuse me," said he, putting Pierre at ease instead of being put
"I am glad I have spoken out fully. Perhaps you did not like it? You

But Boris again interrupted him.

very well..."
"Well, this is strange! Do you suppose I... who could think?... I know

mingled shame and vexation.
way, and, blushing far more than Boris, began to speak with a feeling of
up from the sofa, seized Boris under the elbow in his quick, clumsy
For a long time Pierre could not understand, but when he did, he jumped

I nor my mother would ever ask or take anything from him."
father is rich, I don't regard myself as a relation of his, and neither
poor, but for my own part at any rate, for the very reason that your
mistaken if you reckon me or my mother among such people. We are very
"But I just wish to say, to avoid misunderstandings, that you are quite

"So it does," thought Pierre.

trying to get something out of the rich man?"
changing his tone or attitude, "it must seem to you that everyone is
"And it must seem to you," said Boris flushing slightly, but not

something disconcerting to himself.
Pierre was still afraid that this officer might inadvertently say

"Yes, it is all very horrid," interrupted Pierre, "very horrid."

perhaps outlive us all, as I sincerely hope he will..."
is wondering to whom the count will leave his fortune, though he may
"Moscow has nothing else to do but gossip," Boris went on. "Everybody

Pierre's eyes.
But Boris spoke distinctly, clearly, and dryly, looking straight into
sake that the latter might say something he would afterwards regret.
Pierre smiled in his good-natured way as if afraid for his companion's

father."
gossip," he continued. "Just now they are talking about you and your
about it and have not thought about it. Moscow is chiefly busy with
than with politics," said he in his quiet ironical tone. "I know nothing
"We here in Moscow are more occupied with dinner parties and scandal

papers and it was the first time he had heard Villeneuve's name.
Boris knew nothing about the Boulogne expedition; he did not read the

doesn't make a mess of things!"
Channel. I think the expedition is quite feasible. If only Villeneuve
The English will come off badly, you know, if Napoleon gets across the
know where we are. And what do you think of the Boulogne expedition?
many relatives in Moscow! So you are Boris? Of course. Well, now we
"Oh dear, what am I thinking about? I've mixed everything up. One has so

Pierre shook his head and arms as if attacked by mosquitoes or bees.

never knew any Madame Jacquot."
Drubetskaya. Rostov, the father, is Ilya, and his son is Nicholas. I
sarcastic smile. "I am Boris, son of Princess Anna Mikhaylovna
"You are mistaken," said Boris deliberately, with a bold and slightly

went to the Sparrow Hills with Madame Jacquot?... It's such an age..."
Ilya? Only fancy, I didn't know you at first. Do you remember how we
"Ah, Count Rostov!" exclaimed Pierre joyfully. "Then you are his son,

considerable pause which made Pierre feel uncomfortable.
"Count Rostov asks you to come to dinner today," said he, after a

embarrassment looked Pierre straight in the face.
necessary to introduce himself, and without experiencing the least
Boris felt that Pierre did not recognize him but did not consider it

Pierre, trying to remember who this young man was.
"Yes, it seems he is ill. People are always disturbing him," answered

come with my mother to see the count, but it seems he is not well."
"Do you remember me?" asked Boris quietly with a pleasant smile. "I have

smile.
impulsive and hearty way he took Boris by the hand with a friendly
was a boy of fourteen, and had quite forgotten him, but in his usual
officer entering his room. Pierre paused. He had left Moscow when Boris
pronounce Pitt's sentence, he saw a well-built and handsome young
dangerous crossing of the Straits of Dover and captured London--could
imagined himself to be Napoleon in person and to have just effected the
of man, is sentenced to..." But before Pierre--who at that moment
someone unseen. "Mr. Pitt, as a traitor to the nation and to the rights
"England is done for," said he, scowling and pointing his finger at

indistinct words, shrugging his shoulders and gesticulating.
over his spectacles, and then again resuming his walk, muttering
as if running a sword through an invisible foe, and glaring savagely
stopping occasionally at a corner to make menacing gestures at the wall,
When Boris appeared at his door Pierre was pacing up and down his room,

his rooms upstairs.
Since then Pierre had not been disturbed and had spent the whole time in

see him at all."
all I have to say to you. The count is very, very ill, and you must not
behave here as you did in Petersburg, you will end very badly; that is
sent for Pierre and said to him: "My dear fellow, if you are going to
Next day Prince Vasili had arrived and settled in the count's house. He

sister with the mole.
And he left the room, followed by the low but ringing laughter of the

him."
said: "Then I will go to my rooms. You will let me know when I can see
Olga went out. Pierre stood looking at the sisters; then he bowed and

busy causing him annoyance.
busy making his father comfortable, while evidently he, Pierre, was only
time," she added, giving Pierre to understand that they were busy, and
him... Olga, go and see whether Uncle's beef tea is ready--it is almost
"Hm.... If you wish to kill him, to kill him outright, you can see

"Can I see the count?" Pierre again asked.

done your best to increase his mental sufferings."
"The count is suffering physically and mentally, and apparently you have

unabashed.
"How is the count? Can I see him?" asked Pierre, awkwardly as usual, but

"I recognize you only too well, too well."

"How do you do, cousin?" said Pierre. "You don't recognize me?"

pattern.
able to refrain from laughing, stooped as if trying to make out the
she foresaw. She drew her wool down through the canvas and, scarcely
bent over her frame to hide a smile probably evoked by the amusing scene
the one with the mole, who was of a cheerful and lively disposition,
the second assumed precisely the same expression; while the youngest,
paused in her reading and silently stared at him with frightened eyes;
was received as if he were a corpse or a leper. The eldest princess
one had a little mole on her lip which made her much prettier. Pierre
embroidering: both were rosy and pretty and they differed only in that
reading--the one who had met Anna Mikhaylovna. The two younger ones were
embroidery frames while a third read aloud. It was the eldest who was
of their time, he greeted the ladies, two of whom were sitting at
the house. Entering the drawing room, where the princesses spent most
he nevertheless on the day of his arrival went to his father's part of
disposed toward him--would have used it to turn the count against him,
in Moscow and that the ladies about his father--who were never favorably
Though he expected that the story of his escapade would be already known
for some days in Moscow and was staying as usual at his father's house.
Pierre had taken part in tying a policeman to a bear. He had now been
sent to Moscow. The story told about him at Count Rostov's was true.
Petersburg, and had been expelled from there for riotous conduct and
Pierre, after all, had not managed to choose a career for himself in


CHAPTER XVI





stairs and up another, to Pierre's rooms.
He shrugged his shoulders. A footman conducted Boris down one flight of

he is, and the count has not once asked for him."
"I shall be only too glad if you relieve me of that young man.... Here
"On the contrary," replied the prince, who had plainly become depressed,

dinner. I suppose he won't go?" she continued, turning to the prince.
and don't forget to give him the Rostovs' invitation. They ask him to
count, my uncle; but you, my dear, had better go to Pierre meanwhile
"Boris," she said to her son with a smile, "I shall go in to see the

seat beside her.
conquered, settled down in an armchair, inviting Prince Vasili to take a
Anna Mikhaylovna took off her gloves and, occupying the position she had
The princess gave no reply and did not even smile, but left the room as

through," and she sympathetically turned up her eyes.
your service to help you nurse my uncle. I imagine what you have gone
smile, ambling lightly up to the count's niece. "I have come, and am at
"Ah, my dear, I hardly knew you," said Anna Mikhaylovna with a happy

princess, looking at Anna Mikhaylovna as at a stranger.
"Still the same; but what can you expect, this noise..." said the

"Well, how is he?"

to her.
was strikingly out of proportion to her short legs. Prince Vasili turned
count's niece, entered with a cold, stern face. The length of her body
A door of one of the inner rooms opened and one of the princesses, the

Christian..."
welfare of his soul is at stake. Ah, it is awful: the duties of a
"But one cannot delay, Prince, at such a moment! Consider that the

crisis."
said he. "Let us wait until evening. The doctors are expecting a
"Would not such a meeting be too trying for him, dear Anna Mikhaylovna?"

Mikhaylovna.
done at Anna Pavlovna's, that it would be difficult to get rid of Anna
Evidently the prince understood her, and also understood, as he had

am used to suffering."
things. I absolutely must see him, however painful it may be for me. I
women, Prince," and she smiled tenderly, "always know how to say these
worse, and it is absolutely necessary to prepare him if he is so ill. We
Prince? How priceless are those last moments! It can make things no
her head and continued in a whisper: "Has he performed his final duty,
except the young princesses.... They are still young...." She bent
his character: noble, upright... but you see he has no one with him
she, uttering the word with peculiar assurance and unconcern, "I know
"If it were not for my sincere affection and devotion to Uncle," said

and hastened to reassure him.
he was afraid of finding in her a rival for Count Bezukhov's fortune,
Prince Vasili became thoughtful and frowned. Anna Mikhaylovna saw that

ought to give Prince Vasili much satisfaction.
Boris. He is his godson," she added, her tone suggesting that this fact
"And I should so like to thank Uncle once for all his kindness to me and

"They give little hope," replied the prince.

expressing deep sorrow.
doctors say?" asked the princess after a pause, her worn face again
but asked him not to be too hard on the poor old man. "What do the
smile, as though she too knew that Count Rostov deserved this censure,
"But a very kind man, Prince," said Anna Mikhaylovna with a pathetic

I am told."
unlicked bear! A perfectly absurd and stupid fellow, and a gambler too,
"I never could understand how Nataly made up her mind to marry that
"I know, I know," answered Prince Vasili in his monotonous voice.

Mikhaylovna.
"That is, with Ilya Rostov who married Nataly Shinshina," said Anna

excellency."
"I am living at Countess Rostova's," replied Boris, again adding, "your

"Are you living with your mother?"

respectfully that the prince gave him a searching glance.
a desire to enter into conversation, but speaking so quietly and
Boris, betraying neither annoyance at the prince's brusque manner nor
"I am awaiting orders to join my new regiment, your excellency," replied

usual tone of indifference.
with severity. "I am glad.... Are you here on leave?" he went on in his
"Try to serve well and show yourself worthy," added he, addressing Boris

in Petersburg at Anna Scherer's reception.
obligation, assuming an air of much greater importance than he had done
here in Moscow to Anna Mikhaylovna whom he had placed under an
said Prince Vasili, arranging his lace frill, and in tone and manner,
"I am glad I was able to do you a service, my dear Anna Mikhaylovna,"

done for us."
"Believe me, Prince, a mother's heart will never forget what you have

Boris bowed again politely.

wanted to thank you himself."
terrible to think.... This is my son," she added, indicating Boris. "He
"Is it possible?" exclaimed Anna Mikhaylovna. "Oh, how awful! It is

lips indicating very little hope for the patient.
to Anna Mikhaylovna, answering her query by a movement of the head and
Boris bowed politely. Prince Vasili without acknowledging the bow turned
Prince Vasili stared at her and at Boris questioningly and perplexed.

fixed on her.
dear invalid?" said she, as though unaware of the cold offensive look
"Ah, Prince! In what sad circumstances we meet again! And how is our

mother's face, and he smiled slightly.
son noticed that an expression of profound sorrow suddenly clouded his
with a bow and approached them silently and with a look of inquiry. The
Seeing Anna Mikhaylovna and her son, Prince Vasili dismissed the doctor

"Very well, very well..."


     * To err is human.


his r's, and pronouncing the Latin words with a French accent.
"Prince, humanum est errare, * but..." replied the doctor, swallowing

"Then it is certain?" said the prince.

man. This was the celebrated Petersburg doctor, Lorrain.
was his custom when at home--taking leave of a good-looking, dark-haired
came out--wearing a velvet coat with a single star on his breast, as
entered, the bronze handle of one of the doors turned and Prince Vasili
about to ask their way of an elderly footman who had sprung up as they
Just as the mother and son, having reached the middle of the hall, were

apartments assigned to Prince Vasili.
They entered the large hall, from which one of the doors led to the

The son, lowering his eyes, followed her quietly.

"you promised me!"
"My dear," she said to her son, once more stimulating him by a touch,

ascended the carpeted stairs.
Venetian mirror in the wall, and in her trodden-down shoes briskly
The mother smoothed the folds of her dyed silk dress before a large

ran downstairs and looked over from the halfway landing.
footman dressed in knee breeches, shoes, and a swallow-tail coat, who
"Princess Drubetskaya to see Prince Vasili Sergeevich," he called to a

away.
The hall porter sullenly pulled a bell that rang upstairs, and turned

Please announce me."
only need see Prince Vasili Sergeevich: he is staying here, is he not?
have come... I am a relation. I shall not disturb him, my friend... I
porter, "I know Count Cyril Vladimirovich is very ill... that's why I
"My friend," said Anna Mikhaylovna in gentle tones, addressing the hall

off his cloak.
Boris said no more, but looked inquiringly at his mother without taking

his arm as if that touch might soothe or rouse him.
"My dear!" exclaimed his mother imploringly, again laying her hand on

"We may as well go back," said the son in French.

today, and that his excellency was not receiving anyone.
hearing that they wished to see the count, said his excellency was worse
cloak, he asked whether they wanted the count or the princesses, and,
rows of statues in niches) and looking significantly at the lady's old
be announced had passed straight through the glass porch between the
entrance, after scrutinizing the mother and son (who without asking to
Although the hall porter saw someone's carriage standing at the

sake."
answered her son coldly. "But I have promised and will do it for your
"If only I knew that anything besides humiliation would come of it..."

to be."
him. Remember that, my dear, and be nice to him, as you so well know how
Cyril Vladimirovich is your godfather after all, your future depends on
tenderly on her son's arm, "be affectionate and attentive to him. Count
drawing her hand from beneath her old mantle and laying it timidly and
Vladimirovich Bezukhov's house. "My dear Boris," said the mother,
covered street and turned into the wide courtyard of Count Cyril
Rostova's carriage in which they were seated drove over the straw
"My dear Boris," said Princess Anna Mikhaylovna to her son as Countess


CHAPTER XV





never gave such a dinner as ours will be!"
We will see how Taras distinguishes himself today. He says Count Orlov
know, and danced with the children. Be sure to invite him, my dear.
he is better, ask Pierre to dine with us. He has been to the house, you
coming out from the dining hall into the anteroom, and he added: "If
"Are you going to Count Cyril Vladimirovich, my dear?" said the count

luck."
and added in a whisper so that her son should not hear, "Wish me good
"Good-by, my dear," said she to the countess who saw her to the door,

anteroom with him.
time, Anna Mikhaylovna sent someone to call her son, and went into the
And like a practical Petersburg lady who knows how to make the most of

two o'clock and you dine at four. There will just be time."
same to me when my son's fate is at stake." The princess rose. "It's now
straight out. Let people think what they will of me, it's really all the
I will take Boris and go to see him at once, and I shall speak to him
"Heaven only knows, my dear! These rich grandees are so selfish. Still,

"Surely he will leave something to Boris," said the countess.

and Bory's life is only just beginning...."
tremendous fortune... and what is his life worth? It's a burden to him,
here lives Count Cyril Vladimirovich Bezukhov so rich, all alone... that
"I often think, though, perhaps it's a sin," said the princess, "that

The countess' eyes filled with tears and she pondered in silence.

thrown away.... I shall not be able to equip him."
allow him something for his maintenance, all my trouble will have been
If he will not assist his godson--you know he is Bory's godfather--and
state.... My only hope now is in Count Cyril Vladimirovich Bezukhov.
hundred rubles, and have only one twenty-five-ruble note. I am in such a
Boris." She took out her handkerchief and began to cry. "I need five
believe it, I have literally not a penny and don't know how to equip
"My wretched lawsuit takes all I have and makes no progress. Would you
a terrible one," continued Anna Mikhaylovna, sadly, dropping her voice.
happiness! And my affairs are in such a bad way that my position is now
But, Nataly, you know my love for my son: I would do anything for his
your command.' Yes, he is a fine fellow and a very kind relation.
me, 'I am sorry I can do so little for you, dear Princess. I am at
with amiability. His position has not turned his head at all. He said to
"He is just the same as ever," replied Anna Mikhaylovna, "overflowing

with a smile.
forgotten me. He paid me attentions in those days," said the countess,
since we acted together at the Rumyantsovs' theatricals. I expect he has
"Has Prince Vasili aged much?" asked the countess. "I have not seen him

to gain her end.
enthusiastically, quite forgetting all the humiliation she had endured
and put the matter before the Emperor," said Princess Anna Mikhaylovna
"To Prince Vasili. He was so kind. He at once agreed to everything,

did you apply?"
going as a cadet. There's no one to interest himself for him. To whom
see yours is already an officer in the Guards, while my Nicholas is
"Well, and to whom did you apply about Bory?" asked the countess. "You

times--till I get what I want. I don't mind what they think of me."
So and-So,' and then I take a cab and go myself two, three, or four
people I write a note: 'Princess So-and-So desires an interview with
pride. "That lawsuit taught me much. When I want to see one of those big
to distraction! One learns many things then," she added with a certain
what it is to be left a widow without means and with a son you love
"Ah, my love," answered Anna Mikhaylovna, "God grant you never know

get things settled? I couldn't possibly do it."
and know how to deal with them all! It's quite astonishing. How did you
carriage to Moscow, to Petersburg, to those ministers and great people,
wonder at you, Annette--how at your age you can rush off alone in a
don't let's talk about me; tell me how you managed everything. I often
get any rest? Theatricals, hunting, and heaven knows what besides! But
It's all the Club and his easygoing nature. Even in the country do we
Don't I know that at the rate we are living our means won't last long?
"Ah, my dear," said the countess, "my life is not all roses either.

In the drawing room the conversation was still going on.


her own handsome face she seemed to become still colder and calmer.
went to the looking glass and arranged her hair and scarf. Looking at
on everyone, smiled and, evidently unmoved by what had been said to her,
The handsome Vera, who produced such an irritating and unpleasant effect

the door.
"Madame de Genlis! Madame de Genlis!" shouted laughing voices through

anyone."
"The unpleasant things were said to me," remarked Vera, "I said none to

All four, like a flock of scared birds, got up and left the room.

unpleasant things to everyone and upset them. Let's go to the nursery."
"Well, now you've done what you wanted," put in Nicholas--"said

"I shall at any rate not run after a young man before visitors..."

finished quickly.
unpleasant to people! Go and flirt with Berg as much as you please," she
was considered very stinging), "and your greatest pleasure is to be
and nothing more" (this nickname, bestowed on Vera by Nicholas,
never loved anyone. You have no heart! You are a Madame de Genlis
added, turning to Vera, "You'll never understand it, because you've
special sense they attached to it.) "Why does she bother me?" And she
"diplomat," which was just then much in vogue among the children, in the
Natasha in a mortified voice that trembled slightly. (She used the word
"Don't, Boris! You are such a diplomat that it is really tiresome," said

nothing to complain of."
"Natalya Ilynichna behaves very well to me," remarked Boris. "I have

Boris."
wrong in my behavior. But I'll just tell Mamma how you are behaving with
"I should think not," said Vera, "because there can never be anything

don't interfere with you and Berg."
"All have secrets of their own," answered Natasha, getting warmer. "We

"Very silly," said Vera. "I am ashamed of you. Secrets indeed!"

everyone.
She seemed that day to be more than ever kind and affectionate to

speaking very gently.
"Now, Vera, what does it matter to you?" said Natasha in defense,

between you two? It's all nonsense!"
"And at your age what secrets can there be between Natasha and Boris, or

room with the inkstand in her hand.
replied, and the four simply looked at one another. She lingered in the
Though what she said was quite just, perhaps for that very reason no one

you."
"You came rushing into the drawing room so that everyone felt ashamed of
"You always manage to do things at the wrong time," continued Vera.

"In a minute, in a minute," he said, dipping his pen.

a room of your own," and she took the inkstand from Nicholas.
"How often have I asked you not to take my things?" she said. "You have

apparently the sight of them roused no pleasant feeling in Vera.
It was pleasant and touching to see these little girls in love; but

with guilty, happy faces.
and ceased talking when Vera entered. Sonya and Natasha looked at Vera
first he had ever written. Boris and Natasha were at the other window
sitting close to Nicholas who was copying out some verses for her, the
one pair at each window. She stopped and smiled scornfully. Sonya was
But as she passed the sitting room she noticed two couples sitting,

she rose to go to her own room.
"If you had told me sooner, Mamma, I would have gone," she replied as

The handsome Vera smiled contemptuously but did not seem at all hurt.

wanted here? Go to the other girls, or..."
favorite, "how is it you have so little tact? Don't you see you are not
"Vera," she said to her eldest daughter who was evidently not a

friend's hand.
Anna Mikhaylovna looked at Vera and paused. The countess pressed her

many left of us old friends! That's why I so value your friendship."
"With you I will be quite frank," said Anna Mikhaylovna. "There are not

her chair nearer to that of the countess.
Petersburg. Anna Mikhaylovna, with her tear-worn but pleasant face, drew
Mikhaylovna, whom she had not seen properly since she returned from
a tete-a-tete talk with the friend of her childhood, Princess Anna
to dinner all who came "to congratulate." The countess wished to have
orders to admit no more, but the porter was told to be sure to invite
After receiving her visitors, the countess was so tired that she gave


CHAPTER XIV





sitting room.
She took his arm and with a happy face went with him into the adjoining

"Forever?" said the little girl. "Till death itself?"

"Settled!" replied Boris.

A smile of joy and satisfaction lit up her eager face.

little fingers. "All right! Then it's settled?"
"Thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, sixteen," she counted on her slender

Natasha considered.

years... then I will ask for your hand."
"Yes, I am, but please don't let us do like that.... In another four

"You are in love with me?" Natasha broke in.

"Natasha," he said, "you know that I love you, but..."

and stood, hanging her head.
Then she slipped down among the flowerpots on the other side of the tubs

back her hair, kissed him full on the lips.
that both her slender bare arms clasped him above his neck, and, tossing
Suddenly she jumped up onto a tub to be higher than he, embraced him so

more, but he waited and did nothing.
"How funny you are!" he said, bending down to her and blushing still

Boris blushed.

excitement.
glancing up at him from under her brows, smiling, and almost crying from
"And me? Would you like to kiss me?" she whispered almost inaudibly,

fear appeared on her flushed face.
She caught the young officer by his cuffs, and a look of solemnity and

whispered.
in among the plants and threw down the doll. "Closer, closer!" she
"Don't you want to? Well, then, come here," said she, and went further

reply.
Boris looked attentively and kindly at her eager face, but did not

"Kiss the doll," said she.

down on one of the tubs, picked it up.
She grew confused, glanced round, and, seeing the doll she had thrown

"What is the something?" asked he.

Boris followed her, smiling.

conservatory to the place among the tubs where she had been hiding.
have something to tell you. Here, here!" and she led him into the
"Boris, come here," said she with a sly and significant look. "I

out of the conservatory she followed and called Boris to her.
"Oh, how nice," thought Natasha; and when Sonya and Nicholas had gone

kissed her.
"Well, then, I won't; only forgive me, Sonya!" He drew her to him and

"I don't like you to talk like that."

said Nicholas. "And I will prove it to you."
"Sonya! What is anyone in the world to me? You alone are everything!"

"What will happen now?" thought she.
and scarcely breathing, watched from her ambush with sparkling eyes.
Sonya did not pull it away, and left off crying. Natasha, not stirring

for a mere fancy?" said Nicholas taking her hand.
"So-o-onya! Look here! How can you torture me and yourself like that,

"Well, if you do, so much the better, and you can go back to her!"

"Ah, I know what it is."

"It's nothing, nothing; leave me alone!" sobbed Sonya.

to her.
"Sonya, what is the matter with you? How can you?" said he, running up

round toward the drawing-room door. It opened and Nicholas came in.
a new and peculiar pleasure. Sonya, muttering to herself, kept looking
invisible cap--to see what went on in the world. She was experiencing
run out to her, and remained in her hiding place, watching--as under an
angrily, came in at the other door. Natasha checked her first impulse to
Hardly had Boris gone than Sonya, flushed, in tears, and muttering
to call him but changed her mind. "Let him look for me," thought she.
glass, smiled, and walked toward the other door. Natasha was about
waiting to see what he would do. He stood a little while before the
his handsome face. Natasha, very still, peered out from her ambush,
dust from the sleeve of his uniform, and going up to a mirror examined
Boris paused in the middle of the room, looked round, brushed a little

flower tubs and hid there.
neither quickly nor slowly. At this Natasha dashed swiftly among the
at once, when she heard the young man's discreet steps approaching
growing impatient, and stamped her foot, ready to cry at his not coming
in the drawing room, waiting for Boris to come out. She was already
conservatory. There she paused and stood listening to the conversation
When Natasha ran out of the drawing room she only went as far as the


CHAPTER XIII





she had seen her guests out.
"What manners! I thought they would never go," said the countess, when

The guests got up and took their leave, promising to return to dinner.

splendidly all the same," he added, winking at Vera.
clever with Vera," said the count. "Well, what of that? She's turned out
"What's the good of denying it, my dear? Our dear countess was too

something exceptional of them," said the visitor.
"People are always too clever with their eldest children and try to make

it, and they all felt awkward.
countess alike--turned to look at her as if wondering why she had said
true and appropriate, yet, strange to say, everyone--the visitors and
was well brought up, and had a pleasant voice; what she said was
expression. Vera was good-looking, not at all stupid, quick at learning,
on the contrary it gave her an unnatural, and therefore unpleasant,
But the smile did not enhance Vera's beauty as smiles generally do;

daughter, Countess Vera, with a smile.
"Yes, I was brought up quite differently," remarked the handsome elder

really that seems the best plan. With her elder sister I was stricter."
accord in the evening and tell me everything. Perhaps I spoil her, but
I know every word she utters. She will come running to me of her own
to on the sly" (she meant that they would be kissing), "but as it is,
severe with her and to forbid it... goodness knows what they might be up
with a thought that always occupied her: "Now you see if I were to be
with a gentle smile, looking at Boris' and went on, evidently concerned
"And she's in love with Boris already. Just fancy!" said the countess

to be married at twelve or thirteen."
"Oh no, not at all too young!" replied the count. "Why, our mothers used

at that age."
"Isn't she too young? I have heard that it harms the voice to train it

give her lessons."
she'll be a singer, a second Salomoni! We have engaged an Italian to
voice she has; though she's my daughter, I tell the truth when I say
"Yes, a regular volcano," said the count. "Takes after me! And what a

little volcano!"
"What a charming creature your younger girl is," said the visitor; "a

to do, my dear?"
everything was splendid. "Just fancy: wants to be an hussar. What's one
always solved questions that seemed to him perplexing by deciding that
"Yes, they are splendid, splendid youngsters," chimed in the count, who

all the same never be like those Petersburg young men."
impulsive nature, does get into mischief (a boy can't help it), he will
always be my daughters' first confidante, and that if Nicholas, with his
imagine that their children have no secrets from them. "I know I shall
confidence," said she, repeating the mistake of so many parents who
always, thank God, been my children's friend and had their full
"Yes, you're quite right," continued the countess. "Till now I have

"It all depends on the bringing up," remarked the visitor.

for girls and boys."
always, always anxious! Especially just at this age, so dangerous both
them now! And yet really the anxiety is greater now than the joy. One is
how much anxiety one has had to go through that we might rejoice in
one had put but which was always in her mind, "and how much suffering,
brought into the room had vanished; and as if answering a question no
"Yes," said the countess when the brightness these young people had


     * Cousinhood is a dangerous neighborhood.


"Cousinage--dangereux voisinage;" * she added.
sleeves!" said Anna Mikhaylovna, pointing to Nicholas as he went out.
"How plainly all these young people wear their hearts on their

with a distressed face left the room to find Sonya.
vanished. He waited for the first pause in the conversation, and then
on her lips, she got up and left the room. All Nicholas' animation
hardly able to restrain her tears and maintain the artificial smile
he glanced round at her. She gave him a passionately angry glance, and
of Sonya, who blushed and smiled unnaturally. In the midst of his talk
without at all noticing that his involuntary smile had stabbed the heart
smile, and engaged the smiling Julie in a confidential conversation
The young man, flattered, sat down nearer to her with a coquettish

without you," said she, giving him a tender smile.
"What a pity you weren't at the Arkharovs' on Thursday. It was so dull

Rostov.
The elders began talking about Bonaparte. Julie Karagina turned to young

not noticing his visitor's sarcastic smile.
from an ensign and became Emperor. Well, well, God grant it," he added,
Buonaparte has turned all their heads; they all think of how he rose
"All right, all right!" said the old count. "He always flares up! This

to start her gambols again and display her kittenish nature.
The little kitten, feasting her eyes on him, seemed ready at any moment

of a handsome youth at Sonya and the young lady visitor.
hide what I feel." As he spoke he kept glancing with the flirtatiousness
army; I am not a diplomat or a government clerk.--I don't know how to
to let me go, I'll stay. But I know I am no use anywhere except in the
"I have already told you, Papa," said his son, "that if you don't wish

speaking playfully of a matter that evidently distressed him.
him. It can't be helped!" said the count, shrugging his shoulders and
today. He has been here on leave and is taking Nicholas back with
"Schubert, the colonel of the Pavlograd Hussars, is dining with us

regarding him with a smile of approbation.
He glanced at his cousin and the young lady visitor; and they were both

at all; I simply feel that the army is my vocation."
turning away as if from a shameful aspersion. "It is not from friendship
"It's not at all from friendship," declared Nicholas, flaring up and

The visitor, not knowing what to say, shook her head.

friendship for you," he repeated. "He's joining the hussars."
so again and again, and that will be the end of it. My dear, there's
"They've been saying so a long while," said the count, "and they'll say

"But they say that war has been declared," replied the visitor.

friendship?" remarked the count in an inquiring tone.
and everything waiting for him in the Archives Department! Isn't that
and entering the military service, my dear. And there was a place
friendship's sake he is leaving the university and me, his old father,
to Nicholas, "his friend Boris has become an officer, and so for
"Ah yes, my dear," said the count, addressing the visitor and pointing

Natasha and Boris, escape from the drawing room.
energy and again play with her cousin as soon as they too could, like
was clear that the kitten had settled down only to spring up with more
her smile could not for a single instant impose upon anyone, and it
was going to join the army, with such passionate girlish adoration that
of herself her eyes under their thick long lashes watched her cousin who
show an interest in the general conversation by smiling, but in spite
to become a beautiful little cat. She evidently considered it proper to
manner, she reminded one of a pretty, half-grown kitten which promises
flexibility of her small limbs, and by a certain coyness and reserve of
arms and neck. By the grace of her movements, by the softness and
and especially in the color of her slender but graceful and muscular
plaits coiling twice round her head, and a tawny tint in her complexion
a tender look in her eyes which were veiled by long lashes, thick black
Nicholas and Sonya, the niece. Sonya was a slender little brunette with
older than her sister and behaved already like a grown-up person), were
young lady visitor and the countess' eldest daughter (who was four years
The only young people remaining in the drawing room, not counting the


CHAPTER XII





disturbed.
boy ran after them angrily, as if vexed that their program had been
Boris quietly left the room and went in search of Natasha. The plump

his smile.
"Yes, yes, go and tell them to get it ready," she answered, returning

carriage?" he asked his mother with a smile.
"You were meaning to go out, weren't you, Mamma? Do you want the

fast as her nimble little feet would carry her. Boris did not laugh.
to control herself any longer, she jumped up and rushed from the room as
screwing up his eyes and shaking with suppressed laughter, and unable
turned away from him and glanced at her younger brother, who was
right across the skull. Having said this he glanced at Natasha. She
during the five years he had known her, and how her head had cracked
still quite a young lady, before her nose was broken; how she had aged
quietly and humorously how he had known that doll Mimi when she was
failed. Boris on the contrary at once found his footing, and related
the drawing room. He evidently tried to find something to say, but
expressed impetuosity and enthusiasm. Nicholas blushed when he entered
Dark hairs were already showing on his upper lip, and his whole face
features. Nicholas was short with curly hair and an open expression.
was tall and fair, and his calm and handsome face had regular, delicate
were of the same age and both handsome fellows, though not alike. Boris
The two young men, the student and the officer, friends from childhood,

able to suppress their laughter.
Countess Apraksina. Now and then they glanced at one another, hardly
than the drawing-room talk of society scandals, the weather, and
had dashed out so impetuously, the conversation had been more amusing
shone in all their faces. Evidently in the back rooms, from which they
restrain within the bounds of decorum the excitement and mirth that
had all settled down in the drawing room and were obviously trying to
count's fifteen-year-old niece, and little Petya, his youngest boy,
son; Nicholas, the undergraduate, the count's eldest son; Sonya, the
Meanwhile the younger generation: Boris, the officer, Anna Mikhaylovna's

things. She did not reply, but looked at her seriously.
Natasha did not like the visitor's tone of condescension to childish

daughter, I suppose?"
"Tell me, my dear," said she to Natasha, "is Mimi a relation of yours? A

necessary to take some part in it.
The visitor, compelled to look on at this family scene, thought it

glanced up at her through tears of laughter, and again hid her face.
Natasha, raising her face for a moment from her mother's mantilla,

visitor she added: "She is my youngest girl."
pushing away her daughter with pretended sternness, and turning to the
"Now then, go away and take your monstrosity with you," said the mother,

visitor could not help joining in.
and burst into such a loud, ringing fit of laughter that even the prim
to utter (to her everything seemed funny). She leaned against her mother
"Do you see?... My doll... Mimi... You see..." was all Natasha managed

from the folds of her frock.
fragmentary sentences tried to explain about a doll which she produced
attention to her severe remark--and began to laugh. She laughed, and in
flushed face in the lace of her mother's mantilla--not paying the least
yet a young woman. Escaping from her father she ran to hide her
charming age when a girl is no longer a child, though the child is not
in lace-frilled drawers, and feet in low slippers--was just at that
bodice, with black curls tossed backward, thin bare arms, little legs
childish bare shoulders which after her run heaved and shook her
This black-eyed, wide-mouthed girl, not pretty but full of life--with

the mother.
day," said the visitor. "What a charming child," she added, addressing
"How do you do, my dear? I wish you many happy returns of your name

husband.
feigned severity. "You spoil her, Ilya," she added, turning to her
"Ma chere, there is a time for everything," said the countess with

My dear pet!"
"Ah, here she is!" he exclaimed laughing. "My pet, whose name day it is.

and threw them round the little girl who had run in.
The count jumped up and, swaying from side to side, spread his arms wide

a girl of fifteen, and a plump rosy-faced boy in a short jacket.
appeared a student with a crimson coat collar, an officer of the Guards,
not intended her flight to bring her so far. Behind her in the doorway
stopped short in the middle of the room. It was evident that she had
hiding something in the folds of her short muslin frock, darted in and
the door and the noise of a chair falling over, and a girl of thirteen,
the next room were heard the footsteps of boys and girls running to
down her dress with an inquiring look at her mother, when suddenly from
rose and took their leave. The visitor's daughter was already smoothing
but not concealing the fact that she would not be distressed if they now
Silence ensued. The countess looked at her callers, smiling affably,


CHAPTER XI





said.
well and, in particular, drinks well. "So do come and dine with us!" he
again shook with a deep ringing laugh, the laugh of one who always eats
And as he waved his arms to impersonate the policeman, his portly form

ladies. "I can just imagine what a funny figure that policeman cut!"
seeing that the elder visitor was not listening, he turned to the young
"But do you know, my dear, that was a capital joke," said the count; and

is."
fact is he has come to see Count Cyril Vladimirovich, hearing how ill he
"Yes, but between ourselves," said the princess, "that is a pretext. The

inspection business," remarked the visitor.
"Prince Vasili arrived in Moscow yesterday. I hear he has come on some

fact.
godfather," she added, as if she attached no importance at all to the
Vladimirovich is my mother's second cousin. He's also my Bory's
it all very well for Prince Vasili told me himself. Besides, Cyril
or Prince Vasili. Forty thousand serfs and millions of rubles! I know
Petersburg--no one knows who will inherit his immense fortune, Pierre
ill that he may die at any moment, and Dr. Lorrain has come from
Emperor about him; so that in the case of his death--and he is so
is very fond of Pierre, looked after his education, and wrote to the
saying, Prince Vasili is the next heir through his wife, but the count
"He is very much altered now," said Anna Mikhaylovna. "Well, as I was

countess. "I have never seen a handsomer man."
"How handsome the old man still was only a year ago!" remarked the

of his children, but this Pierre was his favorite."
whisper, "everyone knows Count Cyril's reputation.... He has lost count
"The fact of the matter is," said she significantly, and also in a half

society.
wishing to show her connections and knowledge of what went on in
Princess Anna Mikhaylovna intervened in the conversation, evidently

"I should think he has a score of them."

The visitor made a gesture with her hand.

children are all illegitimate. I think Pierre also is illegitimate."
away from the girls, who at once assumed an air of inattention. "His
"Why do you say this young man is so rich?" asked the countess, turning

my daughters to consider."
money. They wanted to introduce him to me, but I quite declined: I have
him! I hope that here in Moscow no one will receive him, in spite of his
educated and clever. This is all that his foreign education has done for
amuses himself in this sensible manner! And he was said to be so well
visitor. "And to think it is Cyril Vladimirovich Bezukhov's son who
"It was all they could do to rescue the poor man," continued the

Yet the ladies themselves could not help laughing.

"Oh, how dreadful! How can you laugh at it, Count?"

count, dying with laughter.
"What a nice figure the policeman must have cut, my dear!" shouted the

was the bear swimming about with the policeman on his back!"
the bear back to back and put the bear into the Moyka Canal. And there
to interfere, and what did the young men do? They tied a policeman and
carriage, and set off with it to visit some actresses! The police tried
there, just fancy! Those three got hold of a bear somewhere, put it in a
"He is a son of Marya Ivanovna Dolokhova, such a worthy woman, but
"They are regular brigands, especially Dolokhov," replied the visitor.

"But what have they been up to?" asked the countess.

up, but even he was ordered out of Petersburg."
Anatole Kuragin's father managed somehow to get his son's affair hushed
has been degraded to the ranks and Bezukhov's son sent back to Moscow.
heaven only knows what! And they have had to suffer for it. Dolokhov
Vasili's son, he, and a certain Dolokhov have, it is said, been up to
"He chose his friends badly," interposed Anna Mikhaylovna. "Prince

"You don't say so!" replied the countess.

that he has been expelled by the police."
liked, now in Petersburg I hear he has been doing such terrible things
seems that while he was abroad this young man was allowed to do as he
"That's what comes of a modern education," exclaimed the visitor. "It

Count Bezukhov's distress some fifteen times.
visitor alluded to, though she had already heard about the cause of
"What is that?" asked the countess as if she did not know what the

health, and now this vexation about his son is enough to kill him!"
"I am so sorry for the poor count," said the visitor. "He is in such bad

so improperly at Anna Pavlovna's reception.
Bezukhov, and about his illegitimate son Pierre, the one who had behaved
illness of the wealthy and celebrated beau of Catherine's day, Count
and drive away. The conversation was on the chief topic of the day: the
then, again rustling, pass into the anteroom, put on cloaks or mantles,
"I am so delighted... Mamma's health... and Countess Apraksina..." and
at the first pause, the guests rise with a rustle of dresses and say,
of chairs. Then one of those conversations began which last out until,
one another and mingling with the rustling of dresses and the scraping
delighted..." came the sounds of animated feminine voices, interrupting
at the Razumovski's ball... and Countess Apraksina... I was so
"Dear Countess, what an age... She has been laid up, poor child...

daughter, entered the drawing room, their dresses rustling.
A tall, stout, and proud-looking woman, with a round-faced smiling

as if saying: "Very well, finish me off."
She is so affected. Ask her in," she said to the footman in a sad voice,
"I'm quite worn out by these callers. However, I'll see her and no more.

her husband's portrait on it.
countess reflected a moment and took a pinch from a gold snuffbox with
gigantic footman in his bass voice, entering the drawing room. The
"Marya Lvovna Karagina and her daughter!" announced the countess'

complacent sigh he would return to the drawing room.
be? That's right! The great thing is the serving, that's it." And with a
would say: "Well, Dmitri, you'll see that things are all as they should
all his affairs, and while looking with pleasure at the enormous table
would call Dmitri Vasilevich, a man of good family and the manager of
silver and china, moving tables, and unfolding damask table linen, he
out for eighty people; and looking at the footmen, who were bringing in
pantry into the large marble dining hall, where tables were being set
way back from the anteroom he would pass through the conservatory and
hairs over his bald patch, also asked them to dinner. Sometimes on his
of duty, he rose to see some visitors off and, stroking his scanty gray
French; then again, like a man weary but unflinching in the fulfillment
sometimes in Russian and sometimes in very bad but self-confident
offered surmises about the weather, or touched on questions of health,
enjoys life and knows how to live, he swayed to and fro with dignity,
his legs and putting his hands on his knees with the air of a man who
drawing room, drew a chair toward him or her, and jauntily spreading out
had seen a visitor off he returned to one of those who were still in the
pressure of the hand and the same quick, repeated bows. As soon as he
expression on his full, cheerful, clean-shaven face, the same firm
repeated to everyone without exception or variation, and with the same
behalf of the whole family I beg you to come, mon cher!" These words he
But mind you come to dinner or I shall be offended, ma chere! On
you for myself and for our two dear ones whose name day we are keeping.
tone, "my dear," whether they were above or below him in rank--"I thank
everyone without exception and without the slightest variation in his
"I am very, very grateful to you, mon cher," or "ma chere"--he called

them off, inviting them all to dinner.
take part in receiving the visitors. The count met the guests and saw
people were in one of the inner rooms, not considering it necessary to
drawing room, helped to receive and entertain the visitors. The young
Drubetskaya, who as a member of the household was also seated in the
distinguished air which inspired respect. Princess Anna Mikhaylovna
A languor of motion and speech, resulting from weakness, gave her a
of face, evidently worn out with childbearing--she had had twelve.
The countess was a woman of about forty-five, with a thin Oriental type

relays.
who came to congratulate, and who constantly succeeded one another in
her handsome eldest daughter were in the drawing-room with the visitors
the Povarskaya, so well known to all Moscow. The countess herself and
continually, bringing visitors to the Countess Rostova's big house on
the morning, carriages with six horses had been coming and going
mother and the youngest daughter--both named Nataly. Ever since
It was St. Natalia's day and the name day of two of the Rostovs--the

on the march to Radzivilov.
her son, who had remained in Moscow for his equipment, was to join them
time. The Guards had already left Petersburg on the tenth of August, and
as a cornet, had been educated from childhood and lived for years at a
regiment of the line and was being at once transferred to the Guards
in the town and where her darling Bory, who had only just entered a
straight to her rich relations, the Rostovs, with whom she stayed when
Anna Pavlovna's reception Anna Mikhaylovna returned to Moscow and went
despite all Anna Mikhaylovna's endeavors and entreaties. Soon after
rank of cornet. He received, however, no appointment to Kutuzov's staff
made, and Boris transferred into the regiment of Semenov Guards with the
Pavlovna's soiree. The matter was mentioned to the Emperor, an exception
had spoken to him on behalf of her only son Boris on the evening of Anna
Prince Vasili kept the promise he had given to Princess Drubetskaya who


CHAPTER X





and began dancing round the room with it.
And he caught the bear, took it in his arms, lifted it from the ground,

us."
"Come on then," cried Pierre. "Come on!... And we'll take Bruin with

are all going to ----'s."
I'll get round him.... Listen! I'll take your bet tomorrow, but now we
"No, you'll never manage him that way," said Anatole. "Wait a bit and

touched him was sent flying.
They seized him by his arms; but he was so strong that everyone who

of the window.
table with a determined and drunken gesture and preparing to climb out
"I'll drink it! Let's have a bottle of rum!" shouted Pierre, banging the

giddy even on a staircase," exclaimed several voices.
"What next? Have you gone mad?... No one would let you!... Why, you go

"Let him do it, let him do it," said Dolokhov, smiling.

bottle. I'll do it.... Bring a bottle!"
suddenly cried. "Even without a bet, there! Tell them to bring me a
"Gentlemen, who wishes to bet with me? I'll do the same thing!" he

sill.
Dolokhov stood frowning and did not speak. Pierre jumped upon the window
The Englishman took out his purse and began counting out the money.

you!" came from different sides.
"Well done!... Fine fellow!... There's a bet for you!... Devil take

jumped down. He smelt strongly of rum.
He threw the bottle to the Englishman, who caught it neatly. Dolokhov

"It's empty."

radiant face.
He looked up: Dolokhov was standing on the window sill, with a pale but
would never open them again. Suddenly he was aware of a stir all around.
refrained from touching it. Pierre again covered his eyes and thought he
with the strain. One hand moved as if to clutch the window sill, but
ledge. As he began slipping down, his head and arm wavered still more
was sufficient to cause his whole body to slip as he sat on the sloping
a backward movement with his spine, and his arm trembled nervously; this
to him that more than half an hour had elapsed. Suddenly Dolokhov made
tilting yet further back. "Why is it so long?" thought Pierre. It seemed
bottle was emptying perceptibly and rising still higher and his head
bottle was lifted higher and higher and trembled with the effort. The
till his curly hair touched his shirt collar, and the hand holding the
still sat in the same position, only his head was thrown further back
and fear. All were still. Pierre took his hands from his eyes. Dolokhov
faint smile forgot to fade though his features now expressed horror
on a sofa with his face to the wall. Pierre hid his face, from which a
wished to stop the affair ran to a corner of the room and threw himself
The Englishman looked on sideways, pursing up his lips. The man who had
window and from Dolokhov's back. Anatole stood erect with staring eyes.
broken glass remained in that position without taking his eyes from the
to balance himself. One of the footmen who had stooped to pick up some
and lifted it to his lips, threw back his head, and raised his free hand
Saying this he again turned round, dropped his hands, took the bottle

then!"
through his thin compressed lips, "I will throw him down there. Now
"If anyone comes meddling again," said he, emitting the words separately

himself on his seat.
Dolokhov turned round and, again holding on with both hands, arranged

What then?... Eh?"
"Don't touch him! You'll startle him and then he'll be killed. Eh?...

Anatole stopped him.

"I say, this is folly! He'll be killed," said this more sensible man.

hold of Dolokhov's shirt.
suddenly pushed forward with a scared and angry look and wanted to seize
stood smiling but silent. One man, older than the others present,
sides. Everyone crowded to the window, the Englishman in front. Pierre
back in his white shirt, and his curly head, were lit up from both
them on the window sill, though it was already quite light. Dolokhov's
the left, and took up the bottle. Anatole brought two candles and placed
his seat, lowered his hands, moved a little to the right and then to
legs. Pressing against both sides of the window, he adjusted himself on
Dolokhov climbed carefully and slowly through the window and lowered his
Placing the bottle on the window sill where he could reach it easily,

jumped awkwardly back into the room, tripping over his spurs.
"Shut up!" cried Dolokhov, pushing him away from the window. The lad

the pavement.
"Oh! Oh! Oh!" he muttered, looking down from the window at the stones of

leaned over, and looked down.
Guards, who had been losing that evening, climbed on the window sill,
Dolokhov's words into English. A thin young lad, an hussar of the Life
he kept nodding to show that he understood, Anatole went on translating
accept this challenge or not. Anatole did not release him, and though
The Englishman nodded, but gave no indication whether he intended to

same, I will pay him a hundred imperials. Do you understand?"
attract attention. "Wait a bit, Kuragin. Listen! If anyone else does the
"Wait!" cried Dolokhov, hammering with the bottle on the window sill to

repeating the terms of the wager to him in English.
of his coat and looking down at him--the Englishman was short--began
Anatole turned to the Englishman and taking him by one of the buttons

"Quite right," said the Englishman.

"and without holding on to anything. Is that right?"
spot" (he stooped and pointed to the sloping ledge outside the window)
without taking it from my mouth, sitting outside the window on this
"All right. Fifty imperials... that I will drink a whole bottle of rum

"No, fifty," replied the latter.

the Englishman.
imperials... or do you wish to make it a hundred?" added he, addressing
understand him, but he did, not speak it very well--"I bet fifty
"I bet fifty imperials"--he spoke French that the Englishman might

room. All were silent.
sill. "Listen!" cried he, standing there and addressing those in the
Dolokhov, the bottle of rum still in his hand, jumped onto the window

the dawn merging with the afterglow of sunset, was visible.
in his hand was approaching the window, from which the light of the sky,
"First-rate," said Pierre, looking at Dolokhov, who with a bottle of rum

"Is the Englishman bragging?... Eh? Is it all right?" said Anatole.

"Take it right out, or they'll think I'm holding on," said Dolokhov.

a crash.
Pierre seized the crossbeam, tugged, and wrenched the oak frame out with

"You have a try, Hercules," said he, turning to Pierre.

could not move it. He smashed a pane.
smash something. Pushing away the footmen he tugged at the frame, but
Anatole with his swaggering air strode up to the window. He wanted to

the gentlemen around.
were evidently flurried and intimidated by the directions and shouts of
from sitting on the outer sill was being forced out by two footmen, who
The bottle of rum was brought. The window frame which prevented anyone

of Petersburg.
and Dolokhov were at that time notorious among the rakes and scapegraces
However much he drank, he never lost his clearheadedness. Both Kuragin
they did Anatole. Dolokhov could play all games and nearly always won.
all who knew them, including Anatole himself, respected him more than
Dolokhov lived with him and had placed himself on such a footing that
no connections. Yet, though Anatole spent tens of thousands of rubles,
impossible not to notice his face. Dolokhov was a man of small means and
insolent intelligence of his eyes, produced an effect which made it
round the two corners of the mouth; this, together with the resolute,
lower one, and something like two distinct smiles played continually
of the upper lip formed a sharp wedge and closed firmly on the firm
seen. The lines of that mouth were remarkably finely curved. The middle
so that his mouth, the most striking feature of his face, was clearly
was about twenty-five. Like all infantry officers he wore no mustache,
Dolokhov was of medium height, with curly hair and light-blue eyes. He

Anatole and Pierre.
repeating the terms of the bet, addressing himself particularly to
Dolokhov was holding the Englishman's hand and clearly and distinctly

window.
"No, I won't," said Pierre, pushing Anatole aside, and he went up to the

glass, "or I won't let you go!"
"Go on, you must drink it all," said Anatole, giving Pierre the last

of the third floor window with his legs hanging out.
officer, that he would drink a bottle of rum sitting on the outer ledge
explaining that Dolokhov was betting with Stevens, an English naval
to their chatter. Anatole kept on refilling Pierre's glass while
the tipsy guests who were again crowding round the window, and listening
Pierre drank one glass after another, looking from under his brows at

"First of all you must drink!"

glass from the table he went up to Pierre.
"Wait a bit, he is not drunk yet! A bottle here," said Anatole, taking a

"I don't understand. What's it all about?"

was living with Anatole. Pierre smiled, looking about him merrily.
an officer of the Semenov regiment, a notorious gambler and duelist, who
cried from the window: "Come here; part the bets!" This was Dolokhov,
particularly striking among all these drunken voices by its sober ring,
Another voice, from a man of medium height with clear blue eyes,

Good man!" cried he, addressing Pierre.
shirt unfastened in front. "Wait a bit, you fellows.... Here is Petya!
stood in the midst of the group, without a coat, and with his fine linen
"Jacob, bring a bottle!" shouted the host, a tall, handsome fellow who

"At one draught, or he loses!" shouted a fourth.

"There, leave Bruin alone; here's a bet on."

"I bet on Dolokhov!" cried a third. "Kuragin, you part our hands."

"Mind, no holding on!" cried another.

"I bet a hundred on Stevens!" shouted one.

pulling him by the chain and trying to set him at the others.
round an open window. Three others were romping with a young bear, one
general commotion. Some eight or nine young men were crowding anxiously
laughter, the shouting of familiar voices, the growling of a bear, and
the sly what was left in the glasses. From the third room came sounds of
remains of supper. A footman, thinking no one saw him, was drinking on
Pierre threw off his cloak and entered the first room, in which were the
Cards and supper were over, but the visitors had not yet dispersed.

alcohol, and sounds of voices and shouting in the distance.
bottles, cloaks, and overshoes were lying about; there was a smell of
and went in at the open door. There was no one in the anteroom; empty
Anatole lived, Pierre entered the lighted porch, ascended the stairs,
Reaching the large house near the Horse Guards' barracks, in which

Kuragin's.
of this sort, nullifying all his decisions and intentions. He went to
dishonor will be all the same!" Pierre often indulged in reflections
be dead, or something so extraordinary may happen to one that honor and
definite meaning, especially if one considers that by tomorrow one may
thought he, "all such 'words of honor' are conventional things with no
had already promised Prince Anatole to come to his gathering; "besides,"
promise to Prince Andrew was of no account, because before he gave it he
that he decided to go. The thought immediately occurred to him that his
passionately once more to enjoy that dissipation he was so accustomed to
there. Then, as happens to people of weak character, he desired so
But he immediately recalled his promise to Prince Andrew not to go

"I should like to go to Kuragin's," thought he.

was very fond of.
was generally a drinking bout, finishing with visits of a kind Pierre
was expecting the usual set for cards that evening, after which there
or evening than night. On the way Pierre remembered that Anatole Kuragin
see a long way in the deserted street and it seemed more like morning
impossibility of going to sleep on such a night. It was light enough to
straight home. But the nearer he drew to the house the more he felt the
northern, summer night. Pierre took an open cab intending to drive
It was past one o'clock when Pierre left his friend. It was a cloudless,


CHAPTER IX





"On my honor!"

"You give me your word of honor not to go?"

spends all one's money. He asked me for tonight, but I won't go."
can't decide or think properly about anything. One's head aches, and one
"seriously, I have long been thinking of it.... Leading such a life I
"Do you know?" said Pierre, as if suddenly struck by a happy thought,

marrying him to Prince Andrew's sister.
life of his son Anatole, the son whom they were planning to reform by
Pierre was staying at Prince Vasili Kuragin's and sharing the dissipated

and wine' I don't understand!"
faut, that's a different matter; but the Kuragins' set of women, 'women
"I don't understand it," replied Prince Andrew. "Women who are comme il

shoulders. "Women, my dear fellow; women!"
"What would you have, my dear fellow?" answered Pierre, shrugging his

this debauchery, dissipation, and the rest of it!"
those Kuragins and leading that sort of life. It suits you so badly--all
same. You'll be all right anywhere. But look here: give up visiting
whole set. Yes, you're all right! Choose what you will; it's all the
"I am fond of you, especially as you are the one live man among our

affectionate as it was--expressed a sense of his own superiority.
Prince Andrew looked kindly at him, yet his glance--friendly and

consult you seriously."
all right. Only I haven't the least idea what I am to do; I wanted to
did not say what "it really" was. "For the present I am free and am
this. "Without a name and without means... And it really..." But he
blushed crimson, and it was plain that he had made a great effort to say
a careless, merry smile. "What am I? An illegitimate son!" He suddenly
"But what is there to say about me?" said Pierre, his face relaxing into

That smile was immediately reflected on Pierre's face.

his reassuring thoughts.
about me? Let us talk about you," he added after a silence, smiling at
"My part is played out," said Prince Andrew. "What's the use of talking

that they may run smoothly.
and commendation are essential, just as grease is necessary to wheels
Even in the best, most friendly and simplest relations of life, praise

strength.
addicted), he regarded even this not as a defect but as a sign of
for philosophical meditation (to which he himself was particularly
study. And if Pierre was often struck by Andrew's lack of capacity
an opinion about everything), but above all at his capacity for work and
his extensive reading (he had read everything, knew everything, and had
Andrew's calm manner of treating everybody, his extraordinary memory,
described as strength of will. Pierre was always astonished at Prince
degree just the very qualities Pierre lacked, and which might be best
a model of perfection because Prince Andrew possessed in the highest
"How can he talk like that?" thought Pierre. He considered his friend

thought of his friend and how much he expected of him in the future.
He did not finish his sentence, but his tone showed how highly he

before you, everything. And you..."
yourself incapable and your life a spoiled life. You have everything
"It seems funny to me," said Pierre, "that you, you should consider

Andrew.
nothing! No, don't marry, my dear fellow; don't marry!" concluded Prince
seems as if there were something in them, but there's nothing, nothing,
when you see them in their true colors! When you meet them in society it
Selfish, vain, stupid, trivial in everything--that's what women are
what those society women are, and women in general! My father is right.
without whom my wife cannot exist, and those women... If you only knew
Andrew, "and at Anna Pavlovna's they listen to me. And that stupid set
nothing. I am very amiable and have a caustic wit," continued Prince
the greatest war there ever was, and I know nothing and am fit for
the enchanted circle I cannot escape from. I am now going to the war,
regret. Drawing rooms, gossip, balls, vanity, and triviality--these are
have of hope and strength merely weighs you down and torments you with
a woman and, like a chained convict, you lose all freedom! And all you
but his aim to consider, and he reached it. But tie yourself up with
worked went step by step toward his goal. He was free, he had nothing
(though Pierre had not mentioned Bonaparte), "but Bonaparte when he
whole story of life. You talk of Bonaparte and his career," said he
"You don't understand why I say this," he continued, "but it is the

impassioned he became in these moments of almost morbid irritation.
was evident that the more lifeless he seemed at ordinary times, the more
of life had seemed extinguished, now flashed with brilliant light. It
was now quivering with nervous excitement; his eyes, in which the fire
uttered French phrases between his teeth. Every muscle of his thin face
had lolled in Anna Pavlovna's easy chairs and with half-closed eyes had
As he said this Prince Andrew was less than ever like that Bolkonski who

mention this, because I like you."
not give now to be unmarried! You are the first and only one to whom I
rare women with whom a man's honor is safe; but, O God, what would I
"My wife," continued Prince Andrew, "is an excellent woman, one of those

in amazement.
the good-natured expression still more apparent, and gazed at his friend
Pierre took off his spectacles, which made his face seem different and

idiot!... But what's the good?..." and he waved his arm.
room, where you will be ranged side by side with a court lackey and an
step that for you all is ended, all is closed except the drawing
expecting anything from yourself in the future, you will feel at every
Yes! Yes! Yes! Don't look at me with such surprise. If you marry
good and noble in you will be lost. It will all be wasted on trifles.
mistake. Marry when you are old and good for nothing--or all that is
her plainly as she is, or else you will make a cruel and irrevocable
until you have ceased to love the woman of your choice and have seen
you can say to yourself that you have done all you are capable of, and
"Never, never marry, my dear fellow! That's my advice: never marry till

and suddenly determines to speak out.
his face, began to talk--as one who has long had something on his mind
with a look of nervous agitation such as Pierre had never before seen on
Halfway through supper Prince Andrew leaned his elbows on the table and,
that imprint of newness found in the households of the newly married.
Everything from the table napkins to the silver, china, and glass bore
They entered the elegant, newly decorated, and luxurious dining room.

"Let us go and have supper," he said with a sigh, going to the door.

with his small hand.
continually glanced at Prince Andrew; Prince Andrew rubbed his forehead
The friends were silent. Neither cared to begin talking. Pierre


CHAPTER VIII





he would have done to a stranger.
"Good night, Lise," said he, rising and courteously kissing her hand as

she went up to her husband and kissed him on the forehead.
"Mon Dieu, mon Dieu!" she muttered, and lifting her dress with one hand

drooping tail.
deprecating expression of a dog when it rapidly but feebly wags its
glanced askance at her husband's face, and her own assumed the timid,
face changed into a winning and piteous look of fear. Her beautiful eyes
Suddenly the angry, squirrel-like expression of the princess' pretty

indicates that patience is exhausted.
"Lise!" said Prince Andrew dryly, raising his voice to the pitch which

restraining her angry tears.
"No, he thinks only of himself," muttered the princess without

pleasure of spending the evening with you."
"No, wait, Pierre! The princess is too kind to wish to deprive me of the

Prince Andrew caught him by the hand.

Good-by!"
An outsider is out of place here... No, don't distress yourself...
I myself have experienced... and so... because... No, excuse me!
"Calm yourself, Princess! It seems so to you because... I assure you

sight of tears and was ready to cry himself.
all this, rose and approached the princess. He seemed unable to bear the
Pierre, who had been growing more and more agitated as he listened to

"Lise, I beg you to desist," said Prince Andrew still more emphatically.

like that six months ago?"
"You treat me like an invalid or a child. I see it all! Did you behave

regret her words. But she went on hurriedly:
entreaty, a threat, and above all conviction that she would herself
"Lise!" was all Prince Andrew said. But that one word expressed an

pity for me. Why is it?"
so to me? What have I done to you? You are going to the war and have no
grimace. "I have long wanted to ask you, Andrew, why you have changed
princess suddenly, her pretty face all at once distorted by a tearful
"Why should I mind Monsieur Pierre being here?" exclaimed the little

now at her, moved as if about to rise too, but changed his mind.
Pierre looked over his spectacles with naive surprise, now at him and

Prince Andrew rose, shrugged his shoulders, and walked about the room.
The princess said nothing, but suddenly her short downy lip quivered.

had better go."
"Your doctor tells you to go to bed earlier," said Prince Andrew. "You

"No, Andrew, I must say you have changed. Oh, how you have..."

The princess blushed, and raised her arms with a gesture of despair.

slowly, not taking his eyes off his wife.
"I still can't understand what you are afraid of," said Prince Andrew

gist of the matter lay in that.
felt it indecorous to speak of her pregnancy before Pierre, though the
joyful, but an animal, squirrel-like expression. She paused as if she
Her tone was now querulous and her lip drawn up, giving her not a

afraid."
"Alone all the same, without my friends.... And he expects me not to be

"With my father and sister, remember," said Prince Andrew gently.

the country."
his own, goodness only knows why, he leaves me and locks me up alone in
"There, what egotists men all are: all, all egotists! Just for a whim of

"What is it you are afraid of, Lise? I don't understand," said he.

frigid politeness.
Pierre and himself was in the room, and addressed her in a tone of
Her husband looked at her as if surprised to notice that someone besides

back.
"I'm afraid, I'm afraid!" she whispered, and a shudder ran down her
and then you know, Andre..." (she looked significantly at her husband)
remembered that all these delightful associations must be broken off...
to the family circle of which Pierre was almost a member. "Today when I
to Hippolyte in the drawing room and which was so plainly ill-suited
the princess in the same petulantly playful tone in which she had spoken
"Oh, don't speak of his going, don't! I won't hear it spoken of," said

"When are you starting?" he asked.

conversation, gave no reply.
Pierre looked at his friend and, noticing that he did not like the

Annette and I were speaking of how to arrange it. What do you think?"
to the Emperor. You know the Emperor spoke to him most graciously.
"He is so well received everywhere. He might easily become aide-de-camp
asking, 'Is that the famous Prince Andrew?' I did indeed." She laughed.
appreciated by everyone. The other day at the Apraksins' I heard a lady
aide-de-camp, a most brilliant position. He is so well known, so much
you shall judge between us. I always tell him: Here he is Uncle's
it that we women don't want anything of the kind, don't need it? Now
don't in the least understand why men can't live without wars. How is
"Ah, that is just what I tell him!" said she. "I don't understand it; I

The princess started. Evidently Pierre's words touched her to the quick.

intercourse with young women.
none of the embarrassment so commonly shown by young men in their
wants to go to the war," replied Pierre, addressing the princess with
"And I am still arguing with your husband. I can't understand why he

Monsieur Pierre!"
but you have no sense about women. What an argumentative fellow you are,
stupid you men all are not to have married her! Excuse me for saying so,
fussily in the easy chair, "how is it Annette never got married? How
"How is it," she began, as usual in French, settling down briskly and

chair for her.
fresh and elegant as the other. Prince Andrew rose and politely placed a
The princess came in. She had changed her gown for a house dress as
in Anna Pavlovna's drawing room. Pierre removed his feet from the sofa.
shook himself as if waking up, and his face assumed the look it had had
The rustle of a woman's dress was heard in the next room. Prince Andrew


CHAPTER VII





"I am going because the life I am leading here does not suit me!"
"What for? I don't know. I must. Besides that I am going..." He paused.

"Well, why are you going to the war?" asked Pierre.

"Very likely it would be splendid, but it will never come about..."

Prince Andrew smiled ironically.

"And that would be splendid," said Pierre.

he said.
"If no one fought except on his own conviction, there would be no wars,"

the one Prince Andrew gave to this naive question.
but it would in fact have been difficult to give any other answer than
put on the air of one who finds it impossible to reply to such nonsense,
Prince Andrew only shrugged his shoulders at Pierre's childish words. He

not right."
but to help England and Austria against the greatest man in the world is
freedom I could understand it and should be the first to enter the army;
tell you. There is a war now against Napoleon. If it were a war for
"No, I have not; but this is what I have been thinking and wanted to

talk business. Have you been to the Horse Guards?"
"That is all nonsense." Prince Andrew again interrupted him, "let us

met that evening.
"But he must be a Freemason," said he, referring to the abbe whom he had

Pierre rubbed his forehead.
on anything. It was about this choice that Prince Andrew was speaking.
already been choosing a career for three months, and had not decided
me all about it, and I will help you in everything." Pierre had
anything. Here is a letter to Prince Vasili, and here is money. Write to
Petersburg, look round, and choose your profession. I will agree to
his father dismissed the abbe and said to the young man, "Now go to
and had remained away till he was twenty. When he returned to Moscow
Pierre at the age of ten had been sent abroad with an abbe as tutor,

"But you must decide on something! Your father expects it."

"Really, I don't yet know. I don't like either the one or the other."

Pierre sat up on the sofa, with his legs tucked under him.

diplomatist?" asked Prince Andrew after a momentary silence.
at last decided on anything? Are you going to be a guardsman or a
"One can't everywhere say all one thinks, mon cher. Well, have you

conversation.
It was evident that Prince Andrew was not interested in such abstract

know how to express it... not by a balance of political power...."
right light.... In my opinion perpetual peace is possible but--I do not
"That abbe is very interesting but he does not see the thing in the

face to Prince Andrew, smiled, and waved his hand.
Pierre turned his whole body, making the sofa creak. He lifted his eager

Prince Andrew, as he entered the study, rubbing his small white hands.
"What have you done to Mlle Scherer? She will be quite ill now," said

Commentaries), and resting on his elbow, began reading it in the middle.
from the shelf the first book that came to his hand (it was Caesar's
one quite at home, and from habit immediately lay down on the sofa, took
Pierre reaching the house first went into Prince Andrew's study like


know how to deal with them."
saying that the Russian ladies are not equal to the French? One has to
Hippolyte spluttered again, and amid his laughter said, "And you were

gives himself the airs of a monarch."
continued the vicomte. "I pity the poor husband, that little officer who
"Do you know, you are a terrible chap for all your innocent airs,"

burst out laughing.
indeed, quite French," and he kissed the tips of his fingers. Hippolyte
Hippolyte in the carriage, "your little princess is very nice, very nice
"Well, mon cher," said the vicomte, having seated himself beside

whom he had promised to take home.
laughed spasmodically as he stood in the porch waiting for the vicomte
The postilion started, the carriage wheels rattled. Prince Hippolyte

affectionately.
"I am expecting you, Pierre," said the same voice, but gently and

tone to Prince Hippolyte who was blocking his path.
"Allow me, sir," said Prince Andrew in Russian in a cold, disagreeable

pretense of helping, was in everyone's way.
carriage, her husband was adjusting his saber; Prince Hippolyte, under
The princess, picking up her dress, was taking her seat in the dark

with his feet.
"Princesse, au revoir," cried he, stumbling with his tongue as well as

following the princess, whom a footman was helping into the carriage.
reached to his very heels, and, stumbling in it, ran out into the porch
Prince Hippolyte hurriedly put on his cloak, which in the latest fashion

"Are you ready?" he asked his wife, looking past her.

seem.
husband. Prince Andrew's eyes were closed, so weary and sleepy did he
Still smiling, she gracefully moved away, turning and glancing at her

though embracing her.
shawl had been adjusted he kept his arm around her for a long time, as
awkwardness or intentionally (no one could have said which) after the
even pushed aside, he began wrapping it round the princess. Either from
smiling joyfully; and snatching the shawl from the footman, whom he
"Not all, for you will not be there; not all," said Prince Hippolyte

her downy little lip. "All the pretty women in society will be there."
"They say the ball will be very good," replied the princess, drawing up

"-so dull-. It has been a delightful evening, has it not? Delightful!"
"I am very glad I did not go to the ambassador's," said Prince Hippolyte

spoke smilingly and listened with a laugh.
understanding but not wishing to appear to do so. The princess as usual
the French sentences which to them were meaningless, with an air of
cloak, waiting for the conversation to finish. They listened to
Two footmen, the princess' and his own, stood holding a shawl and a

close to her, began to whisper something.
Prince Hippolyte approached the little princess and, bending his face

revoir!"--and she left the hall.
"Write to her and let me know how her father looks at the matter. Au
"I rely on you, my dear," said Anna Pavlovna, also in a low tone.

contemplated between Anatole and the little princess' sister-in-law.
Anna Pavlovna had already managed to speak to Lise about the match she

voice.
taking leave of Anna Pavlovna. "It is settled," she added in a low
"Go in, Annette, or you will catch cold," said the little princess,

princess, and stared fixedly at her through his eyeglass.
come into the hall. Prince Hippolyte stood close to the pretty, pregnant
indifferently to his wife's chatter with Prince Hippolyte who had also
to the footman who was helping him on with his cloak, listened
Prince Andrew had gone out into the hall, and, turning his shoulders

everyone, including Anna Pavlovna, felt this.
opinions, but you see what a capital, good-natured fellow I am." And
saw his smile, which said nothing, unless perhaps, "Opinions are
When she said this, he did not reply and only bowed, but again everybody

you will change your opinions, my dear Monsieur Pierre."
indiscretion, nodded and said: "I hope to see you again, but I also hope
him and, with a Christian mildness that expressed forgiveness of his
his kindly, simple, and modest expression. Anna Pavlovna turned toward
inability to enter a room and converse in it was, however, redeemed by
the general asked him to restore it. All his absent-mindedness and
general's three-cornered hat, and held it, pulling at the plume, till
absent-minded. When he rose to go, he took up instead of his own, the
particularly agreeable before going away. Besides this he was
room and still less how to leave one; that is, how to say something
red hands; he did not know, as the saying is, how to enter a drawing
Pierre was ungainly. Stout, about the average height, broad, with huge

to take their leave.
Having thanked Anna Pavlovna for her charming soiree, the guests began


CHAPTER VI





where.
next balls, about theatricals, and who would meet whom, and when and
conversation broke up into insignificant small talk about the last and
Pierre's unpleasant and unamiable outburst. After the anecdote the
others appreciated Prince Hippolyte's social tact in so agreeably ending
it, or why it had to be told in Russian, still Anna Pavlovna and the
And so the anecdote ended. Though it was unintelligible why he had told

went on, between gasps of laughter: "And the whole world knew...."
her long hair came down...." Here he could contain himself no longer and
"She went. Suddenly there was a great wind. The girl lost her hat and

smile.
persons, among them the elderly lady and Anna Pavlovna, did however
audience, which produced an effect unfavorable to the narrator. Several
Here Prince Hippolyte spluttered and burst out laughing long before his

get up behind the carriage, and come with me while I make some calls.'"
"She said... Oh yes! She said, 'Girl,' to the maid, 'put on a livery,

difficulty.
Here Prince Hippolyte paused, evidently collecting his ideas with

taste. And she had a lady's maid, also big. She said..."
have two footmen behind her carriage, and very big ones. That was her
"There is in Moscow a lady, une dame, and she is very stingy. She must

attention to his story.
Everyone waited, so emphatically and eagerly did he demand their
as a Frenchman would speak after spending about a year in Russia.
lost...." And Prince Hippolyte began to tell his story in such Russian
Excuse me, Vicomte--I must tell it in Russian or the point will be
"I was told a charming Moscow story today and must treat you to it.

and asking them all to be seated began:
Suddenly Prince Hippolyte started up making signs to everyone to attend,

go.
Pierre's remarks, rose and made a sign to his wife that it was time to
Prince Andrew, who had evidently wished to tone down the awkwardness of

which it is difficult to justify."
gave his hand to the plague-stricken; but... but there are other acts
great on the bridge of Arcola, and in the hospital at Jaffa where he
"One must admit," continued Prince Andrew, "that Napoleon as a man was

reinforcement.
"Yes, yes, of course!" Pierre chimed in, pleased at the arrival of this

seems to me."
his acts as a private person, as a general, and as an emperor. So it
"Besides, in the actions of a statesman one has to distinguish between
"How do you expect him to answer you all at once?" said Prince Andrew.

silent.
this young Jacobin was not so terrible as his words suggested. All were
The vicomte who was meeting him for the first time saw clearly that

ask forgiveness.
another--a childlike, kindly, even rather silly look, which seemed to
his grave, even rather gloomy, look was instantaneously replaced by
smile was unlike the half-smile of other people. When he smiled,
Pierre, not knowing whom to answer, looked at them all and smiled. His

"He's a low fellow, say what you will," remarked Prince Hippolyte.

little princess, shrugging her shoulders.
"And the prisoners he killed in Africa? That was horrible!" said the

all like the conduct of a great man!"
18th Brumaire; was not that an imposture? It was a swindle, and not at
"I should like," said the vicomte, "to ask how monsieur explains the

and untried?"
of a great man executing a duc--or even an ordinary man who--is innocent
"But, my dear Monsieur Pierre," said she, "how do you explain the fact

a vigorous attack on the orator.
impossible to stop him, she rallied her forces and joined the vicomte in
not exasperated the vicomte, and had convinced herself that it was
horror-struck. But when she saw that Pierre's sacrilegious words had
Pierre's outburst Anna Pavlovna, despite her social experience, was
vicomte and from the vicomte to their hostess. In the first moment of
Prince Andrew kept looking with an amused smile from Pierre to the

wanted liberty, but Buonaparte has destroyed it."
Have people since the Revolution become happier? On the contrary. We
liberty and equality? Even our Saviour preached liberty and equality.
"high-sounding words which have long been discredited. Who does not love
deciding seriously to prove to this youth how foolish his words were,
"Liberty and equality," said the vicomte contemptuously, as if at last

in full force."
and equality of citizenship, and all these ideas Napoleon has retained
What is important are the rights of man, emancipation from prejudices,
"Those were extremes, no doubt, but they are not what is most important.

ironical voice.
"Yes: ideas of robbery, murder, and regicide," again interjected an

"I am not speaking of regicide, I am speaking about ideas."

"Rousseau's Contrat social," said the vicomte with a tolerant smile.

won't you come to this other table?" repeated Anna Pavlovna.
"What? Revolution and regicide a grand thing?... Well, after that... But

wish to express all that was in his mind.
this desperate and provocative proposition his extreme youth and his
Revolution was a grand thing!" continued Monsieur Pierre, betraying by
them of the Bourbons and because they saw that he was a great man. The
"He could not do that. The people only gave him power that he might rid

a great man," remarked the vicomte.
murder he had restored it to the rightful king, I should have called him
"Yes, if having obtained power, without availing himself of it to commit

of the press--and only for that reason did he obtain power."
that was good in it--equality of citizenship and freedom of speech and
he rose superior to the Revolution, suppressed its abuses, preserved all
"No," cried he, becoming more and more eager, "Napoleon is great because

But Pierre continued his speech without heeding her.

"Won't you come over to the other table?" suggested Anna Pavlovna.

he could not stop short for the sake of one man's life."
understood the Revolution and quelled it, and so for the general good,
from the Revolution leaving the people to anarchy, and Napoleon alone
"I say so," he continued desperately, "because the Bourbons fled

audience over his spectacles and continued.
The vicomte merely shrugged his shoulders. Pierre looked solemnly at his

with the palm of his hand.
"Capital!" said Prince Hippolyte in English, and began slapping his knee

"Oh! Oh!" exclaimed several voices.

work nearer to her.
greatness of soul?" said the little princess, smiling and drawing her
"What, Monsieur Pierre... Do you consider that assassination shows

"Dieu! Mon Dieu!" muttered Anna Pavlovna in a terrified whisper.

that deed."
of soul by not fearing to take on himself the whole responsibility of
political necessity, and it seems to me that Napoleon showed greatness
"The execution of the Duc d'Enghien," declared Monsieur Pierre, "was a

was unable to stop him.
though Anna Pavlovna felt sure he would say something inappropriate, she
of the vicomte's epigram, Pierre again broke into the conversation, and
Before Anna Pavlovna and the others had time to smile their appreciation

hero less on earth."
after the murder of the duc there was one martyr more in heaven and one
people," he went on, turning to Anna Pavlovna, "he ever was a hero,
duc even the most partial ceased to regard him as a hero. If to some
"Not in the least," replied the vicomte. "After the murder of the

he was justified in saying so."
"'I opened my antechambers and they crowded in.' I do not know how far
Andrew continued after a short silence, again quoting Napoleon's words.
"'I showed them the path to glory, but they did not follow it,'" Prince

remarks at him, though without looking at him.
It was evident that he did not like the vicomte and was aiming his

"Bonaparte has said so," remarked Prince Andrew with a sarcastic smile.

state of French public opinion."
looking at Pierre. "At the present time it is difficult to know the real
"It is the Buonapartists who say that," replied the vicomte without

Bonaparte's side."
conversation, "almost all the aristocracy has already gone over to
"From what I have heard," said Pierre, blushing and breaking into the

be difficult to return to the old regime."
rightly supposes that matters have already gone too far. I think it will
"That is doubtful," said Prince Andrew. "Monsieur le Vicomte quite

emigrant.
rightful king," she concluded, trying to be amiable to the royalist
the whole nation will certainly throw itself into the arms of its
own form of government; and I believe that once free from the usurper,
that he will leave it to the French people themselves to choose their
accompanied any reference of hers to the Imperial family, "has declared
"The Emperor Alexander," said she, with the melancholy which always

who had him under observation, interrupted:
make a remark, for the conversation interested him, but Anna Pavlovna,
He shrugged his shoulders and spread out his hands. Pierre wished to

good French society--will have been forever destroyed, and then..."
By intrigues, violence, exile, and executions, French society--I mean
follows the current of his own thoughts, "things will have gone too far.
he is better acquainted than anyone else, does not listen to others but
vicomte continued, with the air of a man who, in a matter with which
"If Buonaparte remains on the throne of France a year longer," the

The princess listened, smiling.

"Baton de gueules, engrele de gueules d'azur--maison Conde," said he.

as if she had asked him to do it.
coat of arms on the table. He explained this to her with as much gravity
little princess, and having asked for a needle began tracing the Conde
through his lorgnette, suddenly turned completely round toward the
Prince Hippolyte, who had been gazing at the vicomte for some time

And sighing disdainfully, he again changed his position.

to compliment the usurper."
of the Bourbon cause. The sovereigns! Why, they are sending ambassadors
animated. "And believe me, they are reaping the reward of their betrayal
for the Queen, or for Madame Elizabeth? Nothing!" and he became more
hopeless: "The sovereigns, madame... What have they done for Louis XVII,
"The sovereigns? I do not speak of Russia," said the vicomte, polite but

endure this man who is a menace to everything."
over," Anna Pavlovna continued. "The sovereigns will not be able to
"I hope this will prove the last drop that will make the glass run


     * God has given it to me, let him who touches it beware!


mi l'ha dato. Guai a chi la tocchi!'"
when he said that," he remarked, repeating the words in Italian: "'Dio
"'Dieu me la donne, gare a qui la touche!' * They say he was very fine

smile.
Prince Andrew looked Anna Pavlovna straight in the face with a sarcastic

the whole world had gone crazy."
nations? Adorable! It is enough to make one's head whirl! It is as if
Buonaparte sitting on a throne and granting the petitions of the
Lucca laying their petitions before Monsieur Buonaparte, and Monsieur
asked Anna Pavlovna, "and of the comedy of the people of Genoa and
"And what do you think of this latest comedy, the coronation at Milan?"


CHAPTER V





accomplished.
listen, while waiting till it would be time to leave. Her task was
group where the vicomte was still talking, and again pretended to
resumed its former cold, artificial expression. She returned to the
all the old feminine arts. But as soon as the prince had gone her face
Apparently she had forgotten her age and by force of habit employed

naturally to her, but was now very ill-suited to her careworn face.
with the smile of a coquettish girl, which at one time probably came
"Do promise, do promise, Vasili!" cried Anna Mikhaylovna as he went,

"Certainly; but about Kutuzov, I don't promise."

"Then tomorrow you will speak to the Emperor?"

"Well, au revoir! Good-by! You hear her?"

shall be late."
"Papa," said his beautiful daughter in the same tone as before, "we

"No, but do promise! I won't let you go! My dear benefactor..."

Moscow ladies have conspired to give him all their sons as adjutants."
his appointment as Commander in Chief. He told me himself that all the
"No, I won't promise that. You don't know how Kutuzov is pestered since

Prince Vasili smiled.

then..."
recommend Boris to him as adjutant! Then I shall be at rest, and
faltered. "You are on good terms with Michael Ilarionovich Kutuzov...
"Wait--just a word! When he has been transferred to the Guards..." she

kindness!" He turned to go.
"My dear benefactor! This is what I expected from you--I knew your

Here is my hand on it. Are you satisfied?"
I will do the impossible--your son shall be transferred to the Guards.
but to prove my devotion to you and how I respect your father's memory,
weariness of tone, "it is almost impossible for me to do what you ask;
"My dear Anna Mikhaylovna," said he with his usual familiarity and

scenes. This last consideration moved him.
to go on insisting day after day and hour after hour, and even to make
rest until they have gained their end, and are prepared if necessary
women--mostly mothers--who, having once made up their minds, will not
Moreover, he could see by her manners that she was one of those
he had been indebted to her father for the first steps in his career.
like qualms of conscience. She had reminded him of what was quite true;
Princess Drubetskaya's case he felt, after her second appeal, something
to ask for himself, he became chary of using his influence. But in
if he asked on behalf of all who begged of him, he would soon be unable
if it is to last. Prince Vasili knew this, and having once realized that
Influence in society, however, is a capital which has to be economized

waiting by the door.
head and looking over her classically molded shoulder as she stood
"Papa, we shall be late," said Princess Helene, turning her beautiful

trying to smile though tears were in her eyes.
and he has refused. Be the kindhearted man you always were," she said,
added hurriedly. "No, don't be angry, but promise! I have asked Golitsyn
do this for my son--and I shall always regard you as a benefactor," she
father's friendship for you; but now I entreat you for God's sake to
anything and I never will again, nor have I ever reminded you of my
"Listen to me, Prince," said she. "I have never yet asked you for

smiled again and clutched Prince Vasili's arm more tightly.
look clouded her once handsome face, but only for a moment; then she
vicomte's story. Prince Vasili's words frightened her, an embittered
invitation to Anna Pavlovna's reception and had sat listening to the
It was, in fact, solely to meet Prince Vasili that she had obtained an
Petersburg to procure an appointment in the Guards for her only son.
society had lost her former influential connections. She had now come to
best families in Russia, but she was poor, and having long been out of
The elderly lady was a Princess Drubetskaya, belonging to one of the

best way."
you to appeal to Rumyantsev through Prince Golitsyn. That would be the
Vasili, "but it is difficult for me to ask the Emperor. I should advise
"Believe me, Princess, I am ready to do all I can," answered Prince

be transferred to the Guards at once?" said she.
"What would it cost you to say a word to the Emperor, and then he would

away.
ingratiating and appealing smile, and took his hand that he might not go
the elderly lady, even betraying some impatience, she gave him an
Although Prince Vasili listened reluctantly and not very politely to

may take back to my poor boy."
anteroom. "I can't remain any longer in Petersburg. Tell me what news I
"How about my son Boris, Prince?" said she, hurrying after him into the

fear.
left her kindly and tear-worn face and it now expressed only anxiety and
in the anteroom. All the affectation of interest she had assumed had
been sitting with the old aunt rose hurriedly and overtook Prince Vasili
father to be a connection of Prince Vasili's. The elderly lady who had
Anna Pavlovna smiled and promised to take Pierre in hand. She knew his

necessary for a young man as the society of clever women."
and this is the first time I have seen him in society. Nothing is so
"Educate this bear for me! He has been staying with me a whole month
In passing Prince Vasili seized Pierre's hand and said to Anna Pavlovna:

"Very," said Pierre.

"Very lovely," said Prince Andrew.

almost frightened, eyes as she passed him.
radiantly on her beautiful face. Pierre gazed at her with rapturous,
holding up the folds of her dress, and the smile shone still more
His daughter, Princess Helene, passed between the chairs, lightly

enchanting party," said he, turning to Anna Pavlovna.
and obliges me to interrupt you. I am very sorry to leave your
"This unfortunate fete at the ambassador's deprives me of a pleasure,
holding him down by the sleeve in a friendly way to prevent his rising.
"You must excuse me, dear Vicomte," said Prince Vasili to the Frenchman,

got up to go and the two young men rose to let them pass.
say something more, but at that moment Prince Vasili and his daughter
hand to show that there was no need to ask the question. He wished to
"No, impossible!" said Prince Andrew, laughing and pressing Pierre's

who was continuing his story.
you. May I?" he added in a low voice so as not to disturb the vicomte
"I knew you would be here," replied Pierre. "I will come to supper with

"There now!... So you, too, are in the great world?" said he to Pierre.

unexpectedly kind and pleasant smile.
touching his arm, but when he saw Pierre's beaming face he gave him an
Prince Andrew frowned again, expressing his annoyance with whoever was
affectionate eyes, now came up and took his arm. Before he looked round
the moment Prince Andrew entered the room had watched him with glad,
Prince Andrew screwed up his eyes and turned away. Pierre, who from

such a tale about Mademoiselle George and Buonaparte!"
manner in which she spoke to other men, "the vicomte has been telling us
"Andre," said his wife, addressing her husband in the same coquettish

"Are you not ashamed to deprive us of your charming wife?"

"She will go to the country."

"And Lise, your wife?"

to take me as an aide-de-camp...."
last syllable of the general's name like a Frenchman, "has been pleased
"General Kutuzov," said Bolkonski, speaking French and stressing the

"You are off to the war, Prince?" said Anna Pavlovna.

hand, and screwing up his eyes scanned the whole company.
with a grimace that distorted his handsome face, kissed Anna Pavlovna's
to bore him so much as that of his pretty wife. He turned away from her
them. And among all these faces that he found so tedious, none seemed
found them to be so tiresome that it wearied him to look at or listen to
evident that he not only knew everyone in the drawing room, but had
offered a most striking contrast to his quiet, little wife. It was
him, from his weary, bored expression to his quiet, measured step,
man, of medium height, with firm, clearcut features. Everything about
Bolkonski, the little princess' husband. He was a very handsome young
Just then another visitor entered the drawing room: Prince Andrew


CHAPTER IV





larger circle.
conveniently to keep them under observation, brought them into the
Not letting the abbe and Pierre escape, Anna Pavlovna, the more

the climate," said he.
the honor of being received, that I have not yet had time to think of
society, more especially of the feminine society, in which I have had
"I am so enchanted by the brilliancy of the wit and culture of the

expression, evidently habitual to him when conversing with women.
face instantly changed and assumed an offensively affected, sugary
asked the Italian how he stood Russian climate. The Italian's
At that moment Anna Pavlovna came up and, looking severely at Pierre,

"But how are you to get that balance?" Pierre was beginning.

world!"
maintenance of the balance of power of Europe, and it would save the
disinterestedly at the head of an alliance having for its object the
nation like Russia--barbaric as she is said to be--to place herself
people," the abbe was saying. "It is only necessary for one powerful
"The means are... the balance of power in Europe and the rights of the

Pavlovna disapproved.
talking and listening too eagerly and too naturally, which was why Anna
man's simple-minded eagerness, was explaining his pet theory. Both were
the balance of power, and the latter, evidently interested by the young
rescue. Pierre had managed to start a conversation with the abbe about
talking too loudly and vehemently with the abbe, so she hurried to the
watchful eye on the young man who so alarmed her, noticed that he was
prepared to continue, but just then Anna Pavlovna, who had kept a
The vicomte appreciated this silent praise and smiling gratefully

prevented her from going on with it.
work as if to testify that the interest and fascination of the story
"Charming!" whispered the little princess, sticking the needle into her

princess.
"Charming!" said Anna Pavlovna with an inquiring glance at the little

agitated.
where the rivals suddenly recognized one another; and the ladies looked
The story was very pretty and interesting, especially at the point

magnanimity Bonaparte subsequently repaid by death.
and was thus at the duc's mercy. The latter spared him, and this
happened to fall into one of the fainting fits to which he was subject,
enjoyed the famous actress' favors, and that in his presence Napoleon
Mademoiselle George; that at her house he came upon Bonaparte, who also
to the effect that the Duc d'Enghien had gone secretly to Paris to visit
The vicomte told his tale very neatly. It was an anecdote, then current,

effrayee, as he called it, shoes, and silk stockings.
a dark-green dress coat, knee breeches of the color of cuisse de nymphe
whether what he said was very witty or very stupid. He was dressed in
He spoke with such self-confidence that his hearers could not be sure

uttered them.
showed that he only understood the meaning of his words after he had
"Because I hate ghost stories," said Prince Hippolyte in a tone which

shoulders.
"Why no, my dear fellow," said the astonished narrator, shrugging his

instrument he could not begin to speak.
the princess and hastily adjusting his lorgnette, as if without this
"It's not going to be a ghost story?" said he, sitting down beside

and legs always fell into unnatural positions.
mouth all seemed puckered into a vacant, wearied grimace, and his arms
self-confidence, while his body was thin and weak. His eyes, nose, and
was dulled by imbecility and a constant expression of sullen
wonderful classic beauty of her figure, his face on the contrary
self-satisfied, youthful, and constant smile of animation, and by the
sister's, but while in her case everything was lit up by a joyous,
this resemblance he was exceedingly ugly. His features were like his
to his beautiful sister, but yet more by the fact that in spite of
Le charmant Hippolyte was surprising by his extraordinary resemblance

moving a chair close to hers seated himself beside her.
Prince Hippolyte, having brought the workbag, joined the circle and

took up her work.
"Now I am all right," she said, and asking the vicomte to begin, she

seat.
merrily to everyone at once, sat down and gaily arranged herself in her
There was a general movement as the princess, smiling and talking

of?" she went on, turning to Prince Hippolyte. "Fetch me my workbag."
"Wait a moment, I'll get my work.... Now then, what are you thinking

The little princess had also left the tea table and followed Helene.

into her radiant smile.
the expression she saw on the maid of honor's face, and again relapsed
produced an effect she glanced at Anna Pavlovna, at once adopted just
to time she smoothed the folds of her dress, and whenever the story
beautiful bosom, on which she readjusted a diamond necklace. From time
altered in shape by its pressure on the table, now at her still more
being told she sat upright, glancing now at her beautiful round arm,
a reply unnecessary. She smilingly waited. All the time the story was
The princess rested her bare round arm on a little table and considered

inclining his head.
"Madame, I doubt my ability before such an audience," said he, smilingly

unchanging smile.
when she took her seat opposite and beamed upon him also with her
shoulders and dropped his eyes as if startled by something extraordinary
"How lovely!" said everyone who saw her; and the vicomte lifted his

seemed to wish, but to be unable, to diminish its effect.
appeared shy of her unquestionable and all too victorious beauty. She
did she not show any trace of coquetry, but on the contrary she even
she moved toward Anna Pavlovna. Helene was so lovely that not only
exposed--and she seemed to bring the glamour of a ballroom with her as
back, and bosom--which in the fashion of those days were very much
privilege of admiring her beautiful figure and shapely shoulders,
at any of them but smiling on all, as if graciously allowing each the
diamonds, she passed between the men who made way for her, not looking
and ivy, with a gleam of white shoulders, glossy hair, and sparkling
woman. With a slight rustle of her white dress trimmed with moss
she had first entered the room--the smile of a perfectly beautiful
The princess smiled. She rose with the same unchanging smile with which

group.
young princess who was sitting some way off, the center of another
"Come over here, Helene, dear," said Anna Pavlovna to the beautiful

The vicomte wished to begin his story and gave a subtle smile.

dish.
advantageous style, like a well-garnished joint of roast beef on a hot
and the vicomte was served up to the company in the choicest and most
"How evidently he belongs to the best society," said she to a third;
the guests. "The vicomte is a wonderful raconteur," said she to another.
"The vicomte knew the duc personally," whispered Anna Pavlovna to of

listen to his tale.
comply. Anna Pavlovna arranged a group round him, inviting everyone to
The vicomte bowed and smiled courteously in token of his willingness to

that sentence: "Contez nous cela, Vicomte."
pleasant feeling that there was something a la Louis XV in the sound of
"Ah, yes! Do tell us all about it, Vicomte," said Anna Pavlovna, with a

for Buonaparte's hatred of him.
perished by his own magnanimity, and that there were particular reasons
murder of the Duc d'Enghien. The vicomte said that the Duc d'Enghien had
morsels. The group about Mortemart immediately began discussing the
guests, first the vicomte and then the abbe, as peculiarly choice
kitchen would have cared to eat, so Anna Pavlovna served up to her
choice delicacy a piece of meat that no one who had seen it in the
treat to her guests. As a clever maitre d'hotel serves up as a specially
which he found himself. Anna Pavlovna was obviously serving him up as a
politeness modestly placed himself at the disposal of the circle in
manners, who evidently considered himself a celebrity but out of
The vicomte was a nice-looking young man with soft features and polished

group was gathered round Mortemart and Anna Pavlovna.
very pretty and rosy, though rather too plump for her age. The third
Helene, Prince Vasili's daughter, and the little Princess Bolkonskaya,
abbe. Another, of young people, was grouped round the beautiful Princess
settled into three groups. One, chiefly masculine, had formed round the
was rather out of place in this brilliant society, the whole company had
beside whom sat only one elderly lady, who with her thin careworn face
steadily and ceaselessly on all sides. With the exception of the aunt,
Anna Pavlovna's reception was in full swing. The spindles hummed


CHAPTER III





to express his own views, as young people are fond of doing.
conversation seemed interesting and he stood waiting for an opportunity
to hear something very profound. At last he came up to Morio. Here the
refined expression on the faces of those present he was always expecting
clever conversation that was to be heard. Seeing the self-confident and
in a toyshop, did not know which way to look, afraid of missing any
intellectual lights of Petersburg were gathered there and, like a child
was the first he had attended in Russia. He knew that all the
Pierre had been educated abroad, and this reception at Anna Pavlovna's

again when he passed to another group whose center was the abbe.
the group round Mortemart to listen to what was being said there, and
Pierre was evident. She kept an anxious watch on him when he approached
proper, and regular motion. But amid these cares her anxiety about
word or slight rearrangement kept the conversational machine in steady,
drawing room, approaching now a silent, now a too-noisy group, and by a
machine or set it in proper motion, so Anna Pavlovna moved about her
creaks or makes more noise than it should, and hastens to check the
round and notices here a spindle that has stopped or there one that
the foreman of a spinning mill, when he has set the hands to work, goes
to help at any point where the conversation might happen to flag. As
resumed her duties as hostess and continued to listen and watch, ready
And having got rid of this young man who did not know how to behave, she

"We will talk of it later," said Anna Pavlovna with a smile.

he began explaining his reasons for thinking the abbe's plan chimerical.
wished to get away. With his head bent, and his big feet spread apart,
finished speaking to him, and now he continued to speak to another who
a reverse act of impoliteness. First he had left a lady before she had
get away to attend to her duties as hostess. But Pierre now committed
"You think so?" rejoined Anna Pavlovna in order to say something and

interesting but hardly feasible."
"Yes, I have heard of his scheme for perpetual peace, and it is very

Morio? He is a most interesting man."
Pavlovna in dismay detained him with the words: "Do you know the Abbe
aunt without waiting to hear her speech about Her Majesty's health. Anna
Anna Pavlovna's alarm was justified, for Pierre turned away from the

princess with a pleased smile, as to an intimate acquaintance.
if in search of something. On his way to the aunt he bowed to the little
Pierre murmured something unintelligible, and continued to look round as

as she conducted him to her.
invalid," said Anna Pavlovna, exchanging an alarmed glance with her aunt
"It is very good of you, Monsieur Pierre, to come and visit a poor

distinguished him from everyone else in that drawing room.
the clever though shy, but observant and natural, expression which
the other men in the room, her anxiety could only have reference to
when she saw Pierre enter. Though he was certainly rather bigger than
of something too large and unsuited to the place, came over her face
this lowest-grade greeting, a look of anxiety and fear, as at the sight
accorded to the lowest hierarchy in her drawing room. But in spite of
first appearance in society. Anna Pavlovna greeted him with the nod she
just returned from abroad where he had been educated, and this was his
had not yet entered either the military or civil service, as he had only
grandee of Catherine's time who now lay dying in Moscow. The young man
young man was an illegitimate son of Count Bezukhov, a well-known
at that time, a very high ruffle, and a brown dress coat. This stout
close-cropped hair, spectacles, the light-colored breeches fashionable
One of the next arrivals was a stout, heavily built young man with

Anna Pavlovna.
"What a delightful woman this little princess is!" said Prince Vasili to

turned to speak to his daughter, the beautiful Helene.
added, addressing Prince Vasili, and without waiting for an answer she
to get himself killed. Tell me what this wretched war is for?" she
French, turning to a general, "my husband is deserting me? He is going
"You know," said the princess in the same tone of voice and still in

replied Anna Pavlovna.
"Soyez tranquille, Lise, you will always be prettier than anyone else,"

girdled with a broad ribbon just below the breast.
out her arms to show her short-waisted, lace-trimmed, dainty gray dress,
small reception, and just see how badly I am dressed." And she spread
added, turning to her hostess. "You wrote that it was to be quite a
"Mind, Annette, I hope you have not played a wicked trick on me," she
said she in French, displaying her bag and addressing all present.
pleasure to herself and to all around her. "I have brought my work,"
down on a sofa near the silver samovar, as if all she was doing was a
steps, her workbag on her arm, and gaily spreading out her dress sat
The little princess went round the table with quick, short, swaying

specially amiable mood that day.
and the constant gleam of her white teeth, thought that they were in a
and health. All who talked to her, and at each word saw her bright smile
little while, felt as if they too were becoming, like her, full of life
who looked at her, after being in her company and talking to her a
carrying her burden so lightly. Old men and dull dispirited young ones
young woman, so soon to become a mother, so full of life and health, and
peculiar form of beauty. Everyone brightened at the sight of this pretty
upper lip and her half-open mouth--seemed to be her own special and
with a thoroughly attractive woman, her defect--the shortness of her
occasionally drew it down to meet the lower lip. As is always the case
but it lifted all the more sweetly, and was especially charming when she
delicate dark down was just perceptible, was too short for her teeth,
gold-embroidered velvet bag. Her pretty little upper lip, on which a
The young Princess Bolkonskaya had brought some work in a

to her the whole evening.
sense of relief at having performed a vexatious duty and did not return
politeness prevented his showing impatience, left the old woman with a
Majesty, "who, thank God, was better today." And each visitor, though
the same words, about their health and her own, and the health of Her
solemn interest and silent approval. The aunt spoke to each of them in
cared about; Anna Pavlovna observed these greetings with mournful and
one of them knew, not one of them wanted to know, and not one of them
Each visitor performed the ceremony of greeting this old aunt whom not

mentioned each one's name and then left them.
and slowly turning her eyes from the visitor to her aunt, Anna Pavlovna
sailing in from another room as soon as the guests began to arrive;
a little old lady, wearing large bows of ribbon in her cap, who had come
or "You do not know my aunt?" and very gravely conducted him or her to
To each new arrival Anna Pavlovna said, "You have not yet seen my aunt,"


     * The most fascinating woman in Petersburg.


and many others had also come.
Hippolyte, had come with Mortemart, whom he introduced. The Abbe Morio
any large gatherings, but only to small receptions. Prince Vasili's son,
married during the previous winter, and being pregnant did not go to
femme la plus seduisante de Petersbourg, * was also there. She had been
as maid of honor. The youthful little Princess Bolkonskaya, known as la
to the ambassador's entertainment; she wore a ball dress and her badge
Prince Vasili's daughter, the beautiful Helene, came to take her father
and character but alike in the social circle to which they belonged.
Petersburg society was assembled there: people differing widely in age
Anna Pavlovna's drawing room was gradually filling. The highest


CHAPTER II





apprenticeship as old maid."
arranged. It shall be on your family's behalf that I'll start my
Bolkonski's wife, this very evening, and perhaps the thing can be
"Attendez," said Anna Pavlovna, reflecting, "I'll speak to Lise, young

he lay back in his armchair, looking in another direction.
maid of honor's hand to his lips, kissed it, and swung it to and fro as
And with the familiarity and easy grace peculiar to him, he raised the

family and that's all I want."
a village elder of mine writes in his reports. She is rich and of good
me and I shall always be your most devoted slave-slafe with an f, as
hand and for some reason drawing it downwards. "Arrange that affair for
"Listen, dear Annette," said the prince, suddenly taking Anna Pavlovna's

aide-de-camp of Kutuzov's and will be here tonight."
brother; I think you know him, he married Lise Meinen lately. He is an
but eccentric, and a bore. The poor girl is very unhappy. She has a
late Emperor, and was nicknamed 'the King of Prussia.' He is very clever
well-known Prince Bolkonski who had to retire from the army under the
"Her father is very rich and stingy. He lives in the country. He is the

fathers have to put up with.... Is this princess of yours rich?"
years, if he goes on like this?" Presently he added: "That's what we
rubles a year? And," he went on after a pause, "what will it be in five
current of his thoughts, "that Anatole is costing me forty thousand
"Do you know," he said at last, evidently unable to check the sad

the head that he was considering this information.
perception befitting a man of the world, he indicated by a movement of
Prince Vasili did not reply, though, with the quickness of memory and

Bolkonskaya."
very unhappy with her father. She is a relation of yours, Princess Mary
don't feel that weakness in myself as yet, I know a little person who is
asked. "They say old maids have a mania for matchmaking, and though I
"Have you never thought of marrying your prodigal son Anatole?" she

gesture. Anna Pavlovna meditated.
He said no more, but expressed his resignation to cruel fate by a

is how I explain it to myself. It can't be helped!"
children are the bane of my life. It is the cross I have to bear. That
"I am your faithful slave and to you alone I can confess that my

looking up pensively.
there would be nothing I could reproach you with," said Anna Pavlovna,
"And why are children born to such men as you? If you were not a father

very clearly revealed something unexpectedly coarse and unpleasant.
natural and animated than usual, so that the wrinkles round his mouth
is the only difference between them." He said this smiling in a way more
Hippolyte is at least a quiet fool, but Anatole is an active one. That
father could for their education, and they have both turned out fools.
"What would you have me do?" he said at last. "You know I did all a

awaiting a reply. He frowned.
The prince answered nothing, but she looked at him significantly,

and you were pitied...."
assumed its melancholy expression), "he was mentioned at Her Majesty's
dissatisfied with your younger son? Between ourselves" (and her face
"Don't joke; I mean to have a serious talk with you. Do you know I am

bump of paternity."
"I can't help it," said the prince. "Lavater would have said I lack the

And she smiled her ecstatic smile.

don't deserve to have them."
children. And really you appreciate them less than anyone, and so you
admitting of no rejoinder and raising her eyebrows. "Two such charming
speak of Anatole, your youngest. I don't like him," she added in a tone
distributed. Why has fate given you two such splendid children? I don't
conversation--"I often think how unfairly sometimes the joys of life are
and social topics were ended and the time had come for intimate
the prince and smiling amiably at him as if to show that political
"I often think," she continued after a short pause, drawing nearer to

The prince bowed to signify his respect and gratitude.

beautiful."
out everyone has been enraptured by her? They say she is amazingly
"Now about your family. Do you know that since your daughter came

to the Empress) and at the same time to console him, so she said:
both to rebuke him (for daring to speak he had done of a man recommended
courtierlike quickness and tact habitual to her, Anna Pavlovna wished
The prince was silent and looked indifferent. But, with the womanly and

beaucoup d'estime, and again her face clouded over with sadness.
patroness. She added that Her Majesty had deigned to show Baron Funke
sadness, and this occurred every time she mentioned her illustrious
expression of profound and sincere devotion and respect mingled with
As she named the Empress, Anna Pavlovna's face suddenly assumed an

was all she said, in a dry and mournful tone.
"Baron Funke has been recommended to the Dowager Empress by her sister,"

pleased with.
anyone else had a right to criticize what the Empress desired or was
Anna Pavlovna almost closed her eyes to indicate that neither she nor

baron.
trying through the Dowager Empress Marya Fedorovna to secure it for the
Prince Vasili wished to obtain this post for his son, but others were

creature."
appointed first secretary at Vienna? The baron by all accounts is a poor
visit, "is it true that the Dowager Empress wants Baron Funke to be
though the question he was about to ask was the chief motive of his
added with studied carelessness as if it had only just occurred to him,
"I shall be delighted to meet them," said the prince. "But tell me," he

received by the Emperor. Had you heard?"
also the Abbe Morio. Do you know that profound thinker? He has been
French families. He is one of the genuine emigres, the good ones. And
connected with the Montmorencys through the Rohans, one of the best
two very interesting men tonight, le Vicomte de Mortemart, who is
"In a moment. A propos," she added, becoming calm again, "I am expecting

cup of tea?"
Prussia's consent by assault. You are so eloquent. Will you give me a
instead of our dear Wintzingerode you would have captured the King of
"I think," said the prince with a smile, "that if you had been sent

She suddenly paused, smiling at her own impetuosity.

destiny of our adored monarch. He will save Europe!"
neutrality is just a trap. I have faith only in God and the lofty
word that Hardenburg says, or Haugwitz either. This famous Prussian
that all Europe is powerless before him.... And I don't believe a
perform! Prussia has always declared that Buonaparte is invincible, and
promised? Nothing! And what little they have promised they will not
himself, but only desires the good of mankind. And what have they
understand the self-abnegation of our Emperor who wants nothing for
Novosiltsev get? None. The English have not understood and cannot
and still seeks, some secret motive in our actions. What answer did
of soul. She has refused to evacuate Malta. She wanted to find,
spirit will not and cannot understand the Emperor Alexander's loftiness
one.... Whom, I ask you, can we rely on?... England with her commercial
this murderer and villain! We alone must avenge the blood of the just
revolution, which has become more terrible than ever in the person of
not forsake him. He will fulfill his vocation and crush the hydra of
the noblest role on earth, and he is so virtuous and noble that God will
thing I have faith in! Our good and wonderful sovereign has to perform
recognizes his high vocation and will be true to it. That is the one
betraying us! Russia alone must save Europe. Our gracious sovereign
but Austria never has wished, and does not wish, for war. She is
"Oh, don't speak to me of Austria. Perhaps I don't understand things,

out:
In the midst of a conversation on political matters Anna Pavlovna burst

correct.
which she neither wished, nor could, nor considered it necessary, to
as in a spoiled child, a continual consciousness of her charming defect,
did not suit her faded features, always played round her lips expressed,
expectations of those who knew her. The subdued smile which, though it
feel like it, she became enthusiastic in order not to disappoint the
become her social vocation and, sometimes even when she did not
overflowed with animation and impulsiveness. To be an enthusiast had
part. Anna Pavlovna Scherer on the contrary, despite her forty years,
Prince Vasili always spoke languidly, like an actor repeating a stale

burnt his boats, and I believe that we are ready to burn ours."
tone. "What has been decided? They have decided that Buonaparte has
"What can one say about it?" replied the prince in a cold, listless

dispatch? You know everything."
"Don't tease! Well, and what has been decided about Novosiltsev's

said things he did not even wish to be believed.
put off," said the prince, who, like a wound-up clock, by force of habit
"If they had known that you wished it, the entertainment would have been

festivities and fireworks are becoming wearisome."
"I thought today's fete had been canceled. I confess all these

me to take me there."
put in an appearance there," said the prince. "My daughter is coming for
"And the fete at the English ambassador's? Today is Wednesday. I must

whole evening, I hope?"
these if one has any feeling?" said Anna Pavlovna. "You are staying the
"Can one be well while suffering morally? Can one be calm in times like

discerned.
and affected sympathy of which indifference and even irony could be
at rest," said he without altering his tone, beneath the politeness
"First of all, dear friend, tell me how you are. Set your friend's mind

and complacently seated himself on the sofa.
kissed her hand, presenting to her his bald, scented, and shining head,
who had grown old in society and at court. He went up to Anna Pavlovna,
with the gentle, patronizing intonation natural to a man of importance
refined French in which our grandfathers not only spoke but thought, and
his breast and a serene expression on his flat face. He spoke in that
embroidered court uniform, knee breeches, and shoes, and had stars on
least disconcerted by this reception. He had just entered, wearing an
"Heavens! what a virulent attack!" replied the prince, not in the

Scherer."
I shall be very charmed to see you tonight between 7 and 10--Annette
prospect of spending an evening with a poor invalid is not too terrible,
"If you have nothing better to do, Count (or Prince), and if the

by a scarlet-liveried footman that morning, ran as follows:
All her invitations without exception, written in French, and delivered

elite.
grippe; grippe being then a new word in St. Petersburg, used only by the
had had a cough for some days. She was, as she said, suffering from la
importance, who was the first to arrive at her reception. Anna Pavlovna
these words she greeted Prince Vasili Kuragin, a man of high rank and
Scherer, maid of honor and favorite of the Empress Marya Fedorovna. With
It was in July, 1805, and the speaker was the well-known Anna Pavlovna

you--sit down and tell me all the news."
slave,' as you call yourself! But how do you do? I see I have frightened
to do with you and you are no longer my friend, no longer my 'faithful
Antichrist--I really believe he is Antichrist--I will have nothing more
if you still try to defend the infamies and horrors perpetrated by that
Buonapartes. But I warn you, if you don't tell me that this means war,
"Well, Prince, so Genoa and Lucca are now just family estates of the


CHAPTER I





BOOK ONE: 1805





By Leo Tolstoy/Tolstoi

WAR AND PEACE





An Anonymous Volunteer




*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WAR AND PEACE ***


Language: English

[Last updated: August 22, 2012]
Release Date: April, 2001
Posting Date: January 10, 2009 [EBook #2600]

Author: Leo Tolstoy

Title: War and Peace


with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with

The Project Gutenberg EBook of War and Peace, by Leo Tolstoy
