



















































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































                        z
                       160
             t    u    v    w    x    y
            100  110  120  130  140  150
        "It's a long, long way.
        --
        24 guns of the artillery of the Guards
        30 guns of Campan's division
        To my native land..."
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/0/2600/
       l    m    n    o    p    q    r    s
      * So that squares matters.
      * Who had a triple talent
      *Poisonous nourishment of a too sensitive soul,
      1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10
      20   30   40   50   60   70   80   90
      And for being a gallant old boy...
      For drinking, for fighting,
      a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   i   k
     * "Ah, it's you! Do you want something to eat? Don't be
     * "But my dear fellow, with all my respect for the Orthodox
     * "But, my dear, you ought on the contrary to be grateful to
     * "Don't see it that way, that's the trouble."
     * "Forty thousand men massacred and the army of our allies
     * "Good God, what simplicity!"
     * "I have acted the Emperor long enough; it is time to act
     * "Indeed, Sire, we shall do everything it is possible to
     * "It is great."
     * "Long live Henry the Fourth, that valiant king! That rowdy
     * "Marlborough is going to the wars; God knows when he'll
     * "Moscow, the Asiatic capital of this great empire, the
     * "My dear, my tender, my poor mother."
     * "No, tell him I don't wish to see him, I am furious with
     * "Oh, Mamma, don't talk nonsense! You don't understand
     * "Oh, yes, the only aim is to weaken the enemy, so of
     * "Quarters, quarters, lodgings! The French are good
     * "That Asiatic city of the innumerable churches, holy
     * "That Russian army which has been brought from the ends of
     * "That's a superb animal."
     * "The principle of monarchies is honor seems to me
     * "The war must be extended widely. I cannot sufficiently
     * "Think it over; get into the barque, and take care not to
     * "When an officer is making his round, sentinels don't ask
     * "You must know that this is a woman."
     * (2) "Come in, come in."
     * (2) "For heaven's sake."
     * (2) "House of my Mother."
     * (2) "It is all very well for that good-for-nothing fellow
     * (2) "Of a charming woman, as witty as she is lovely."
     * (2) "When in doubt, my dear fellow, do nothing."
     * (2) That it is great.
     * (2) That their fire gets into his eyes and he forgets that
     * (2) Whose flames illumined his route.
     * A bastard.
     * And all that follows therefrom.
     * Bridgehead.
     * Cousinhood is a dangerous neighborhood.
     * God has given it to me, let him who touches it beware!
     * History of the year 1812. The character of Kutuzov and
     * Hors d'oeuvres.
     * Our most gracious sovereign.
     * The Illuminati sought to substitute republican for
     * The most fascinating woman in Petersburg.
     * To err is human.
     * To understand all is to forgive all.
     * You expect to make an income out of the government.
     *(2) That suits us down to the ground.
     *(3) Hollow.
     *(4) I just ask you that.
     *Catherine.
     *Do you know the proverb?
     *Kutuzov.
     And mingle a secret sweetness
     But oh! till then I cannot live!...
     Chief Executive and Director
     Come to calm the torments of my gloomy retreat,
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     How sweet, as fancies wander free,
     Hurrah for Emperor Alexander!"
     Krasnoe, by Bogdanovich.
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     Moscow! Here it is then at last, that famous city. It was
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.
     Russian army, I must say that your victory was not
     Sighing its message out to thee...
     Tender melancholy, ah, come to console me,
     Thou, without whom happiness would for me be impossible,
     Wafting sweet music o'er the lea,
     Who still is thinking but of thee!
     With these tears that I feel to be flowing.
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     afraid, they won't hurt you."
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     anything. In my position I have obligations."
     aristocracy appear to me a means of maintaining that
     commend that view."
     course one cannot take into account the loss of private
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     destroyed, and you find that a cause for jesting!"
     devil."
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.
     do, Sire."
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     fate--(the fate of the army at Ulm)."
     fellow!"
     fellows. What the devil! There, don't let us be cross, old
     gbnewby@pglaf.org
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     he ought to be firing at the enemy.
     here."
     high time."
     him for not keeping his word to me."
     him for the password.... I am asking you if the colonel is
     http://www.gutenberg.org
     incontestable. Certain rights and privileges for the
     individuals."
     innumerable churches shaped like Chinese pagodas."
     make it a barque of Charon."
     man."
     me for explaining to Pierre your intimacy with this young
     monarchical institutions.
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     of receipt of the work.
     of whom you have made a friend, but not for you, not for
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     particularly victorious."
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     reflections on the unsatisfactory results of the battles at
     return."
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sacred city of Alexander's people, Moscow with its
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     sentiment."
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."
     the earth by English gold, we shall cause to share the same
     the general."
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     you."
    "Qui eut le triple talent,
    * "A little bit in love with the young man."
    * "A very good morning! A very good morning!"
    * "And hurrah for the whole world!"
    * "Are you the master here?"
    * "Bring the boyars to me."
    * "Busy already?"
    * "Child of the Don."
    * "Countess, there is mercy for every sin."
    * "Cousinhood is a dangerous neighborhood."
    * "Delighted to see you. I am very glad to see you."
    * "Delighted to see you."
    * "Europe will never be our sincere ally."
    * "Everything comes in time to him who knows how to wait."
    * "Food for cannon."
    * "From the sublime to the ridiculous is but a step."
    * "Get along, get along!"
    * "Good day, everybody!"
    * "Good day, gentlemen."
    * "Hang these Russians!"
    * "He is all the rage just now."
    * "He is charming; he has no sex."
    * "I love you."
    * "I'm your man."
    * "If you regard the question from that point of view."
    * "In a minute I shall be at your disposal."
    * "It is the talk of all Moscow. My word, I admire you!"
    * "Lancers of the 6th Regiment."
    * "Long live the king."
    * "Look here, no nonsense!"
    * "My child! I love you and have known you a long time."
    * "On vous fera danser."
    * "Password."
    * "Princess, on my word, I did not wish to offend her."
    * "Royalty has its obligations."
    * "Tell me, is Colonel Gerard here?"
    * "Thank you for coming, my dear."
    * "Thank you, sir."
    * "That girl shall be my wife."
    * "This is a pleasure one gets in camp, Prince."
    * "To shed (or not to shed) the blood of his peoples."
    * "To your places."
    * "We must let him off the u!"
    * "What's he singing about?"
    * "Who excuses himself, accuses himself."
    * "Who goes there?"
    * "Woman is man's companion."
    * "You can't pass!"
    * "You clear out of this."
    * (2) "Hurrah for the Austrians! Hurrah for the Russians!
    * A captain of Cossacks.
    * A kind of entrenchment.
    * A masterly woman.
    * Anna Pavlovna.
    * Are the pretty women.
    * As looters.
    * Daughter of Matthew.
    * Death gives relief and death is peaceful.
    * Denisov.
    * Fine eyes.
    * Forty-two.
    * Fruhstuck: breakfast.
    * I love you.
    * Knight without fear and without reproach.
    * Large battalions are always victorious.
    * Lay member of the Society of Jesus.
    * Nicholas.
    * Old style.
    * Ours.
    * The French shawl dance.
    * The little one is charming.
    * The marshalls.
    * Those whom (God) wishes to destroy he drives mad.
    * Though a foreigner, Russian in heart and soul.
    * Till tomorrow, my dear fellow.
    * To Rostopchin's ferocious patriotism.
    * To be a man.
    * To force the guard.
    * To indicate he did not want more tea.
    * Without faith or law.
    A ces pleurs que je sens couler. *
    Ah! contre les douleurs il n'y a pas d'autre asile. *
    Aliment de poison d'une ame trop sensible,
    As 'twas growing dark last night
    De boire, de battre,
    Et d'etre un vert galant." *
    Et mele une douceur secrete
    Fell the snow so soft and light...
    Fetching water clear and sweet,
    La mort est secourable et la mort est tranquille.
    Stop, dear maiden, I entreat--
    Tendre melancholie, ah, viens me consoler,
    Toi, sans qui le bonheur me serait impossible,
    Viens calmer les tourments de ma sombre retraite,
   A Rhipheus at home, a Caesar in the field!
   A day or two, then bliss unspoilt,
   A dreaded foe be thou, kindhearted as a man,
   Ah lost, quite lost... is my head so keen,
   And dare not Herculean Russians trouble...
   And on the throne our Titus shield.
   At nighttime in the moon's fair glow
   Bring glory then to Alexander's reign
   Conquest's joyful thunder waken,
   Courage conquest guarantees;
   E'en fortunate Napoleon
   Enchantress, say, to my forsaken lyre
   Have we not Bagration?
   He brings foe men to their knees,... etc.
   It is for thee thus swells her heart,
   Knows by experience, now, Bagration,
   Living in a foreign land.
   Russians! O'er all barriers on!
   That while her fingers touch the harp
   To feel that in this world there's one
   Triumph, valiant Russians, now!...
   What is this bliss that makes my fingers thrill?
   What magic power is this recalls me still?
   What spark has set my inmost soul on fire,
 "All our stupidity, Yakov Alpatych," came the answers, and the
 "All over?" he repeated. "If I were not myself, but the handsomest,
 "And the count wanted him to say it was from Klyucharev? I
 "But if I want to..." said Natasha.
 "What is that, mon cher ami?" asked the countess, who had
 After this, three pages were left blank in the diary, and then
 At the edge of the road stood an oak. Probably ten times the age of
 Despite her excitement, Princess Mary realized that this was the
 He had felt it for the first time when the shell spun like a top
 Natasha gave herself up so fully and frankly to this new feeling
 Rostov, growing red and pale alternately, looked first at one
 The band struck up the newly introduced mazurka. Nicholas could not
 Two girlish voices sang a musical passage--the end of some song.
 and     8 guns of Friant's and Dessaix's divisions
 in all 62 guns.
"'Dieu me la donne, gare a qui la touche!' * They say he was very fine
"'From all my riding,' he writes to the Emperor, 'I have got a saddle
"'Grant leave to retire to his country seat to an old man who is already
"'I most ardently desire,' writes the King of Prussia to Bonaparte,
"'I opened my antechambers and they crowded in.' I do not know how far
"'I showed them the path to glory, but they did not follow it,'" Prince
"'No barrier bars a Russian's path'--we'll go!" shouted Petya.
"'The Brook,'" suggested Nicholas.
"'To him that hath shall be given, and from him that hath not shall be
"'Told them,' I dare say!" said Alpatych. "Are they drinking?" he asked
"'You see, St. Thomas,' he said to me the other day. 'Monsieur Kiril is
"-so dull-. It has been a delightful evening, has it not? Delightful!"
"...of my youth, farewell!" he said, turning to Makarin and the others.
"A French pancake," answered Zherkov.
"A Frenchman or a Russian prince incognito," said the officer, looking
"A Negro," chimed in Nicholas with a smile of delight. "Of course I
"A battle is won by those who firmly resolve to win it! Why did we lose
"A bayonet wound. I remained at the front. Remember, your excellency!"
"A bear, lads," said one of the men.
"A bit touched--I always said so."
"A charming lady, a divine one. Her eyes" (Nicholas looked at his
"A charming woman!" said Ilyin, with all the gravity of a boy of
"A child?" shouted a Frenchman from above. "I did hear something
"A diary, Nicholas," she replied, handing him a blue exercise book
"A diary?" Nicholas repeated with a shade of irony, and he took up the
"A dog astwide a fence! A weal dog astwide a fence!" shouted Denisov
"A fine lad! My word! A fine lad!... His father lies on his deathbed and
"A fine little bitch, that!" said he in a careless tone. "Is she swift?"
"A fine mess we've made of it!" he remarked.
"A fine thing too!" replied the captain, "and really..."
"A forfeit!" cried a young man in militia uniform whom Julie called "mon
"A full-grown one?" asked Ilagin as he approached the whip who had
"A future life?" Prince Andrew repeated, but Pierre, giving him no time
"A geography lesson!" he muttered as if to himself, but loud enough to
"A good figure and in her first bloom," he was saying, but on seeing
"A good thing too, little countess," said "Uncle," "only mind you don't
"A hare's track, a lot of tracks!" rang out Natasha's voice through the
"A horrid business dragging these corpses about with one! It would be
"A joke indeed!" put in the count. "Let him but say the word and we'll
"A kindly old man but not up to much. And why do they stay on so long in
"A letter from Nikolenka! I'm sure of it!" exclaimed Natasha, reading
"A likely thing, killing a fox our dogs had hunted! And it was my gray
"A little wound, but he has been made an officer; he is well now, he
"A live one!" shouted a man as a whistling shell approached.
"A member without salary," repeated Arakcheev. "I have the honor...
"A million all but one!" replied a waggish soldier in a torn coat, with
"A mo-o-st me-r-r-y co-o-m-pa...!" sang one of the peasants with a
"A nice girl! Very nice!" said Marya Dmitrievna. "Arranging meetings
"A nice little hot torch for the infantry! Good luck to you, fellow
"A perfect picture! How he chased a fox out of the rank grass by the
"A petition? This way, to the officer on duty" (he was shown the door
"A present to Your Majesty from the Empress."
"A promise is own brother to performance! I said Friday and here it is,
"A skillful commander?" replied Pierre. "Why, one who foresees all
"A soldier on leave--a shirt outside breeches," he would say.
"A splendid reply!" said Napoleon. "Young man, you will go far!"
"A splendid soldier, splendid! 'What am I attached to!' Ha, ha, ha!"
"A staff officer was here a minute ago, but skipped off," said an
"A town captured by the enemy is like a maid who has lost her honor,"
"A trifle," said the colonel in his bass voice: "two hussars wounded,
"A visitor," answered Anton.
"A vos places!" * suddenly cried a voice.
"A whole year!" Natasha repeated suddenly, only now realizing that
"A wife for counsel, a mother-in-law for welcome, but there's none as
"A word of friendly advice, mon cher. Be off as soon as you can, that's
"A-tu!" came the long-drawn cry of one of the borzoi whippers-in, who
"Aah!" Rostov almost screamed lifting both hands to his head. The seven
"About Boris... I know," she said seriously; "that's what I have come
"About Prince Michael..."
"About life, about man's destiny. It can't be so. I myself thought
"About my wife... I am ashamed as it is to leave her on your hands..."
"About your sister," ejaculated Denisov testily.
"According to the scouts the last of them crossed on rafts during the
"Adele tempted me: she kept on telling me to buy it," returned Pierre.
"Adieu, Mary," said he gently to his sister, taking her by the hand and
"Adieu, ma bonne," answered Prince Vasili turning away from her.
"Adjutant!" he shouted. "Order them not to crowd together."
"Adorable! divine! delicious!" was heard from every side.
"Adored friend of my soul!" he wrote. "Nothing but honor could keep
"Afraid of being late..." said the old man, looking at Kochubey.
"Afraid of what?"
"After Austerlitz!" said Prince Andrew gloomily. "No, thank you very
"After all, you must understand that besides your pleasure there is such
"After that, I could not make out what there was; something blue and
"After the next affair... epaulettes."
"Again!" she commanded, pointing with a peremptory gesture to the spot
"Again, again!" interrupted Natasha.
"Against your will He will save and have mercy on you and bring you
"Ah what a calamity! You say the affair was decisive? But Mortier is
"Ah yes, and what else did he say that's unpleasant?" thought Prince
"Ah yes, my dear," said the count, addressing the visitor and pointing
"Ah! Breathing again, breathing!" he muttered to himself.
"Ah! He is alive," said Napoleon. "Lift this young man up and carry him
"Ah! One of the old ones! Has your regiment had its rice?"
"Ah! Telyanin! How d'ye do? They plucked me last night," came Denisov's
"Ah! That's a good thing. So, my dear boy, you wish to serve the Tsar
"Ah! Very glad! Kiss me," he said, having learned who the young stranger
"Ah! ah!" screamed Natasha, rolling her eyes with horror.
"Ah! here's the warrior! Wants to vanquish Buonaparte?" said the old
"Ah! mon ami, I only pray, and hope that God will hear me. Andrew..."
"Ah! my dear!... Ah! Mary!" they suddenly exclaimed, and then laughed.
"Ah! my dear, I am afraid you and your monk are wasting your powder,"
"Ah! what joy for the princess!" exclaimed she: "At last! I must let her
"Ah!" cried Vereshchagin in meek surprise, looking round with a
"Ah!" exclaimed Rostopchin, as if struck by an unexpected recollection.
"Ah!" said Anatole. "Well, sit down."
"Ah!" said Kutuzov. "I hope this will be a lesson to you. Do your duty.
"Ah!" said Rostopchin, hurriedly turning away his eyes from the young
"Ah!" said the Emperor reassured, and with a kindly gleam in his eyes,
"Ah!... Alpatych... Ah, Yakov Alpatych... Grand! Forgive us for Christ's
"Ah!..." said Kutuzov glancing at Bolkonski as if by this exclamation he
"Ah, Bondarenko, dear friend!" said he to the hussar who rushed up
"Ah, Count Rostov!" exclaimed Pierre joyfully. "Then you are his son,
"Ah, Countess," he said at last, "that's a European talent, she has
"Ah, God! My God! What is it? The stomach? That means death! My
"Ah, I know what it is."
"Ah, I so long to like her! Tell her so if you see her before I do."
"Ah, I'm so sorry I wasn't there when you met the children," said
"Ah, Maman, ne dites pas de betises. Vous ne comprenez rien. Dans ma
"Ah, Nicholas, do you know I am often troubled about little Nicholas,"
"Ah, Nikita Ivanych!" cried Nicholas, rising politely, and as if wishing
"Ah, Pierre," said the countess going up to her husband. "You don't know
"Ah, Prince! In what sad circumstances we meet again! And how is our
"Ah, Prince, how sorry I am to part from you!
"Ah, Princess Mary!" he said suddenly in an unnatural voice, throwing
"Ah, Sonya, if you only knew how happy I am!" cried Natasha. "You don't
"Ah, Timokhin!" said he, recognizing the red-nosed captain who had been
"Ah, Vaska!" joyfully replied Nesvitski. "What's up with you?"
"Ah, Vesenny?" said a Cossack.
"Ah, Wostov? How are you, how are you?" he called out, still in the
"Ah, a weapon?" said the officer and turned to the barefooted soldier
"Ah, ah!" muttered the officer with a frown. "Well then, march!"
"Ah, and Ivanushka is here too!" said Prince Andrew, glancing with a
"Ah, and here's Nicholas!" cried Natasha, running up to him.
"Ah, but you are a crusty fellow, friend!" said the count.
"Ah, but you won't talk politics to me like Annette!"
"Ah, c'est vous!" said Petya. "Voulez-vous manger? N'ayez pas peur, on
"Ah, dear friend," replied Princess Mary, "I have asked you never to
"Ah, don't talk to me! Last winter she wheedled herself in here and
"Ah, from Vienna? Very good. Later, later!"
"Ah, he has found one, I think," said Ilagin carelessly. "Yes, we must
"Ah, he has passed judgment... passed judgement!" said the old man in a
"Ah, he looks very much like an incendiary," remarked the officer. "And
"Ah, he's come?" said Pierre. "And Plat-" he began, but did not finish.
"Ah, here he is!" she added. "Quand on... No, no," she said to the
"Ah, here he is, my hero!" said Kutuzov to a portly, handsome,
"Ah, here she is!" he exclaimed laughing. "My pet, whose name day it is.
"Ah, here she is!" said the old count, when he saw Natasha enter. "Well,
"Ah, here she is, the Queen of Petersburg, Countess Bezukhova," said
"Ah, how afraid I am for her, how afraid I am!" said the countess, not
"Ah, how annoying!" he muttered. "I should have come yesterday.... Ah,
"Ah, how do you do, great warrior?" said Rostopchin as soon as the short
"Ah, how do you do, my dear prince? How do you do, my dear boy? Come
"Ah, if only I were a man? I'd certainly stay with you. How splendid!"
"Ah, is it you, cousin?"
"Ah, it can't be avoided!" thought Nicholas, for the first and last
"Ah, it's you!" said Pierre with a preoccupied, dissatisfied air. "And
"Ah, it's you? Very glad, very glad to see you," he said, however,
"Ah, madam!" he began. "Madam, Countess... Countess Rostova, if I am
"Ah, madam, it is a great sacrament," replied the priest, passing his
"Ah, may the devil take you and evewybody," were the last words Rostov
"Ah, money, Count, money! How much sorrow it causes in the world," said
"Ah, my God! my God! When one thinks who and what--what trash--can cause
"Ah, my boy, my head's in a whirl!" said the old man with a smile, as if
"Ah, my dear fellow!" rejoined Karataev, "never decline a prison or a
"Ah, my dear fellow, what a battle we have gained! God grant that
"Ah, my dear friend! Forget the wrongs that may have been done you.
"Ah, my dear friend, he is very unfortunate," she said. "If what we hear
"Ah, my dear prince! I could not have a more welcome visitor," said
"Ah, my dear vicomte," put in Anna Pavlovna, "L'Urope" (for some
"Ah, my dear! He is so rich, and we are so poor!"
"Ah, my dear, I hardly knew you," said Anna Mikhaylovna with a happy
"Ah, my dear, my dear!" he began, rising and taking her by both hands.
"Ah, my dear," said the countess, "my life is not all roses either.
"Ah, my friend!" said he, taking Pierre by the elbow; and there was
"Ah, my friend!" she said, touching his arm as she had done her son's
"Ah, my love," answered Anna Mikhaylovna, "God grant you never know
"Ah, ours! And there?..." Pierre pointed to another knoll in the
"Ah, she has come!" thought he.
"Ah, she is indeed a darling! I'll send her to you."
"Ah, that is just what I tell him!" said she. "I don't understand it; I
"Ah, that's always the way!" said Nesvitski with a wave of the hand.
"Ah, that's the way to talk French," said the picket soldiers. "Now,
"Ah, the letter? Yes..." replied the prince peevishly. "Yes... yes..."
"Ah, the standards!" said Kutuzov, evidently detaching himself with
"Ah, the villains! What heathens! Yes; dead, dead, so he is... And
"Ah, there are still lights in the drawingroom!" she said, pointing to
"Ah, those are the French! And over there?..." Pierre pointed to a knoll
"Ah, those damned Germans! They don't know their own country!" said
"Ah, we were friends," said Kutuzov cheerfully. "All right, all right,
"Ah, what a beauty! Thank you, sweetheart!"
"Ah, what a mad bweed you Wostovs are!" he muttered, and Rostov noticed
"Ah, what have you done to me, and why?" And at the sight the old man
"Ah, yes! Do tell us all about it, Vicomte," said Anna Pavlovna, with a
"Ah, yes! That's a whole long story! How are you going to speak to
"Ah, yes! Today's events mark an epoch, the greatest epoch in our
"Ah, you are sending off a letter, Princess? I have already dispatched
"Ah, you'd better not go, sir," said the doctor, "or you may have to
"Ah, you're back?"
"Ah, you're up already," said Denisov, entering the room.
"Ah, you've come here too, young man!" he said, smiling and raising his
"Ah, your excellency," put in Zherkov, his eyes fixed on the hussars,
"Ah... a wonderful, a matchless people!" said Kutuzov; and he closed his
"Ah? You're Pwince Bolkonski? Vewy glad to make your acquaintance! I'm
"Aline," he said to his wife, "go and see what they are about."
"All I can say, General," said he with a pleasant elegance of expression
"All have secrets of their own," answered Natasha, getting warmer. "We
"All is over," he thought, and a cold sweat broke out on his forehead.
"All right now. Come along! I wonder you're not ashamed! If only you
"All right!" said Dolokhov, having finished the addition. "All right!
"All right!" said the doctor.
"All right, all right!" he said to Prince Andrew, and turned to a
"All right, all right!" said Dolokhov. But Petya did not let go of him
"All right, all right!" said the old count. "He always flares up! This
"All right, all right, we'll see!"
"All right, all right, you can tell us afterwards," said Princess Mary,
"All right, all right," he said, throwing the bits under the table.
"All right, all right," interrupted the prince, and laughing his
"All right, all right," replied the commander, and turned to Major
"All right, all right. We'll talk it over," replied Prince Andrew.
"All right, immediately," he replied to a dresser who pointed Prince
"All right, one can't talk--how tiresome!"
"All right," said Pierre, still smiling in the same way. A feeling of
"All right--all right. I haven't time just now," replied Ermolov, and
"All right. All right. They'll be safe with me, as safe as in Chancery!
"All right. Fifty imperials... that I will drink a whole bottle of rum
"All right. Let Monsieur de Beausset enter, and Fabvier too," he said,
"All right. They are good fellows. And how have you wriggled onto the
"All take glasses; you too, Balaga. Well, comrades and friends of my
"All the points of our position are in the enemy's hands and we cannot
"All the same I shan't sleep. What silliness, to sleep! Mummy! Mummy!
"All the same! They say this one is the commander of all the Emperor
"All the same, Aunt, it is impossible," he rejoined with a sigh, after
"All the same, I love and value nothing but triumph over them all, I
"All the same, it was Bilibin who found a suitable form for the address.
"All the same, one is afraid! Oh, you clever people," said a third manly
"All this had to be and could not be otherwise," thought Pierre, "so
"All well?" asked Rostov, drawing away his arm.
"All wight! All wight!" shouted Denisov. "It's no good making excuses
"All with grapeshot!" shouted the officer.
"Alley! Alley!" said the Cossack, touching the prisoner's arm to make
"Allow me to ask," he said, "are you a Mason?"
"Allow me to introduce you to my daughter," said the countess, with
"Allow me to look at your purse," he said in a low, almost inaudible,
"Allow me, Miss! I can't do it like that," said the maid who was holding
"Allow me, sir," said Prince Andrew in Russian in a cold, disagreeable
"Alone all the same, without my friends.... And he expects me not to be
"Alpatych!" a familiar voice suddenly hailed the old man.
"Altogether such heroism as was displayed by the Russian warriors
"Always about the same thing," said Pierre with a smile. "Jealo..."
"Always busy," replied Michael Ivanovich with a respectfully ironic
"Always some fantastic schemes," said Nicholas.
"Always the same thing," said Pierre, looking round at his listeners.
"Always thoughts... about you... thoughts..." he then uttered much
"Am I not too late?" he thought. "No, probably he won't make his entry
"Am I spoiled for Andrew's love or not?" she asked herself, and with
"Am I to let the troops have the oats, and to take a receipt for them?
"An institution upholding honor, the source of emulation, is one similar
"An officer, I have to see him," came the reply in a pleasant, well-bred
"An order to who?" asked the colonel morosely.
"An ukase, they are reading an ukase! Reading an ukase!" cried voices in
"Anatole used to come to borrow money from her and used to kiss her
"Anatole, come with me! I must speak to you," he added in French.
"And Alpatych is being sent to Smolensk?" asked Princess Mary.
"And Bolkonski?" she asked.
"And I am still arguing with your husband. I can't understand why he
"And I did not know... Nicholas... My darling!..."
"And I don't at all want to get married. And I am afraid of him; I have
"And I had no idea!..." exclaimed Princess Mary. "Ah, Andrew, I did not
"And I have a great favor to ask of you, Papa," said he.
"And I have known so many cases of a splinter wound" (the Gazette said
"And I know why she'd be ashamed," said Petya, offended by Natasha's
"And I love her, because her character is sensible and very good.
"And I might have been in his place!" thought Rostov, and hardly
"And I only..."
"And I remember their telling me that you had been born under a
"And I should be ashamed to write to Boris. I'm not going to."
"And I should so like to thank Uncle once for all his kindness to me and
"And I tell you, Rostov, that you must apologize to the colonel!" said
"And I tell you, don't you dahe to do it!" shouted Denisov, rushing at
"And I tell you--Peter Kirilych here will also tell you..."
"And I was looking for you," said Natasha running out to him. "I told
"And I was wishing for his death!" thought Princess Mary.
"And I will tell you this," Prince Andrew interrupted in a tone of quiet
"And I!"--She turned away for an instant. "Why too much?" she asked.
"And I'd have won on my Frenchy, your excellency," said Lavrushka
"And I'll go to my ruin, I will, as soon as possible! It's not your
"And I?" he said; "do you think it is easier for me? I am as worn out
"And Lise, your wife?"
"And Mamma pressed her!" said Nicholas reproachfully.
"And Nicholas? Where is he? By the Lyadov upland, isn't he?"
"And Sonya! They are lovely!"
"And am I to bring the gypsy girls along with him?" asked Nicholas,
"And are the hours the same? And the walks in the avenues? And the
"And are you building?"
"And as for the man who advised forming this camp--the Drissa camp,"
"And ask whether sharpshooters have been posted," he added. "What are
"And at your age what secrets can there be between Natasha and Boris, or
"And because," Pierre continued, "only one who believes that there is a
"And can't it be helped?" she asked. Prince Andrew did not reply, but
"And did you give me tobacco yesterday? That's just it, friend! Ah,
"And did you really see and speak to Napoleon, as we have been told?"
"And didn't Hippolyte tell you?" asked Prince Vasili, turning to his son
"And do you feel quite calm?" Rostov asked.
"And do you feel sad here?" Pierre inquired.
"And do you know, Countess," he said, suddenly addressing her as an
"And do you know, Daddy, the day before yesterday we ran at them and,
"And do you know, my dear fellow, it seems to me that Bonaparte has
"And do you remember how we rolled hard-boiled eggs in the ballroom, and
"And do you remember," Natasha asked with a pensive smile, "how once,
"And fancy! she refused him quite definitely!" adding, after a pause,
"And have you been here long?" Pierre asked as he munched the last of
"And have you brought little Nicholas?" he asked in the same slow, quiet
"And have you heard?" Shinshin asked. "Prince Golitsyn has engaged a
"And have you talked everything well over with Prince Theodore?" she
"And here's the commander," said Likhachev.
"And here, friend, the people are quite beggarly. There they all seemed
"And how about you, Count Peter Kirilych? If they call up the militia,
"And how could you believe he was my lover? Why? Because I like his
"And how did they arrest you, dear lad? At your house?"
"And how do you get on with the officers?" inquired Zherkov.
"And how does he now regard the matter?" asked Pierre, referring to the
"And how does one do it in a barn?" inquired Sonya.
"And how like one another," said Ilyin.
"And how she dances! What gwace!" he said again after a pause.
"And how we've been begging, your honor," said the old soldier, his
"And how's it you're not afraid, sir, really now?" a red-faced,
"And how's your father?"
"And if I should meet His Majesty before I meet the commander in chief,
"And if he asks about the losses?"
"And if you allow yourself," he screamed in a fury, addressing Princess
"And if you put up at my house that will be better still. That's it,
"And is Papa older?" she asked.
"And is there a large force of you here?" said another, a short man,
"And it had to happen that he should come specially to Petersburg while
"And it must seem to you," said Boris flushing slightly, but not
"And let him know that I will do so!" said Napoleon, rising and pushing
"And love of one's neighbor, and self-sacrifice?" began Pierre. "No, I
"And me, kiss me!"
"And me? Would you like to kiss me?" she whispered almost inaudibly,
"And mine have had nothing for two weeks," said Denisov.
"And now, in token of candor, I ask you to reveal to me your chief
"And of state interest to some extent," said Prince Andrew.
"And our little tea table?"
"And our share?" asked the princess smiling ironically, as if anything
"And she's in love with Boris already. Just fancy!" said the countess
"And should your Serene Highness require a man who will not spare his
"And so he is! Quite blind!"
"And so they are writing from Potsdam already?" he said, repeating
"And so you had to go through that too!"
"And so you have met Count Nicholas, Mary?" Prince Andrew suddenly said,
"And so you think Napoleon will manage to get an army across?" asked
"And so you've had him educated abroad, Prince Vasili, haven't you?"
"And so, brother" (it was at this point that Pierre came up), "ten years
"And so, brother," he continued, with a smile on his pale emaciated face
"And such a one!" she said. But as soon as she had said it a new train
"And tell Mr. Dolokhov that I won't forget him--he may be quite easy.
"And tell me your opinion of Barclay de Tolly. In Moscow they are saying
"And that is all the state has for the millions it has spent," said he.
"And that other one with him, the Austrian, looked as if he were smeared
"And that son of a bitch Petrov has lagged behind after all, it seems,"
"And that would be splendid," said Pierre.
"And the fete at the English ambassador's? Today is Wednesday. I must
"And the old man said, 'God will forgive you, we are all sinners in His
"And the other one is not here. They've been telling tales," he
"And the prisoners he killed in Africa? That was horrible!" said the
"And then of course my family has also to be considered," Prince Vasili
"And then, old fellow, he gives him one in the teeth with the butt end
"And there hasn't been anyone in the room except the lieutenant and
"And there's nothing for you to say. I shall speak to him myself," said
"And they said Kutuzov was blind of one eye?"
"And they say he's a skillful commander," rejoined Pierre.
"And this is gratitude--this is recognition for those who have
"And this man too," thought Pierre, looking into the face of the Chief
"And to drink," said one of the officers, not wishing to quarrel.
"And was Ivanushka with you?"
"And was our militia of any use to the Empia? Not at all! It only wuined
"And was the Holy Mother promoted to the rank of general?" said Prince
"And we, my dear boy! It's terrible! I was wrong to laugh at Mack,
"And what a well-preserved man he was!" remarked the aide-de-camp. "And
"And what about his character?" asked the regimental commander.
"And what devil made me go to that wat?" (an officer nicknamed "the
"And what do you think of this latest comedy, the coronation at Milan?"
"And what does he mean by 'One of my eyes was sore but now I am on the
"And what ingenious maneuvers they all propose to me! It seems to
"And what is she so pleased about?" thought Nicholas, looking at his
"And what were you going to say?"
"And what's your name?"
"And when are we to start, your excellency?"
"And where is Lise?" he asked, answering her question only by a smile.
"And where is your brother-in-law now, if I may ask?" he said.
"And where's the fur cloak?" asked Dolokhov. "Hey, Ignatka! Go to
"And who are you?"
"And who are you?" cried the officer, turning on him with tipsy rage,
"And who has told you what is bad for another man?" he asked.
"And who is this?" she asked her governess, peering into the face of her
"And who may you be?" one of them suddenly asked Pierre, evidently
"And why are children born to such men as you? If you were not a father
"And why are they stopping? There's no proper order!" said the soldiers.
"And why didn't you do it at seven in the morning? You ought to have
"And why didn't you simply come straight to me as to a friend? I know
"And why do you serve?"
"And why do you stand there gaping?"
"And why has the Emperor Alexander taken command of the armies? What is
"And why is it?"
"And why the deuce are we going to fight Bonaparte?" remarked Shinshin.
"And will she soon be confined?" and shaking his head reproachfully
"And with such fine fellows to retreat and retreat! Well, good-by,
"And yet he's such an affectionate father," said Countess Mary,
"And yet they say that war is like a game of chess?" he remarked.
"And yet what a splendid reign your master might have had!"
"And you all listen to me!" said Rostov to the peasants. "Be off to your
"And you didn't see that everybody is packing up?"
"And you too!"
"And you won't feel ashamed to write to him?"
"And you're still the same diplomatist! But that's not the point...
"And you're surprised at the way she rides, Simon, eh?" said the count.
"And you, Michael Nikanorovich?" he said, addressing "Uncle."
"And you, Theodore, get me a piece of chalk."
"And you, are you one of the doctors?"
"And you? Are you going to have lunch too? They feed you quite decently
"And you?" he asked Dolokhov, but as soon as he had asked the question
"And your children?"
"And, if your excellency will allow me to express my opinion," he
"Andre," said his wife, addressing her husband in the same coquettish
"Andrew Sevastyanych!" said Rostov. "You know, we could crush them...."
"Andrew lying? Is he ill?" asked Natasha, her frightened eyes fixed on
"Andrew! One thing I beg, I entreat of you!" she said, touching his
"Andrew!" said Princess Mary, imploringly. "Il faut que vous sachiez que
"Andrew, I bless you with this icon and you must promise me you will
"Andrew, already!" said the little princess, turning pale and looking
"Andrew, au nom de Dieu!" *(2) Princess Mary repeated.
"Andrew, do leave off," said Princess Mary. "Don't tell him, Pelageya."
"Andrew, don't!" said Princess Mary.
"Andrew, if you had faith you would have turned to God and asked Him
"Andrew, why didn't you warn me?" said the princess, with mild reproach,
"Andrew, would you like..." Princess Mary suddenly said in a trembling
"Angel! Dear one! Hurrah! Father!..." cried the crowd, and Petya with
"Angina? Oh, that's a terrible illness!"
"Anisya, go and see if the strings of my guitar are all right. I haven't
"Anna Ignatyevna Malvintseva. She has heard from her niece how you
"Anna Ignatyevna wants to see you, Nicholas," said she, pronouncing the
"Annette, for heaven's sake don't refuse me," the countess began, with a
"Announce me. Perhaps she will see me," said Pierre.
"Another Ismail comrade," said he. "A brave officer! Are you satisfied
"Another forfeit for a Gallicism," said a Russian writer who was
"Another petitioner," answered the man with the braces.
"Another romance," said the militia officer. "Really, this general
"Any news from Mack?"
"Anybody can shove," said the footman, and also began working his elbows
"Anyhow, I'm in your way," he said in a low tone. "Come and talk over my
"Apropos, tell me please, is it true that the women have all left
"Arakcheev and Golitsyn," incautiously remarked Pierre, "are now the
"Are those our men there?" Pierre inquired.
"Are we really quite lost, your excellency?" he asked again.
"Are you afraid, then?" said Pierre.
"Are you an officer?"
"Are you asleep, Mamma?"
"Are you bowing to a friend, eh?" remarked another, chaffing a peasant
"Are you going to Count Cyril Vladimirovich, my dear?" said the count
"Are you ill?" he heard Dessalles' voice asking.
"Are you living with your mother?"
"Are you mad? You have twice been ordered to retreat, and you..."
"Are you not ashamed to deprive us of your charming wife?"
"Are you ready?" he asked his wife, looking past her.
"Are you remaining in Moscow, then?"
"Are you the Elder? Bind him, Lavrushka!" shouted Rostov, as if that
"Aren't you cold?" he asked.
"Aren't you ready? It is nearly ten," came the countess' voice.
"Arguing? Mutiny!... Brigands! Traitors!" cried Rostov unmeaningly in a
"Arinka! Look, she sits sideways! There she sits and her skirt
"As I see it you were quite right, and I told Natasha so. Pierre says
"As I was saying to you, Andrew, be kind and generous as you always
"As far as the service goes he is quite punctilious, your excellency;
"As it flies past me, Daddy, the ball I mean," said a young soldier with
"As it is, she is Queen, and her word is law!"
"As may happen," said Rostov.
"As one community, without distinction of class, without enmity, united
"As soon as we have a certain number of worthy men in every state,
"As the enemy's left wing rests on wooded hills and his right extends
"As there's no one to fall in love with on campaign, he's fallen in love
"As to your business," Prince Andrew continued, addressing Boris, "we
"As you please."
"As you please... really... I think so... but as you please," said
"As you see," he said.
"As your messenger ordered, your special beasts," replied Balaga.
"Ask him to wait," and the sound was heard of a chair being pushed back.
"Ask the count to come to me."
"Ask the countess, I don't give orders."
"Ask them," replied Prince Andrew, indicating the officers.
"Asks for reinforcements?" said Napoleon with an angry gesture.
"Asleep, I think."
"Assure the Emperor Alexander from me," said he, taking his hat, "that
"At boss zides, Captain," he heard the voice of the colonel, who,
"At eight hundred leagues from France, I will not have my Guard
"At first I did not like it much, because what makes a town pleasant
"At home?" asked Pierre.
"At least, change your coiffure," said the little princess. "Didn't I
"At once? This instant!... No, it can't be!" she thought.
"At one draught, or he loses!" shouted a fourth.
"At seven o'clock, I believe."
"At seven o'clock? It's very sad, very sad!"
"At such a moment!" Prince Andrew repeated. "To them it is only a moment
"At such a moment?" said Pierre reproachfully.
"At that time, when everything was plunged in darkness, preaching alone
"At what o'clock did the battle begin?" asked the Emperor.
"At what o'clock was General Schmidt killed?"
"Att-ention!" shouted the regimental commander in a soul-shaking voice
"Attack indeed!" said the colonel in a bored voice, puckering up his
"Attendez," said Anna Pavlovna, reflecting, "I'll speak to Lise, young
"Au revoir! Thank you very much. His Majesty will probably desire to see
"Aunt, I did it gently," said the boy.
"Auntie, darling, do tell me what it is!"
"Awfully angry!" he said, smiling and getting up. And smoothing his hair
"Aye, when I look at you!..." said one of them to Karp.
"Back or forward? Eh, no matter, forward..." the wolf seemed to say to
"Bad news! He's not among the prisoners nor among the killed! Kutuzov
"Bad! Bad!" exclaimed Pierre. "We all know what is bad for ourselves."
"Bad! But it's not that, my friend-" said Dolokhov with a gasping voice.
"Bah! How they scurry. He just sends a ball and they think they'll all
"Bah, really? So much the better! You are certainly brave foes. The
"Baron Funke has been recommended to the Dowager Empress by her sister,"
"Baton de gueules, engrele de gueules d'azur--maison Conde," said he.
"Be a man, my friend. I will look after your interests," said she in
"Be off, thou base slave! Touch me not! See this?" shouted Makar
"Be quiet, backbiter!" said Dolgorukov. "It is not true; there are now
"Be quiet, quiet!" The prince slapped his hand on the table. "Yes, I
"Be quite easy," he continued playfully, as he adroitly took the gold
"Be so good as to step in. Makar Alexeevich, the brother of my late
"Be so good..." shouted the captain, frowning angrily.
"Beat him!... Let the traitor perish and not disgrace the Russian name!"
"Beautiful," said the doctor in answer to a remark about the weather.
"Because I am accustomed to doing everything accurately," said Petya.
"Because I hate ghost stories," said Prince Hippolyte in a tone which
"Because I have noticed that when a young man comes on leave from
"Because I know it will end in nothing...."
"Because I love you!" was what he wanted to say, but he did not say it,
"Because he is young, because he is poor, because he is a relation...
"Because it is better for me to come less often... because... No, simply
"Because it's useless."
"Because not everything happens as one expects or with the smoothness of
"Because when once a man starts on military service, he should try to
"Because, consider, Count--if I allowed myself to marry now without
"Before Moscow!" repeated Napoleon, and inviting M. de Beausset, who was
"Before me? No! All is over for me," she replied with shame and
"Believe me, Prince, a mother's heart will never forget what you have
"Believe me, Princess, I am ready to do all I can," answered Prince
"Believe me," said Prince Dolgorukov, addressing Bagration, "it is
"Besides how can I ask the Emperor for his instructions for the right
"Besides that, Peter Nikolaevich, by exchanging into the Guards I shall
"Besides, Monsieur Kiril, you have only to say a word to the captain,
"Besides, in the actions of a statesman one has to distinguish between
"Better not say anything to her either."
"Bezukhov est ridicule, but he is so kind and good-natured. What
"Bezukhov."
"Blast you!" he shouted, holding up his whip threateningly at the count.
"Blockhead! Why do you come in without being called?" cried Nicholas,
"Board them!" yelled the tipsy man, trying to press the trigger. Hearing
"Bogucharovo Cloister," as his father called Prince Andrew's estate.
"Bolkonski! Bolkonski!... Don't you hear? Eh? Come quick..." he shouted.
"Bolkonski!" he whispered, his voice trembling from a consciousness
"Bonaparte has said so," remarked Prince Andrew with a sarcastic smile.
"Bonaparte treats Europe as a pirate does a captured vessel," said Count
"Bonaparte..." began Dolokhov, but the Frenchman interrupted him.
"Bonjour, la compagnie!" * said he gaily, smiling and looking about him.
"Bonjour, messieurs!" * said Dolokhov loudly and clearly.
"Boris doesn't want to help me and I don't want to ask him. That's
"Boris, come here," said she with a sly and significant look. "I
"Boris," she said to her son with a smile, "I shall go in to see the
"Borodino," the other corrected him.
"Bosse! Vincent!" Petya cried, stopping outside the door.
"Both true and untrue," Pierre began; but Prince Andrew interrupted him.
"Bravo! Ha, ha, ha!" rose their rough, joyous laughter from all sides.
"Brigand! You shall pay for this," said the Frenchman, letting go
"Bring it here--that's fine!"
"Brothers! Dear fellows! Darlings!" old soldiers exclaimed, weeping, as
"Buonaparte himself!... Just listen to the fool, what he doesn't know!
"Buonaparte was born with a silver spoon in his mouth. He has got
"Buonaparte?" said Bilibin inquiringly, puckering up his forehead to
"Burdino, isn't it?" said the officer, turning to his companion.
"But I am three times as rich as before," returned Pierre.
"But I can't believe it," insisted Sonya. "I don't understand. How is it
"But I can't live without him!" cried Natasha.
"But I do not know, Father!"
"But I don't in the least want to, Mamma."
"But I have nothing here," replied Pierre, supposing that he was asked
"But I heard," said Natasha. "Why does Mamma object?"
"But I just wish to say, to avoid misunderstandings, that you are quite
"But I never said I was dull."
"But I never said a word about the Emperor!" said the officer,
"But I never sent for them," declared the princess. "You must have given
"But I never told them to come," said Princess Mary. "I only told Dron
"But I questioned him," said Tikhon. "He said he didn't know much.
"But I should like to see the right flank. They say it's very strong,"
"But I will, I'll give the order at once."
"But I wish it," he said. "I beg you--give it him!"
"But I'll go to Bezukhov's myself. Pierre has arrived, and now we shall
"But I'll send an orderly.... Two of them!" said Rostov. "What an idea,
"But Princess Bolkonskaya--that's another matter. I will tell you the
"But Uncle Pierre! Oh, what a wonderful man he is! And my father? Oh,
"But a large number of monasteries and churches is always a sign of the
"But a very kind man, Prince," said Anna Mikhaylovna with a pathetic
"But above all Denisov must not dare to imagine that I'll obey him and
"But above all," added Prince Andrew, "I have grown used to my regiment,
"But action with what aim?" he cried. "And what position will you adopt
"But after all who asked them here? Serves them right, the bloody
"But all that is only life's setting, the real thing is love--love! Am I
"But all the same?"
"But am I not too cold with him?" thought the princess. "I try to be
"But anything suits you, my charmer!" she remarked.
"But as you are a philosopher, be a consistent one, look at the other
"But between not recognizing him as Emperor and calling him General
"But can this be compared...?" said Pierre.
"But could it be otherwise?" he thought. "Here is this capital at my
"But did you notice, it says, 'for consultation'?" said Pierre.
"But do listen," returned Prince Andrew, holding him by the arm. "Do you
"But do you know, my dear, that was a capital joke," said the count; and
"But don't be late, Count, if I may venture to ask; about ten minutes to
"But don't hurt my little horse!" said the Alsatian good-naturedly to
"But every time there have been conquests there have been conquerors;
"But for God's sake, be careful, you know how it may affect your mamma."
"But for heaven's sake listen to me!"
"But for you and me, old fellow, it's time to drop these amenities,"
"But he is dying," Pierre again began.
"But he must be a Freemason," said he, referring to the abbe whom he had
"But he's sucked our blood and now he thinks he's quit of us. He's been
"But here was a fairy forest with black moving shadows, and a glitter
"But how are you going to stop them?" replied another officer. "There is
"But how are you to get that balance?" Pierre was beginning.
"But how can I?..."
"But how could one say that in Russian?"
"But how get married?" said Pierre, in answer to Marya Dmitrievna. "He
"But how is his wound? What is his general condition?"
"But how is it the doctor from Moscow is not here yet?" said the
"But how often I have felt proud of her, proud of her majestic beauty
"But how? Are we to take him up to her? The room there has not been
"But if I want to..."
"But if I were right, I should be rendering a service to my Fatherland
"But if for reason you don't feel inclined to talk to me," said the old
"But if he is dishonorable?"
"But if the bridge is crossed it means that the army too is lost? It
"But if you only knew how offensive it was... as if I..."
"But if you won't accept money from me like a comrade, you will offend
"But in the Third Company they say nine men were missing yesterday."
"But in what am I to blame?" she asked herself. And his cold, stern look
"But in what position are we going to attack him? I have been at the
"But in what was I to blame?" he asked. "In marrying her without loving
"But is it possible that all is really ended?" asked Pierre.
"But it can't be he, alone in the midst of this empty field!" thought
"But it isn't?..."
"But it says plainly: 'Whosoever shall marry her that is divorced...'"
"But it's all the same now," Pierre could not help saying.
"But it's already ten."
"But it's impossible..." declared the gentlemen of the suite, shrugging
"But it's strange, friends," continued the man who had wondered at their
"But it's true that you remained in Moscow to kill Napoleon?" Natasha
"But joking apart," said Prince Andrew, "do you really think the
"But look here, brothers, there's another fire!" remarked an orderly.
"But military men have told me that it is impossible to fight in the
"But no! They shall eat horseflesh yet, like the Turks!" exclaimed
"But no, it can't be!" he thought. "This stern, thin, pale face that
"But nobody possesses it, so what would you have? It is a vicious circle
"But now I am off at once."
"But nowhere in Europe is there anything like that," said Napoleon.
"But on what then?"
"But one cannot delay, Prince, at such a moment! Consider that the
"But perhaps that's my shirt on the table," he thought, "and that's my
"But please don't interrupt me when I am entertaining the guests," said
"But really, hadn't I better go away?" he asked, looking kindly at her
"But see here, to tell the truth, Aunt..."
"But seriously," said Prince Andrew, "we can at any rate say without
"But shan't we have to accept battle?" remarked Prince Andrew.
"But she doesn't like me," said Natasha.
"But she's stupid. I have myself said she is stupid," he thought. "There
"But still this does not mean that the campaign is over," said Prince
"But such a... such a... never happened to me before!" she said. "Only I
"But tell me, how will your husband look at the matter?" Bilibin asked,
"But tell me, what is he like, eh?" said Prince Andrew again.
"But that is my conviction, and judging by the last letter with which
"But that's all rubbish," Natasha chattered on. "And is Denisov nice?"
"But that's impossible," said Prince Andrew as if it were a matter
"But that's impossible."
"But that's just the same as myself--they are not others," explained
"But that's not Mytishchi, it's farther away."
"But that's the Grand Duke, and I want the commander in chief or the
"But the best of it was," said one, telling of the misfortune of
"But the law, religion..." said the prince, already yielding.
"But the worst of it, gentlemen--I am giving Kuragin away to you--is
"But they don't understand our talk at all," said the dancer with a
"But they heard him at the council of war and will hear him when he
"But they say that war has been declared," replied the visitor.
"But they told us Little Mytishchi had been set on fire by Mamonov's
"But they'll make grand leg bands, dear friend," he said, and went back
"But they're a clean folk, lads," the first man went on; "he was
"But think what you are doing," cried Sonya. "I can't leave it like
"But this is very important, from General Dokhturov," said
"But two days ago this suddenly happened," said Natasha, struggling with
"But we daren't. In our regiment two officers were court-martialed for
"But we have grain belonging to my brother?" she said.
"But we must give him an answer."
"But what I say is," he said, turning to Rostov, "it would be best
"But what about my heirs?" said Pierre. "Supposing I suddenly marry...
"But what am I to do?"
"But what are 'God's folk'?" asked Pierre.
"But what are you shouting for? Calm yourself," said Rostov. "You've set
"But what could have happened? What did I want? I want his death!" she
"But what did Klyucharev do wrong, Count?" asked Pierre.
"But what did you hear?"
"But what did you want?" cried Marya Dmitrievna, growing angry again.
"But what do I care about your allies?" said Napoleon. "I have
"But what do they want?" he asked the superintendent of police.
"But what do you mean by living only for yourself?" asked Pierre,
"But what do you think, Daniel Terentich? Doesn't it look as if that
"But what does it mean?" she added meditatively.
"But what has happened between you?" she asked. "What has he said to
"But what have they been up to?" asked the countess.
"But what is the matter with you, Count? You are not like yourself...."
"But what is there in running across it like that?" said Ilagin's groom.
"But what is there to say about me?" said Pierre, his face relaxing into
"But what is war? What is needed for success in warfare? What are the
"But what nonsense I have been saying to the governor's wife!" thought
"But what of her?"
"But what's to be done? She can't help it," thought the princess.
"But when are you coming to bed?" replied another voice.
"But where do you come from not to know what every coachman in the town
"But where is it?"
"But where was she left?" asked Pierre.
"But who is it? What's his name?"
"But why are you angry?" remonstrated Tikhon, "just as if I'd never seen
"But why didn't you tell me, Dronushka? Isn't it possible to help them?
"But why do you expect that he will leave us anything?"
"But why don't you want to take it?" she asked again.
"But why go to Petersburg?" Natasha suddenly asked, and hastily replied
"But why not?" asked the princess.
"But why shouldn't I say I saw something? Others do see! Besides who can
"But why talk of me?... Talk to me, yes, tell me about your travels and
"But why this secrecy? Why doesn't he come to the house?" asked Sonya.
"But why, Count, why?" she almost cried, unconsciously moving closer to
"But with such ideas what motive have you for living? One would sit
"But you can't have understood me," said Princess Mary with a sad smile.
"But you can't. Mamma said you mustn't," said Nicholas to Natasha.
"But you despise me. You who are so pure can never understand being so
"But you didn't see it!"
"But you don't suppose I'm going to get you married at once? There is
"But you have been misinformed," said Pierre. "Everything is quiet in
"But you have not slept," she said, repressing her joy. "Try to sleep...
"But you haven't refused Bolkonski?" said she.
"But you know how it all ended, don't you? You heard of the duel?"
"But you know the wise maxim your excellency, advising one to expect the
"But you know you may be unfair. You are too fond of this one," his wife
"But you know, my dear boy, it's a pity you got excited! Mitenka has
"But you meant to stay another two days?"
"But you must decide on something! Your father expects it."
"But you said yourself that we would sacrifice everything."
"But you see what he writes..." said another, pointing to a printed
"But you take it without sugar?" she said, smiling all the time, as if
"But you'll be late for dinner."
"But, Mamma, suppose I loved a girl who has no fortune, would you expect
"But, Natasha, can that be all over?"
"But, Prince, they say he is blind!" said he, reminding Prince Vasili of
"But, Prince," Dessalles began timidly, "the letter mentions
"But, Prince," said Anna Mikhaylovna, "after such a solemn sacrament,
"But, dear me, that must be a fraud!" said Pierre, naively, who had
"But, just what did the genewal tell you? To weturn at once?" asked
"But, my dear Monsieur Pierre," said she, "how do you explain the fact
"But, my dear princess," answered Anna Mikhaylovna blandly but
"But, my dear sir," said Nesvitski as he drew up, taking off his cap and
"But, my dear," said Prince Vasili suddenly, clutching the little table
"But, my dear...."
"But, my poor Catiche, it is as clear as daylight! He will then be the
"But... I should like to know one thing...."
"But... no," said Petya, "I don't want to sleep yet. Besides I know
"Bwing the prisoner here," said Denisov in a low voice, not taking his
"By purifying and regenerating our members we try, thirdly, to improve
"By the Lord Jesus Christ, I thought we had put something under him!"
"By the way, your excellency, I should inform you," he
"C'est grand!" * say the historians, and there no longer exists either
"Call him in, call him here."
"Call him to me," said Kutuzov.
"Calm yourself, Princess! It seems so to you because... I assure you
"Can I see the count?" Pierre again asked.
"Can a sleigh pass?" he asked his overseer, a venerable man, resembling
"Can he really be going away leaving me alone without having told me
"Can it be me?" thought Rostov.
"Can it or can it not be?" he now thought as he looked at her and
"Can one be well while suffering morally? Can one be calm in times like
"Can one see from there?... If you would..."
"Can they be French?" He looked at the approaching Frenchmen, and though
"Can this be death?" thought Prince Andrew, looking with a quite new,
"Can't you make less noise?"
"Capital!" said Prince Hippolyte in English, and began slapping his knee
"Caps off, traitors!" shouted Rostov in a wrathful voice. "Where's the
"Captain Ramballe, of the 13th Light Regiment, Chevalier of the Legion
"Captain Tushin's, your excellency!" shouted the red-haired, freckled
"Captain, for God's sake! I've hurt my arm," he said timidly. "For God's
"Captain, there is soup and a leg of mutton in the kitchen," said he.
"Carrot ices."
"Catch hold of my arm or you'll drop him!" he heard one of the servants
"Catch hold!" whispered Gerasim to the porter.
"Catiche has had tea served in the small drawing room," said Prince
"Cela nous convient a merveille.*(2) Suvorov now--he knew what he was
"Cependant, mon cher," he remarked, examining his nails from a distance
"Certainly he must be moved onto the bed; here it will be impossible..."
"Certainly; but about Kutuzov, I don't promise."
"Cette armee russe que l'or de l'Angleterre a transportee des extremites
"Cette ville asiatique aux innombrables eglises, Moscou la sainte. La
"Charme de vous voir," * greeted the Rostovs and Peronskaya in the same
"Charmee de vous voir. Je suis tres contente de vous voir," * she said
"Charming!" said Anna Pavlovna with an inquiring glance at the little
"Charming!" said he, kissing the tips of his fingers.
"Charming!" whispered the little princess, sticking the needle into her
"Charming, charming!" observed Prince Vasili.
"Christ be with you!" Kutuzov repeated and went toward his carriage.
"Clear that away!" said the officer, pointing to the beams and the
"Co-o-om-pa-ny!" roared the tipsy peasant with a beatific smile as
"Colonel Michaud, do not forget what I say to you here, perhaps we may
"Colonel, I always require it," replied the Emperor. "Conceal nothing
"Colonel," he said, addressing Rostov's enemy with an air of gloomy
"Colonel," interrupted the officer of the suite, "You must be quick or
"Come along then! Come along then!" the publican and the tall young
"Come along with me to our knoll. We can get a view from there and in
"Come along!"
"Come along, our Matvevna!" he said to himself. "Matvevna" * was the
"Come and eat something. Have a drink!" Dolokhov shouted to him from the
"Come here, Wostov. Let's dwink to dwown our gwief!" shouted Denisov,
"Come here," said Rostov, catching hold of Telyanin's arm and almost
"Come if you need anything. One can at least be of use on the staff..."
"Come in, Mary," he said to his wife.
"Come in, come in!" he added to the princess.
"Come in, come in!" he repeated in a gentle whisper. "Oh, what can I do
"Come inside, your honor!" repeated the tradesman, bowing.
"Come into my study," said Nicholas.
"Come into the courtyard or you'll be seen; she'll come out directly,"
"Come nearer, come nearer, friend! I used to be the only one to tell
"Come now! You with all your forces fall on the unfortunate Mortier
"Come now, Count, you know!"
"Come now, deal!" exclaimed Rostov.
"Come now, just this one more little card!"
"Come now, this is stupid. What?" said Anatole, fingering a button of
"Come now, what about your Roi de Prusse?"
"Come on then," cried Pierre. "Come on!... And we'll take Bruin with
"Come over here, Helene, dear," said Anna Pavlovna to the beautiful
"Come to the mistress, please," said the footman in his deep bass,
"Come to your Papa at once, please!" said she with a strange, excited
"Come! Balaga is here."
"Come! Come with me, we'll have a talk," said he.
"Come, Anna Makarovna," Pierre's voice was heard saying, "come here into
"Come, I will go with you. Try to weep, nothing gives such relief as
"Come, Pelageya, I was joking," said Pierre. "Princesse, ma parole,
"Come, and you'll see for yourself."
"Come, come to him, Mary," said Natasha, leading her into the other
"Come, come!" said he. "Here's a fine warrior! No! Nonsense! You must
"Come, come!" she said, not letting go of his arm. And they went to
"Come, come, Natasha!" said the count, as he turned back for his
"Come, dear princess," said Mademoiselle Bourienne, "just one more
"Come, get on! You shall have three rubles for vodka--get on!" Rostov
"Come, go in there and drive them out!" shouted the senior officer.
"Come, let's argue then," said Prince Andrew, "You talk of schools," he
"Come, my dear Anna Mikhaylovna, let Catiche do as she pleases. You know
"Come, that's right, Count!" cried the staff captain, turning round and
"Come, what's the matter, old fellow?" said Nesvitski trying to soothe
"Come," said the doctor.
"Coming, friend."
"Commander in Chief Kutuzov?" said the newly arrived general speaking
"Commander of the third company wanted by the general!... commander to
"Commit ourselves to God," Natasha inwardly repeated. "Lord God, I
"Compassion, love of our brothers, for those who love us and for those
"Comtesse, a tout peche misericorde," * said a fair-haired young man
"Confound him, he's a fool!" said Rostov.
"Confound you and your Karl Ivanich!" He took the glass with the drops
"Connaissez-vous le Proverbe: * 'Jerome, Jerome, do not roam, but turn
"Consider my position, Peter Nikolaevich. Were I in the cavalry I should
"Corporal, what will they do with the sick man?..." Pierre began.
"Cossack!" she said threateningly.
"Couldn't one get a book?" he asked.
"Count Ilya Rostov's son?" asked Dolgorukov.
"Count Lichtenfels was here this morning," Bilibin continued, "and
"Count Peter Kirilovich! How did you get here?" said a voice.
"Count Rostov asks you to come to dinner today," said he, after a
"Count Rostov."
"Count Zhilinski--le Comte N. N.--le Capitaine S. S.," said he,
"Count! Count!" shouted Berg who ran up from the other side as eager
"Count! One God is above us both!"--Vereshchagin's words suddenly
"Count! Your excellency, how come you to be here?" asked the doctor.
"Count!" exclaimed the timid yet theatrical voice of Vereshchagin in the
"Count!... Don't ruin a young fellow... here is this wretched money,
"Count, be so good as to allow me... for God's sake, to get into some
"Count, is it wrong of me to sing?" she said blushing, and fixing her
"Count..." said Telyanin drawing nearer to him.
"Countess Apraksina, poor thing, has lost her husband and she has cried
"Countess Natasha," answered Denisov.
"Countess, I have done w'ong," Denisov went on in an unsteady voice,
"Countess..." said Denisov, with downcast eyes and a guilty face. He
"Courage, courage, my friend! He has asked to see you. That is well!"
"Cousinage--dangereux voisinage;" * she added.
"Cover yourself!" even Denisov cried to his adversary.
"Crazy?" repeated Natasha.
"Crew, to your guns!" commanded the officer.
"Cut him down! I command it..." shouted Rostopchin, suddenly growing
"Daniel!" Nicholas said timidly, conscious at the sight of the weather,
"Darkness and gloom," reiterated Pierre: "yes, yes, I understand that."
"Darling Denisov!" screamed Natasha, beside herself with rapture,
"Darling Mummy, how I love you! How happy I am!" cried Natasha, shedding
"De Bal-macheve!" said the King (overcoming by his assurance the
"Dead, I fancy. Eh, Makeev?" queried the doctor, in a tone of
"Deal with him as you think fit! I hand him over to you."
"Dear Brothers," he began, blushing and stammering, with a written
"Dear Countess, what an age... She has been laid up, poor child...
"Dear Natalie," said Princess Mary, "I want you to know that I am glad
"Dear count, you must let me look after your daughters! Though I am not
"Dear doctor," said she, "this young man is the count's son. Is there
"Dear me! Mamma, Sonya, look, it's he!"
"Dear me! Then what are you up to now?"
"Dear me! there's no recognizing them! And Natasha! See whom she looks
"Dear me!" said Rostov.
"Dear me!" said his father, who was in a specially good humor. "I told
"Dear me, Michael Kirilovich has grown still stouter!" remarked the
"Dear me, can I have forgotten? No, I remember thinking that you kept
"Dear me, how jolly we are!" said Rostov laughing.
"Dear me, how you have changed!"
"Dear one... Dearest..." Princess Mary could not quite make out what he
"Dear people, good Christians, save me, help me, dear friends... help
"Dear princess, I beg and implore you, have some pity on him! Je vous en
"Dear, dear! But still tell him to come to the Club--it will all blow
"Dear, dear! Just look at her!" exclaimed the countess as she crossed
"Dear-est!" she repeated again.
"Dearest, I'm afraid this morning's fruschtique *--as Foka the cook
"Dearest," said the little princess after breakfast on the morning of
"Dearest... and me!"
"Decision? What decision? Old dotard!..." cried he. "What have you been
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
"Delightful!" said Bolkonski. "But I have come to you, Prince, as a
"Demosthenes, I know thee by the pebble thou secretest in thy golden
"Denisov! We're here! He's asleep," he added, leaning forward with his
"Denisov, don't make fun of it!" cried Rostov. "It is such a lofty,
"Denisov, let him alone, I know who has taken it," said Rostov, going
"Der Krieg muss in Raum verlegt werden. Der Ansicht kann ich nicht genug
"Dere has neffer been a gase," a German doctor was saying to an
"Despite my great respect for old Kutuzov," he continued, "we should be
"Devil take 'em!" he muttered, while his head was still covered by the
"Devil take all these peasants, and money matters, and carryings forward
"Devil take it!" said the voice of a man stumbling over something.
"Devil take them!" he muttered, and after listening to the verbal
"Did you get here quickly? Let us go to his Highness."
"Did you hear of the last event at the review in Petersburg? The figure
"Did you promise to marry her?"
"Did you see? Did you? What was it?" exclaimed Natasha, holding up the
"Did your mother tell you that it cannot be for a year?" asked Prince
"Didn't I explain to you? What?" And Anatole, with the partiality
"Dieu sait quand reviendra. Go to the dining room."
"Dieu sait quand reviendra..." hummed the prince out of tune and, with a
"Dieu! Mon Dieu!" muttered Anna Pavlovna in a terrified whisper.
"Directly! Directly! And you, Mamma?"
"Directly!"
"Discharge me, little mother, for God's sake! Order the keys to be taken
"Dispositions for an attack on the enemy position behind Kobelnitz and
"Dites donc, le colonel Gerard est ici?" * he asked.
"Dmitri," said Rostov to his valet on the box, "those lights are in our
"Do I remember Nicholas?"
"Do come."
"Do help me out, Theodore Ivanych, sir," or "your excellency," he would
"Do just come and see what a moon!... Oh, how lovely! Come here....
"Do make me acquainted with your charming daughters," said she. "The
"Do not let us lose any time..."
"Do not think, however," she wrote, "that my father is ill-disposed
"Do order them to form into battalion columns and go round the village!"
"Do promise, do promise, Vasili!" cried Anna Mikhaylovna as he went,
"Do stop joking, Bilibin," cried Bolkonski.
"Do this for my sake, mon cher; after all, she had to put up with a
"Do us the honor to come in, there's plenty of everything in the
"Do you believe in a future life?" he asked.
"Do you expect me to give you two battalions--which we have not got--for
"Do you hear how he's walking?" said Tikhon, drawing the architect's
"Do you hear?" he asked. Petya recognized the sound of Russian voices
"Do you know I have entrusted him with our secret? I have known him from
"Do you know her? She's thin, with long teeth," said Pierre.
"Do you know her?" asked Pierre.
"Do you know what I am thinking about?" she asked. "About Platon
"Do you know what it's about?" Petya asked Natasha.
"Do you know, I really believe she is un petit peu amoureuse du jeune
"Do you know, Mary, what I've been thinking?" he began, immediately
"Do you know, Mary..." Natasha suddenly said with a mischievous smile
"Do you know, Rapp, what military art is?" asked he. "It is the art of
"Do you know, dear boy," began the governor's wife with a serious
"Do you know, mon cher," said Bilibin following him, "I have been
"Do you know, one Christmas I drove from Tver," said Anatole, smilingly
"Do you know, that fat Pierre who sat opposite me is so funny!" said
"Do you know, you are a terrible chap for all your innocent airs,"
"Do you know," he said at last, evidently unable to check the sad
"Do you know," said Natasha in a whisper, moving closer to Nicholas and
"Do you know? You'd really better drop it all. There's still time!"
"Do you know?" said Pierre, as if suddenly struck by a happy thought,
"Do you like him?"
"Do you love me?"
"Do you or do you not know where that will is?" insisted Prince Vasili,
"Do you play then?" asked Natasha.
"Do you really not recognize her?"
"Do you recognize him?" said he. "And where has he sprung from?" he
"Do you remember him?" Natasha suddenly asked, after a moment's silence.
"Do you remember me?" asked Boris quietly with a pleasant smile. "I have
"Do you remember we had a talk about cards... 'He's a fool who trusts to
"Do you remember, sire, what you did me the honor to say at Smolensk?"
"Do you see?... My doll... Mimi... You see..." was all Natasha managed
"Do you speak French?" the officer asked again, keeping at a distance
"Do you take vodka, Count?" asked Princess Mary, and those words
"Do you think he can last till morning?" asked the German, addressing
"Do you think so?... Really? Truly?" she said, quickly smoothing her
"Do you understand what you're saying?" he said in a trembling voice.
"Do you understand, damn you?" shouted a voice, and Pierre woke up.
"Do you want anything?"
"Do you want to be doing the same?" said an old soldier, turning
"Do, please, for heaven's sake, relieve me of something!" said the
"Does he love me?" Natasha repeated with a smile of pity at her friend's
"Does he love you?"
"Does it ever happen to you," said Natasha to her brother, when they
"Does it matter, Count, how the Note is worded," he asked, "so long as
"Doesn't he? But I didn't invent it myself."
"Dolokhov, Mary Ivanovna's son," she said in a mysterious whisper, "has
"Don't answer like that, my good girl!" she said. "What I say is true!
"Don't be hurt, my dear fellow; you know I speak from my heart as to an
"Don't be unkind," cried Anna Pavlovna from her end of the table holding
"Don't call him bad!" said Natasha. "But I don't know, don't know at
"Don't come in," she said to the old count who was following her. "Come
"Don't do it without me!" called Natasha. "You won't do it right."
"Don't fire.... Wait!" he shouted.
"Don't joke; I mean to have a serious talk with you. Do you know I am
"Don't kick up the dust, you infantry!" jested an hussar whose prancing
"Don't laugh, stop!" cried Natasha. "You're shaking the whole bed!
"Don't like bowwowing from my own fellows, I don't," growled Denisov.
"Don't look at me, Mamma! Don't look; I shall cry directly."
"Don't mention it, General, as if I'd be so bold!" replied the captain,
"Don't mess Mary Hendrikhovna's dress!" cried other voices.
"Don't play the fool!" said Denisov, coughing angrily. "Why didn't you
"Don't put it in so carelessly," said one of the peasants, a man with a
"Don't say it! I can't bear it!" Natasha cried, and her eyes glittered
"Don't say such things to me. I am betrothed and love another," she said
"Don't say that to me! I want nothing. I love you as a brother and
"Don't speak to me like that. I am not worth it!" exclaimed Natasha and
"Don't speak to me of that! What can I do?" said he. "I tell you I
"Don't speak to me... I beg you," muttered Pierre hoarsely.
"Don't talk Russian," said Dolokhov in a hurried whisper, and at that
"Don't talk about it, Natasha. It wasn't your fault so why should you
"Don't talk nonsense!" cried Marya Dmitrievna.
"Don't talk rubbish..." said Prince Andrew, smiling and looking into
"Don't tease! Well, and what has been decided about Novosiltsev's
"Don't touch him! You'll startle him and then he'll be killed. Eh?...
"Don't touch me," said Rostov, drawing back. "If you need it, take the
"Don't trouble about me," said Pierre. "I'll go up onto the knoll if I
"Don't you like it?" said a laughing voice, and moderating their tones
"Don't you want to? Well, then, come here," said she, and went further
"Don't! Don't! What are you about?" whispered their frightened voices.
"Don't, Boris! You are such a diplomat that it is really tiresome," said
"Don't, Mary Nikolievna!" said her husband to her in a low voice,
"Don't, Natasha! Leave it alone! We'll get it all packed," urged Sonya
"Don't, Natasha! Pray to God. 'Marriages are made in heaven,'" said her
"Don't, Natasha! What nonsense!" she said, hoping it was a joke.
"Done for!" he said with a frown, and went to the gate to meet Denisov
"Done for!" repeated Dolokhov as if the utterance of these words
"Drain the blood from men's veins and put in water instead, then there
"Dram-da-da-dam, dam-dam..." rattled the drums, and Pierre understood
"Draw sabers!" cried the dragoon officer, drawing his own.
"Dronushka, Alpatych has gone off somewhere and I have no one to turn
"Dronushka," she said, regarding as a sure friend this Dronushka who
"Drubetskoy has proposed?"
"Drubetskoy."
"Du sublime (he saw something sublime in himself) au ridicule il n'y
"Dunyasha, send Alpatych, or Dronushka, or somebody to me!" she said,
"Dunyasha, you pack! You will, won't you, dear?" And when Dunyasha
"Dunyasha," she whispered. "Dunyasha!" she screamed wildly, and tearing
"Early tomorrow I shall go to his Serene Highness," he read ("Sirin
"Educate this bear for me! He has been staying with me a whole month
"Eh, Dron, drop it!" Alpatych repeated, withdrawing his hand from his
"Eh, Dron, it will turn out badly!" he said, shaking his head.
"Eh, Makeev! What has become of you, you son of a bitch? Are you lost or
"Eh, books, books!" said another peasant, bringing out Prince Andrew's
"Eh, brother! They've all bolted long ago!" said the soldier, laughing
"Eh, eh, friend! Come here a bit," said she, assuming a soft high tone
"Eh, is anything hurting you?" asked the soldier, shaking his shirt out
"Eh, is she pretty?" he asked with a wink.
"Eh, lad, don't fret!" said he, in the tender singsong caressing voice
"Eh, mounseer, Russian sauce seems to be sour to a Frenchman... sets his
"Eh, sir, this is no place for you," said he, and ran down the slope.
"Eh, what twaddle!" said one of them, a thin, stern-looking man. "When
"Eh, who's there? Come in, come in! What news?" the field marshal called
"Eh, you rascal!" Pierre heard the same kind voice saying at the other
"Eh? Don't talk nonsense!" said a sergeant major.
"Eh? Nonsense! He sees well enough," said Prince Vasili rapidly, in a
"Eh? Really... what do you think? Should we let them go on or not?"
"Eh? What?" asked Prince Andrew.
"Eh? Yes, I heard something: he said something awkward in His Majesty's
"Eh?" murmured Platon, who had almost fallen asleep. "What was I saying?
"Either black is particularly becoming to her or she really has greatly
"Enchantress," which he had composed, and to which he was trying to fit
"Encouraging us to get along quicker," said another uneasily.
"England is done for," said he, scowling and pointing his finger at
"Enough! What nonsense! Above all, try to be respectful and cautious
"Erza, darling!" Ilagin wailed in a voice unlike his own. Erza did not
"Especially such a capital fellow as Bezukhov!" In Natasha's eyes all
"Even divorce you?" said he.
"Even if it were a great deal of trouble..." answered Prince Andrew, as
"Even then he wanted to tell me what he told me the day he died," she
"Every country has its own character," said he.
"Everybody sees that things are going so badly that they cannot be
"Everyone has his Achilles' heel," continued Prince Andrew. "Fancy, with
"Everything has been spoiled, everything muddled, everybody thought they
"Everything's still the same with them," thought Nicholas, glancing into
"Everything's the same with them. They know nothing about it! Where am I
"Exactly, not a hair's breadth farther," answered Prince Vasili,
"Excuse me!" she said.
"Excuse me, General," interrupted Kutuzov, also turning to Prince
"Excuse me, your excellency," he began. (He was well acquainted with
"Excuse my coming to you, cousin," she said in a reproachful and
"Extend widely!" said Prince Andrew with an angry snort, when they had
"Fancy the Emperor's position!" said they, and instead of extolling
"Faster!" came the word of command, and Rostov felt Rook's flanks
"Father! Andrew!"--said the ungraceful, awkward princess with such an
"Father! Angel! Dear one!" she kept repeating, wiping away her tears
"Father! Benefactor! God has sent you!" exclaimed deeply moved voices as
"Father, I did not want to judge," said Prince Andrew, in a hard and
"Father, tell me how it happened," she asked through her tears.
"Father," she said, "do not turn away from me, let us weep together."
"Fetch them back, fetch them back!" said Count Orlov with sudden
"Filez, filez!" * Dolokhov kept saying, having adopted this expression
"Fine doings!" answered Dmitrievna. "For fifty-eight years have I lived
"Fine fellows!" said Rostov laughing. "Is there any hay here?"
"Fine fellows, the Pavlograds!" remarked the Emperor.
"Fine men!" remarked Napoleon, looking at a dead Russian grenadier,
"Fine young fellow! Fine young fellow!" he said. "Well, come and kiss
"Fine! Just like the Frenchie! Oh, ho ho! Do you want some more to eat?"
"Fine, very fine! You have done up your hair in this new way for the
"Finished, finished!" little Natasha's gleeful yell rose above them all.
"First of all you must drink!"
"First of all, dear friend, tell me how you are. Set your friend's mind
"First, notepaper--do you hear? Eight quires, like this sample,
"First-rate," said Pierre, looking at Dolokhov, who with a bottle of rum
"Flesh, bodies, cannon fodder!" he thought, and he looked at his own
"Fo'ward, with God, lads!" rang out Denisov's voice. "At a twot
"Folly... folly! Death... lies..." he repeated, puckering his face.
"Fool! Idiot!" shouted Pierre, abusing his coachman--a thing he rarely
"Fool, I told you the sable one! Hey, Matrena, the sable!" he shouted so
"Fool," retorted Anatole. "Don't talk nonsense! If you only knew... it's
"Fool... or dummy!" he muttered.
"For God's sake, Sonya, don't tell anyone, don't torture me," Natasha
"For caustique--I am guilty and will pay, and I am prepared to pay again
"For her I might as well not exist!" thought Prince Andrew while he
"For me? For me?... Trying for me!..." said she.
"For not dilly-dallying and not hanging to a woman's apron strings. The
"For the dissemination of pure truth and to secure the triumph
"For the last time I say to you--turn all your attention upon yourself,
"For the peace that is from above, and for the salvation of our souls."
"For the world of angels and all the spirits who dwell above us," prayed
"For tomorrow!" said he, quickly finding the page and making a scratch
"For what have you come hither?" asked the newcomer, turning in Pierre's
"For you'll admit that if we don't know for sure how many of them there
"Forage has not been supplied to the extent..."
"Forever?" said Prince Andrew. "Nothing's forever."
"Forever?" said the little girl. "Till death itself?"
"Forfeit, forfeit!" cried the militia officer.
"Forfeit, forfeit, forfeit!"
"Forgive me for troubling you..."
"Forgive me for what I ha-ve do-ne!" faltered Natasha in a scarcely
"Forgive me!"
"Forgive me!" he said. "But you are so young, and I have already been
"Forgive me!" she whispered, raising her head and glancing at him.
"Forgive what?" he asked.
"Forgive...!"
"Form column! Prepare to charge!"
"Forward, lads!" he shouted in a voice piercing as a child's.
"Forward, with God!" said Bagration, in a resolute, sonorous voice,
"Fr... fr..." snorted Prince Bolkonski. "The prince is making a
"French dresses, French ideas, French feelings! There now, you turned
"Friendship laughs at distance," began Prince Vasili in his usual rapid,
"From Dokhturov and from Alexey Petrovich. Napoleon is at Forminsk,"
"From Durrenstein to Krems."
"From General Field Marshal Kutuzov?" he asked. "I hope it is good news?
"From Heloise?" asked the prince with a cold smile that showed his still
"From the direction, it must be the enemy," repeated Rostov.
"From the general," said the officer. "Please excuse its not being quite
"From the governor," said Lavrushka in a sleepy voice. "A courier has
"From what I have heard," said Pierre, blushing and breaking into the
"From where to where, Your Majesty?"
"From whom did you get this?" she asked.
"Gabions must be sent for," said he sternly.
"Gave him leave? Leave? That's just like you young men," said the
"Gee up, my darlings!" shouted Nicholas, pulling the reins to one side
"General Kutuzov," said Bolkonski, speaking French and stressing the
"General, I must obey orders, but I am not bound to endure..." Dolokhov
"Gentlemen!" said the Emperor with a quivering voice.
"Gentlemen, I thank you all; all arms have behaved heroically: infantry,
"Gentlemen, I'll do anything. No one shall hear a word from me," said
"Gentlemen, the dispositions for tomorrow--or rather for today, for it
"Gentlemen, who wishes to bet with me? I'll do the same thing!" he
"Gentlemen, you are crushing me!..."
"Gentlemen," said Dolokhov after he had dealt for some time. "Please
"Gentlemen," said Kutuzov, "I cannot approve of the count's plan. Moving
"Gently, gently! Can't you do it more gently?" said the Emperor
"Get along... Falling? What are you stopping for? There now..."
"Get him to his place and give him some water," said Rostov, pointing to
"Get in with me," said he to Bolkonski.
"Get in," said Kutuzov, and noticing that Bolkonski still delayed, he
"Get into step, Fedor... I say, Fedor!" said the foremost peasant.
"Get onto the ice, over the ice! Go on! Turn! Don't you hear? Go on!"
"Get over what?" inquired Pierre, looking displeased.
"Get well soon, lads!" he continued, turning to the soldiers. "There's
"Give him a seat," said Tushin. "Lay a cloak for him to sit on, lad,"
"Give him some porridge: it takes a long time to get filled up after
"Give it to him, then," said Anatole.
"Give it to the peasants, let them have all they need; I give you leave
"Give me a biscuit, you devil!"
"Give me my thimble, Miss, from there..."
"Give me that letter," said Kutuzov turning to Prince Andrew. "Please
"Give me time to collect my wits, Father," said he, with a smile that
"Give me your hand," said he and, turning it over so as to feel the
"Give them that corn if there is enough of it. Distribute it all. I
"Give this to the countess... if you see her."
"Glad to do our best!" shouted the soldiers.
"Glad to do our best, your ex'len-lency!" came a confused shout from
"Go across to our hosts: they invited you," added Boris.
"Go and choose Denisov. He is a real dancer, a wonder!" he said.
"Go and get it for me," said the old prince to Mademoiselle Bourienne.
"Go away! Go away! You all hate and despise me!" and she threw herself
"Go away, Princess! Go away... go away!"
"Go away..." exclaimed Napoleon suddenly and morosely, and turned aside.
"Go in, Annette, or you will catch cold," said the little princess,
"Go on! Go on! Give it them!" he mentally exclaimed at these sounds,
"Go on! What the devil... Go on! Thirty thousand devils!..." the convoy
"Go on, Uncle dear," Natasha wailed in an imploring tone as if her life
"Go on, go on!" said the major.
"Go on, you must drink it all," said Anatole, giving Pierre the last
"Go over that way, they're there. It's she! She kept on lamenting and
"Go to Petersburg, that will be best. And I will write to you," she
"Go to the devil! quick ma'ch, while you're safe and sound!" and Denisov
"Go to the devil!" cried Anatole and, clutching his hair, left the room,
"Go your way and God be with you. I know your path is the path of
"Go! Go! Killed in battle, where the best of Russian men and Russia's
"Go!" he cried, twisting the reins round his hands, and the troyka tore
"Go!" he repeated, amazed at himself and glad to see the look of
"Go!" the quivering voice repeated. And Prince Vasili had to go without
"Go, Natasha! I will call you," said the countess in a whisper.
"Go, Tit! Thresh a bit!"
"Go, Tit, thresh a bit!" said the wag.
"Go, dear," said Princess Mary.
"Go, go quickly," the old man urged him.
"Go, go to him. He is asking for your hand," said the countess,
"Go, go! Before a battle one must have one's sleep out," repeated Prince
"Go, ma'am! Don't worry, go!" she whispered, smiling, with the kind of
"Go, my dear fellow, and see whether the third division has passed the
"Go, my dear fellow, go... and Christ be with you!" Kutuzov was
"Go, my dear fellow," he said to Ermolov, "and see whether something
"Go," he said, nodding his head to Alpatych, and began questioning the
"God Almighty alone can decide the fate of our fatherland, Papa," said
"God be thanked that you are in time," said she to one of the priests;
"God be with you, general!" said the Emperor.
"God grant it! God grant it!" said Anna Pavlovna.
"God grant only that Prince Kutuzov assumes real power and does not
"God has nothing to do with it! Well, go on," he continued, returning to
"God have mercy.... It's windy and dry..." said another voice.
"God is in the midst, and each drop tries to expand so as to reflect
"God is merciful, birdie."
"God is merciful, doctors are never needed," she said.
"God of our fathers! Remember Thy bounteous mercy and loving-kindness
"Going already?" said he.
"Going on?" Pierre exclaimed. "Why more than ever! The Bible Society is
"Going?" And he went on writing.
"Gone away," said Ermolov's orderly.
"Gone to bed," replied the voice of Demyan the house steward, who was
"Gone to bed?" asked the prince.
"Gone? That's all right!" said he; and looking angrily at the
"Good day, General!" said he. "I have received the letter you brought
"Good day, your excellency!" he said, again holding out his hand to
"Good day, your honor!" he shouted, rolling his eyes at Rostov and
"Good evening, gentlemen," said Dolokhov.
"Good health..."
"Good luck to you!"
"Good morning, Uncle! We are going too!" shouted Petya.
"Good morning, Uncle!" said Nicholas, when the old man drew near.
"Good morning, good morning! But don't go overriding the hounds," said
"Good morning, lads!" said the count briskly and loudly. "Thank you for
"Good news!... Go on!" he shouted to the driver, and they galloped on.
"Good night, Lise," said he, rising and courteously kissing her hand as
"Good!" said Murat and, turning to one of the gentlemen in his suite,
"Good!" said the Rhetor quickly, apparently satisfied with this answer.
"Good-by!" he said and turned with his groom toward the inn.
"Good-by, Andrew! Remember that misfortunes come from God, and men are
"Good-by, Count," she said aloud. "I shall look forward very much to
"Good-by, Peter Kirilych!" Pierre heard the other voices repeat.
"Good-by, Princess!" said he.
"Good-by, dear niece," his voice called out of the darkness--not the
"Good-by, my dear fellow," said Tushin. "Dear soul! Good-by, my dear
"Good-by, my dear fellow.... His words are music, I never tire of
"Good-by, my dear," said she to the countess who saw her to the door,
"Good-by."
"Goodness gracious! See her knife?..."
"Got it?" said Nicholas.
"Gott, wie naiv!" * said he angrily, after he had gone a few steps.
"Gracious heavens! The young count!" he cried, recognizing his
"Granddad." She was nearest to him and saw how his face puckered; he
"Grapeshot!" the senior shouted, without answering the question, looking
"Grounds of personal ambition maybe," Speranski put in quietly.
"H-o-o-w are you standing? Where's your leg? Your leg?" shouted the
"Ha ha ha! The theater of war!" said the prince. "I have said and still
"Ha, ha, ha! Bravo, Nicholas Ivanych! Ha, ha, ha!"
"Ha, ha, ha!" The Frenchman emitted a merry, sanguine chuckle, patting
"Ha, what's this?" asked Napoleon, noticing that all the courtiers were
"Ha-ha-ha!" laughed Pierre. And he said aloud to himself: "The soldier
"Had I seen her before as she is now," thought Nicholas, "I should long
"Had there been no Bagration, it would have been necessary to invent
"Hadn't I better ride over, your excellency?" asked Nesvitski.
"Hallo, Gwiska--my pipe!" came Vasili Denisov's husky voice. "Wostov,
"Hallo, mate! Never again? Gave you a twist?" the Cossacks would banter
"Halt! Dress your ranks!" the order of the regimental commander was
"Hand it in. It seems..."
"Handsome, isn't she?" he whispered to Natasha.
"Hard as this year which delays my happiness will be," continued Prince
"Hardly," said Bagration. "I saw them this evening on that knoll; if
"Hark at them roaring there in the Fifth Company!" said one of the
"Has Prince Vasili aged much?" asked the countess. "I have not seen him
"Has anything come from Andrew?" she asked.
"Has anything happened?" she asked. "I am so terrified."
"Has he been married long?" she asked. "On your honor?..."
"Has he come?" Natasha asked quickly in a whisper, afraid to move lest
"Has he taken his medicine?"
"Has the enemy entered the city?" he asked.
"Has the snow been shoveled back?"
"Hasn't been in since the evening. Must have been losing," answered
"Have some brought from the reserve," said Napoleon, and having gone on
"Have the biscuits and rice been served out to the regiments of the
"Have they surrendered my ancient capital without a battle?" asked the
"Have you a complaint to make?" Kutuzov asked with a slight frown.
"Have you any letters of hers? Any letters?" he said, moving toward
"Have you any news of the Rostovs?" she asked, to change the subject.
"Have you been here long, Countess?" he inquired. "I'll call, I'll call
"Have you brought me sad news, Colonel?"
"Have you done this?" he said, pointing to some broken sealing wax and
"Have you heard the password?" asked one Guards' officer of another.
"Have you known that young man long, Princess?" he asked.
"Have you lost anyone, my dear fellow? You're of the gentry yourself,
"Have you never thought of marrying your prodigal son Anatole?" she
"Have you seen the princess?" she asked, indicating with a movement of
"Have you sought for means of attaining your aim in religion?"
"Have you told her?" asked Natasha, suddenly beaming all over with joy.
"Have you told them to bring the horse?" asked Telyanin, getting up and
"Have you?" he said. "Well, how did it go?"
"Haven't I said I'm not going to gwovel?" Denisov interrupted him, went
"Haven't I told you I won't give them up?" replied Denisov.
"Haven't you robbed people enough--taking their last shirts?" said a
"He always was rather harsh; and now I should think he's getting very
"He chose his friends badly," interposed Anna Mikhaylovna. "Prince
"He could not do that. The people only gave him power that he might rid
"He could not marry, for he was married already," said Pierre.
"He did not shut me up, he said I was telling an untruth."
"He did," replied Shinshin. "He was in the Caucasus and ran away from
"He does not look like a common man," said the interpreter, after a
"He doesn't obey... I said it twice... and he doesn't obey! She is the
"He doesn't play that part right!" said "Uncle" suddenly, with an
"He exists, but to understand Him is hard," the Mason began again,
"He gave me no instructions. I think I could?" he returned, inquiringly.
"He had another stroke about half an hour ago. Courage, my friend..."
"He has been set down. He died," replied someone.
"He has been very unwell since the evening and this is the third night
"He has betrayed his Tsar and his country, he has gone over to
"He has forty thousand men at most," replied Weyrother, with the smile
"He has gone to Peters... But I don't know," said Pierre.
"He has made wills enough!" quietly remarked the princess. "But he
"He has perspired," said Prince Andrew.
"He has spoken? Yes? He has spoken?" she repeated.
"He has stopped Austria's cackle and I fear it will be our turn next."
"He has weported himself sick, he's to be stwuck off the list tomowwow,"
"He higher iss dan I in rank," said the German colonel of the hussars,
"He is Minister of War, a man trusted by the Emperor, and I need not
"He is a Russian spy," Davout interrupted, addressing another general
"He is a great tactician!" said the prince to his son, pointing to the
"He is a little better today," said he. "I was looking for you. One can
"He is a man in a gray overcoat, very anxious that I should call him
"He is a nervous, bilious subject," said Larrey, "and will not recover."
"He is a son of Marya Ivanovna Dolokhova, such a worthy woman, but
"He is a very, very nice, honest, and pleasant fellow," answered Boris.
"He is better than any of you!" exclaimed Natasha getting up. "If you
"He is downstairs. Natasha is with him," answered Sonya, flushing. "We
"He is dozing," said Anna Mikhaylovna, observing that one of the
"He is good and kind and I am fond of him!" he thought of Dessalles.
"He is here now: tell him... to for... forgive me!" She stopped and
"He is just the same as ever," replied Anna Mikhaylovna, "overflowing
"He is leaving me here, God knows why, when he might have had
"He is my refuge! His will be done!" he exclaimed.
"He is my uncle, your Sewene Highness."
"He is no more...."
"He is not to be apprehended by reason, but by life," said the Mason.
"He is one of the most remarkable, but to me most unpleasant of men--the
"He is sleeping well as it is, after a sleepless night."
"He is so well received everywhere. He might easily become aide-de-camp
"He is the enemy of mankind!" cried another. "Allow me to speak...."
"He is very much altered now," said Anna Mikhaylovna. "Well, as I was
"He is warming himself there by the bonfire. Ho, Vesenya!
"He knows all about it," said Marya Dmitrievna pointing to Pierre and
"He knows of course what this loss means to me. He can't want my ruin.
"He left long ago. She has been at death's door."
"He lets one win the singles and collahs it as soon as one doubles it;
"He must first receive the trowel," whispered one of the brothers.
"He must keep order, keep the law, that's what the government is there
"He ought to have acted in this way and in that way. In this case he did
"He says 'a woman,' and Mary Nikolievna is a lady," remarked a house
"He says he expected it," she remarked. "I know his pride will not let
"He sees well enough," he added. "And what I am so pleased about," he
"He should pay folks off properly," a thin workingman, with frowning
"He shouldn't have taken so many men," said the officer of the suite.
"He visits them?"
"He wants to see a battle," said Zherkov to Bolkonski, pointing to the
"He was a very clever man but has now grown quite feeble, as your honor
"He was gray, you remember, and had white teeth, and stood and looked at
"He was here a minute ago but has just gone that way," someone told him,
"He was not always old. But this is what I'll do, Natasha, I'll have a
"He was taken today but he knows nothing. I'm keeping him with me."
"He will get up in twenty minutes. Let us go across to Mary's room," he
"He will have to be told, all the same," said some gentlemen of the
"He writes about this war," said the prince, with the ironic smile that
"He! dishonorable? If you only knew!" exclaimed Natasha.
"He'll get away!" said the esaul, screwing up his eyes.
"He'll make them get a move on, those fellows!" said another, laughing.
"He'll manage to walk, devil take him!" said the captain. "Pass on, pass
"He's a German, but a nice fellow all the same.... But he's a German."
"He's a creature that wriggles in anywhere!" was the answer. "He
"He's a low fellow, say what you will," remarked Prince Hippolyte.
"He's a smart lad," said an hussar standing near Petya. "We gave him
"He's begun to go a little lame on the left foreleg," he added.
"He's chosen already," said Nicholas smiling.
"He's come!" she exclaimed as she ran past, and Denisov felt that he too
"He's come, ma'am," whispered the nurse.
"He's coming! He's coming!" shouted a Cossack standing at the gate.
"He's coming!" shouted the signaler at that moment.
"He's cook to some prince."
"He's dead--why carry him?" said another.
"He's done her to death. Killed the mistress!... Beat her... dragged her
"He's having a little fun at my expense," said Ermolov softly, nudging
"He's our plastun. I sent him to capture a 'tongue.'"
"He's very young to come to meddle with us."
"He's with the army, Father, at Smolensk."
"He? He's crazy... he did not want to listen. But what's the use
"He? That's a tradesman, that is to say, he's the restaurant
"Health and happiness to her whose name day we are keeping and to her
"Health, at a time like this?" said the count. "Come, tell us the news!
"Hear the firing," said the groom, a discharged soldier. "All the
"Heaven only knows what the people here may imagine," muttered Telyanin,
"Heaven only knows, my dear! These rich grandees are so selfish. Still,
"Heavens! I was quite forgetting!" he suddenly cried. "I have some
"Heavens! what a virulent attack!" replied the prince, not in the
"Helene!" he said aloud and paused.
"Helene, I have a word to say to you," and he would lead her
"Helene, who has never cared for anything but her own body and is one
"Help comes from God alone," he said, "but such measure of help as
"Help him up. Sit down, dear fellow, sit down! Spread out the cloak,
"Her father is very rich and stingy. He lives in the country. He is the
"Her niece, Princess Bolkonskaya. She is here in Voronezh with her aunt.
"Here are her letters and her portrait," said he.
"Here at least we shall have the benefit of your company all to
"Here he is at last!" shouted Rostov. "And Berg too! Oh, you
"Here he is... our own... Kolya, * dear fellow... How he has changed!...
"Here is our dear Orthodox Russian army," thought Bolkonski, recalling
"Here is some sort of Key to the Mysteries that your Heloise has sent
"Here is the dispatch," said Bolkhovitinov. "My orders are to give it at
"Here it is! The decisive moment has arrived. My turn has come," thought
"Here it is!" thought he, seizing the staff of the standard and hearing
"Here it's tolerable," said he, "but with Bagration on the left flank
"Here she is, the reward for all those fainthearted men," he reflected,
"Here's a cap, lads!" shouted a Preobrazhensk soldier, donning a shaggy
"Here's something for you to report," said Zherkov. "See if I don't get
"Here's to the health of lovely women, Peterkin--and their lovers!" he
"Here, I don't grudge it--take it!" she said, evidently afraid of her
"Here, eat a bit, sir," said he, resuming his former respectful tone as
"Here, in that house," answered the adjutant.
"Here, take the child!" said Pierre peremptorily and hurriedly to the
"Here, you of the Sixth Company! Devils that you are! Lend a hand...
"Here. What lightning!" they called to one another.
"Herself," came the answer in a rough voice, and Marya Dmitrievna
"Hey, Cossack, my horse!" he said. "Now, then, you there! get out of the
"Hey, look at the trace horse!... Get her leg out! She'll fall.... Ah,
"Highly satisfied, your excellency!"
"Him... I want him... now, this minute! I want him!" said Natasha, with
"His Majesty drew attention to the Grenadier division and to the march
"His excellency is staying in the same house with them."
"Hit him with an ax, eh!... Crushed?... Traitor, he sold Christ....
"Hm! Hm!" muttered the prince, sitting down.
"Hm!--his excellency is a puppy.... I got him his appointment in the
"Hm... Hm...!" growled Pierre, frowning without looking at her, and not
"Hm... Hm..." muttered the old prince to himself, finishing what he was
"Hm..." said the count, and stopped.
"Hm.... If you wish to kill him, to kill him outright, you can see
"Ho! ho! ho! Ha! ha! ha! ha! Ouh! ouh!" came peals of such healthy and
"Ho, ho!" said the old man, casting his eyes on her rounded figure.
"Hold your tongue, Petya, what a goose you are!"
"Home!" said Pierre, and despite twenty-two degrees of frost Fahrenheit
"Home? Why, you meant to spend the evening with us.... You don't
"Honestly, without speaking of what I owe you, I feel friendship for
"How I should have loved him!" said Natasha, immediately guessing his
"How about my son Boris, Prince?" said she, hurrying after him into the
"How about the horses?" he asked, without looking at Pierre.
"How am I to understand you, mon pere?" said the princess, growing pale
"How am I? If we grumble at sickness, God won't grant us death," replied
"How am I?" Dolokhov answered coldly. "I am as you see."
"How are you now?" said Princess Mary, herself surprised at what she was
"How are you, Mary? How did you manage to get here?" said he in a voice
"How beautiful she is!" Natasha remarked to her father who had also
"How can I join in? Why, you've given a village for each of your
"How can he talk like that?" thought Pierre. He considered his friend
"How can one help it, lad? My name is Platon, and the surname is
"How can one push on? They are stuck there, wedged on the bridge, and
"How can one talk or think of such trifles?" thought Pierre.
"How can one talk to the masters like that? What were you thinking of,
"How can people be dissatisfied with anything?" thought Natasha.
"How can the Emperor be undecided?" thought Rostov, but then even this
"How can they laugh, or even live at all here?" thought Rostov, still
"How can we fight the French, Prince?" said Count Rostopchin. "Can we
"How can you ask why?" said Princess Mary. "The thought alone of what
"How can you judge what's best?" he cried, the blood suddenly rushing to
"How can you know? No, Mamma, don't speak to him! What nonsense!" said
"How can you show me that you are telling the truth?" said Davout
"How can you speak so!" he blushingly replied to Princess Mary's
"How d'you do, friend? Well, here he is!"
"How dare you take it?" he shouted.
"How delightful it is, Count!" said she. "Isn't it?"
"How did that fellow get here?" asked Pierre.
"How did the star get into the icon?" Pierre asked.
"How did you get here?" said he, turning to Zherkov.
"How do you do, cousin?" said Pierre. "You don't recognize me?"
"How do you do, my dear? I wish you many happy returns of your name
"How do you expect him to answer you all at once?" said Prince Andrew.
"How do you know?"
"How do you say it?" the captain asked quickly and doubtfully.
"How easy he thinks it," thought Pierre. "He doesn't know how terrible
"How easy it is, how little effort it needs, to do so much good,"
"How evidently he belongs to the best society," said she to a third;
"How funny you are!" he said, bending down to her and blushing still
"How glad I am you have come. You are tired. Won't you have some tea?"
"How glad I am you've come! I am so happy today," she said, with the old
"How good it would be!" and taking her hand he kissed it.
"How good! Really very good!" said Nicholas with some unintentional
"How handsome the old man still was only a year ago!" remarked the
"How handsome you have grown!"
"How has his whole illness gone? Is it long since he grew worse? When
"How have you got here?" he said, and galloped on.
"How is he now? Confused? Angry? Ought I to put it right?" she asked
"How is he?"
"How is it I am not moving? I have fallen, I am killed!" Rostov asked
"How is it pointing?" asked Nicholas, riding a hundred paces toward the
"How is it you didn't go head over heels?" asked the boldest of all,
"How is it," she began, as usual in French, settling down briskly and
"How is that?" the Emperor interrupted him, frowning sternly. "Would
"How is that?..." began Prince Andrew, who had for long been waiting an
"How is the count? Can I see him?" asked Pierre, awkwardly as usual, but
"How is the prince?" she asked.
"How it will be there I don't know, but all will be well!" thought
"How kind they all are," thought Pierre. "What is surprising is that
"How light it is, Nicholas!" came Sonya's voice.
"How like his father he is," Pierre interjected.
"How like the brother is to the sister," remarked the count. "And how
"How lovely!" said everyone who saw her; and the vicomte lifted his
"How many inhabitants are there in Moscow? How many houses? Is it true
"How many miles?"
"How many years have you been fattening on the commune?" Karp shouted at
"How many?" Dolokhov asked the Cossack.
"How much longer? How much longer? Oh, these insufferable streets,
"How often have I asked you not to take my things?" she said. "You have
"How plainly all these young people wear their hearts on their
"How pleasant it is, your excellency!" he said with a respectful smile.
"How shall I put it?" replied Natasha. "I was in love with Boris, with
"How she blushes, how she blushes, my pretty!" said Helene. "You must
"How she loves me!" thought Princess Mary. "How happy I am now, and how
"How she prayed!" he thought. "It was plain that her whole soul was in
"How simple and clear it is," thought Pierre. "How is it I did not know
"How so, my pet?"
"How so?" asked Rostov.
"How strange it is! It's as if it were a dream! I like that."
"How strange it is," said Vera, selecting a moment when all were silent,
"How sweet she is--she will be a weal beauty!" said Denisov.
"How sweet!" said Countess Mary, looking at and playing with the baby.
"How thoroughly like him that is!" he said to Princess Mary, who had
"How understand me!" cried her father angrily. "Prince Vasili finds you
"How was it I noticed nothing? How could it go so far? Can she have
"How was it a gun was abandoned?" asked Bagration, frowning, not so much
"How! Not rec..." Kutuzov began, but checked himself immediately and
"How's it you're not drunk today?" said Nesvitski when the other had
"How's this, Colonel?" he shouted as he approached. "I told you to fire
"How's your wound?"
"How... how dare you!..." he shouted, choking and making a threatening
"How..." she began her question but stopped short.
"How? Am I uglier?"
"How? Standing or lying?"
"However, I think General Kutuzov has come out," said Prince Andrew. "I
"However, if you command it, Your Majesty," said Kutuzov, lifting his
"However, there will hardly be an engagement today," said Bagration as
"However, this is not at all interesting. Let us have dinner, and then
"However, you're sleepy, and it's time for me to sleep. Go back to
"Humbug! Nonsense! Humbug, humbug, humbug!" cried Prince Bolkonski,
"Hur-a-a-a-ah!" came a roar of voices. "Let anyone come my way now,"
"Hur-r-rah!" roared thousands of voices.
"Hurrah! Hurrah! Hurrah!" thundered from all sides, one regiment after
"Hurrah! Rostov, come quick! I've found it! About two hundred yards away
"Hurrah! hurrah! hurrah!" shouted those behind him.
"Hurrah!" and resolved that tomorrow, come what might, he would join the
"Hurrah!" pursued them so far beyond the battery that it was difficult
"Hurrah!" rang the enthusiastic voices of the officers.
"Hurrah!" shouted Prince Andrew, and, scarcely able to hold up the heavy
"Hurrah!" was heard on all sides.
"Hurrah!" were running not forwards but backwards, it seemed to Pierre.
"Hurrah!" with a voice already hoarse.
"Hurrah!"... Then the general march, and again "Hurrah! Hurrah!" growing
"Hurrah!... Lads!... ours!" shouted Petya, and giving rein to his
"Hurrah--ah!--ah!" rang a long-drawn shout from our ranks, and passing
"Hurrah-ah-ah!" reverberated in the forest, and the Cossack companies,
"Hurry up, you others!" he called out to his comrades. "It's getting
"Hush!" whispered the count and turned to Simon. "Have you seen the
"I agreed," Natasha now said to herself, "that it would be dreadful if
"I also wanted to ask you," continued Prince Andrew, "if I'm killed
"I am Russian," he said quickly.
"I am a fool, a fool! what have I been waiting for?" thought Nicholas,
"I am afraid for the baby," she said to Mademoiselle Bourienne: "Heaven
"I am afraid of mixing the figures," Pierre replied; "but if you will
"I am afraid you're going to your ruin," said Sonya resolutely, and was
"I am afraid," said Pierre, smiling, and wavering between the confidence
"I am an admirer of Montesquieu," replied Prince Andrew, "and his idea
"I am asking you when you last heard from Bolkonski," repeated Prince
"I am at your disposal," she murmured.
"I am awaiting orders to join my new regiment, your excellency," replied
"I am convinced that we Russians must die or conquer," he concluded,
"I am expecting you, Pierre," said the same voice, but gently and
"I am fond of you, especially as you are the one live man among our
"I am glad I have spoken out fully. Perhaps you did not like it? You
"I am glad I was able to do you a service, my dear Anna Mikhaylovna,"
"I am going away."
"I am going because the life I am leading here does not suit me!"
"I am going to save the army."
"I am here, your excellency."
"I am living at Countess Rostova's," replied Boris, again adding, "your
"I am not afraid," answered Sonya's voice, and along the path toward
"I am not doing this on my own account," she continued, "I do it in the
"I am not going anywhere," Natasha replied when this was proposed to
"I am not in the cavalry, Colonel, but I am a Russian general and if you
"I am not jesting with you; please be silent!" cried Bolkonski, and
"I am not jesting," Bilibin went on. "Nothing is truer or sadder. These
"I am not petitioning about anything. His Majesty the Emperor has
"I am not petitioning, your excellency," returned Prince Andrew quietly.
"I am not speaking of regicide, I am speaking about ideas."
"I am not talking about you," he said, "I don't know you and, frankly, I
"I am not your 'dear sir,' Mr. Staff Officer, and you did not tell me to
"I am ordered to write a memorandum explaining why we are not
"I am quite of your opinion," replied Nicholas, flaming up, turning his
"I am ready for everything," said Pierre.
"I am so delighted... Mamma's health... and Countess Apraksina..." and
"I am so enchanted by the brilliancy of the wit and culture of the
"I am so glad you've come!" said Natasha, without answering him. "We are
"I am so glad, so glad! I was beginning to be vexed with you. I did not
"I am so sorry for the poor count," said the visitor. "He is in such bad
"I am sorry, for I need you. But you're right, you're right! It's not
"I am speaking sincerely as a friend! Consider! Where and why are you
"I am speaking ze truce," replied the hussar with a smile.
"I am speaking, Prince, of the Emperor Napoleon," he replied. The
"I am straight from the palace. Seeing the position we are in, I think
"I am sure it is Pierre. I will go and see," said Countess Mary and left
"I am sure of it, sure!" Natasha almost shouted, taking hold of both his
"I am sure that rascal was lying," said the count.
"I am sure you're not telling us everything; I am sure you did
"I am thinking of what you have told me," answered Princess Mary.
"I am used to something sweet. Raisins, fine ones... take them all!" he
"I am very glad I did not go to the ambassador's," said Prince Hippolyte
"I am very glad to make your acquaintance. I had heard of you, as
"I am very glad to meet you here, Count," he said aloud, regardless
"I am very glad to see you! Go in there where they are meeting, and wait
"I am very glad you have come," she said without raising her eyes, and
"I am very sorry to have made you travel so far," said he.
"I am very sorry you did not find me in yesterday. I was fussing about
"I am very sorry, ma'am," answered the maid.
"I am very, very grateful to you, mon cher," or "ma chere"--he called
"I am very, very grateful to you," she said in French, "but I hope it
"I am waiting, Your Majesty," answered Kutuzov, bending forward
"I am your faithful slave and to you alone I can confess that my
"I am."
"I ask one thing of you," he said sternly, "to obey me and not shove
"I assure you that the town of Smolensk is not in the slightest danger
"I beg you not to tell anyone who I am, and to do what I ask you."
"I beg you to excuse me, excuse me! God is my witness, I did not know,"
"I beg your Majesty's pardon," returned Balashev, "besides Russia there
"I begin ab ovo. 'The enemy of the human race,' as you know, attacks the
"I believe it, I believe it, fwiend, and I share and appwove..."
"I bestow it with pleasure," said Napoleon. "And who is that young man
"I bet a hundred on Stevens!" shouted one.
"I bet fifty imperials"--he spoke French that the Englishman might
"I bet on Dolokhov!" cried a third. "Kuragin, you part our hands."
"I burned this to prove my love for her. I just heated a ruler in the
"I called once or twice at your house," said Rostov, reddening.
"I came at His Majesty the Emperor's wish to learn from your excellency
"I came here not to wrangle with you, but to talk about your interests
"I can tell you more," continued Prince Vasili, seizing her hand, "that
"I can't bear the sight of that woman."
"I can't get a moment's peace.... Mary, is that you? Why did you bring
"I can't help it," said the prince. "Lavater would have said I lack the
"I can't make out at all," said Nesvitski.
"I can't stand this any more," said Ilyin, noticing that Rostov did not
"I can't tear myself to pieces," the doctor was saying. "Come to Makar
"I can't tell you how much I have lived through since then. I hardly
"I can't tell you, I don't know. No one's to blame," said Natasha--"It's
"I can't think what the servants are about," said the countess, turning
"I can't. I've sworn not to. I won't drink and won't play till I get
"I cannot accept your praise," he interrupted her hurriedly. "On the
"I cannot argue about it," replied Prince Andrew coldly, but he thought:
"I cannot come to visit you but is it possible that I shall never see
"I cannot do it, General. I cannot, because the law is stronger than I,"
"I cannot express, Princess, how glad I am that I happened to ride here
"I cannot help loving the light, it is not my fault. And I am very
"I cannot inform Your Majesty at what o'clock the battle began at the
"I cannot pay it all immediately. Will you take an I.O.U.?" he said.
"I cannot take him away from his grandfather, and besides..."
"I come from Major Denisov," answered Rostov.
"I come from the archduchess'. I heard nothing there."
"I come to ask you what to do, and you call it 'nonsense!'"
"I commanded a squadron," replied Repnin.
"I concluded that if I reported to your Serene Highness you might send
"I consider," Natasha suddenly almost shouted, turning her angry face to
"I could not, on my honor. But how is Petya?"
"I daresay you would like to bind me!" shouted the publican, pushing
"I desire peace, no less than the Emperor Alexander," he began. "Have
"I did not come here at all to quarrel with you. On the contrary..."
"I did not expect this of you," said the staff captain seriously and
"I did not expect this," said he to his adjutant Schneider when the
"I did not notice him following me," she said timidly. "I just looked
"I did not... What is it all about?" inquired Prince Andrew impatiently.
"I did once, but gave it up. I am not fit for it. That's it, come on! I
"I didn't think they would come so soon. I stayed accidentally," replied
"I do not dispute that, but it cannot be denied that court privileges
"I do not know what you think, Father," whispered the princess.
"I do not think I have complained of my wife to you, Masha, or blamed
"I do not understand," said Pierre, feeling with dismay doubts
"I do not, and did not, desire war," he continued, "but it has been
"I don't and can't," replied Nicholas, looking coldly at the baby. "A
"I don't at all say that all the plans are good," said Prince Andrew, "I
"I don't care to have anything to do with Bezukhova and don't advise you
"I don't consider myself bound to answer questions put to me in that
"I don't even know what is in this paper," said the younger of the two
"I don't know about that, eh?" said Anatole, growing more confident as
"I don't know anything about it," said Pierre.
"I don't know how to answer your question," he said, blushing without
"I don't know if it would be allowed," replied the officer in a weak
"I don't know myself," Natasha answered quickly, "but I should not like
"I don't know what is the matter with me today. Don't take any
"I don't know what the reasons are. But there must be reasons!"
"I don't know when I began to love her, but I have loved her and her
"I don't know why you think I am cross," said Nicholas, replying to the
"I don't know, General...."
"I don't know. I can't tell you, sir. Only think! I am alone in charge
"I don't know. I think if he writes, I will write too," she said,
"I don't like those fashionable churches," she said, evidently priding
"I don't like waking him," he said, fumbling for something. "He is very
"I don't like you to talk like that."
"I don't like your Mademoiselle Bourienne at all," said Prince Andrew.
"I don't myself know 'to who,'" replied the cornet in a serious tone,
"I don't say it's a plan I approve of," said the son; "I am only telling
"I don't think anything, only I don't understand this..."
"I don't think so when I look at you!" said Anatole, following Natasha.
"I don't think this interests you?"
"I don't understand it," replied Prince Andrew. "Women who are comme il
"I don't understand what is meant by 'a skillful commander,'" replied
"I don't understand your why, Count," she continued, "but it's hard for
"I don't understand!" said Prince Andrew.
"I don't understand, Mamma--what is his attitude to Pierre?" asked the
"I don't understand," continued Ilagin, "how some sportsmen can be so
"I don't understand," he said, "how it is that the mind of man cannot
"I don't understand. I have nothing to say," her eyes replied.
"I don't understand. What's it all about?"
"I don't want any more. Is Timokhin here?" he asked.
"I don't want anyone, I don't love anyone but him. How dare you say he
"I don't want one."
"I don't want to sleep, Mary, sit by me a little."
"I don't want to," answered Anatole continuing to smile.
"I dreamed last night..."--"You were not expecting us?..." "Ah! Mary,
"I expect he has told you of his childish love for Natasha?"
"I expect so."
"I expected help from you and I get none, none from you either!" said
"I expected nothing else," she told herself, calling her pride to her
"I get there," began Denisov. "'Now then, where's your chief's
"I give my word of honor as a Wussian officer," said Denisov, "that I
"I give you that column, lads," he said, riding up to the troops and
"I go by myself, benefactor," said Ivanushka, trying to speak in a bass
"I had heard that it happens like this, and you must have heard it too,
"I had no chance to talk with you, Prince, during the animated
"I had not the pleasure of seeing you," said Prince Andrew, coldly and
"I had the pleasure," replied Prince Andrew, "not only of taking part
"I hate you, I hate you! You're my enemy forever!" And Natasha ran out
"I have a letter from him," she replied.
"I have already refused," she said hurriedly.
"I have already told you, Papa," said his son, "that if you don't wish
"I have been calling you all night..." he brought out.
"I have been in Paris. I spent years there," said Pierre.
"I have begun giving the elder ones marks every evening, showing how
"I have come from the staff, Count. Have you heard of Raevski's
"I have come to you with a message and an offer, Count," he said without
"I have come, Countess, to ask for your daughter's hand," said Prince
"I have come... simply... you know... come... it interests me," said
"I have done my best for him, and I can assure you the education there
"I have endorsed a resolution on your memorandum and sent it to the
"I have found out everything, your excellency: the Rostovs are staying
"I have four sons in the army but still I don't fret. It is all in
"I have given the order again and again, your honor, but they don't
"I have had a proposition made me concerning you," he said with an
"I have heard nothing," Pierre replied unconcernedly. "But what have you
"I have heard of such cases and know that His Majesty is very severe
"I have heard of you, my dear sir," continued the stranger, "and of your
"I have just been to see the countess, your wife. Unfortunately she
"I have known you a long time, you see, and am as fond of you as of a
"I have long been waiting for you," that frightened happy little girl
"I have loved you from the very first moment I saw you. May I hope?"
"I have neither taste nor smell," he remarked, sniffing at his glass.
"I have never enjoyed myself so much before!" she said, and Prince
"I have no betrothed: I have refused him!" cried Natasha.
"I have no money with me," he said.
"I have not been to see you all this time because I have been at my
"I have not considered it right to conceal from your Serene Highness
"I have not found her yet, she is hiding now, sitting with her 'God's
"I have not referred to this out of curiosity, my dear sir, but for
"I have now quite settled in my new rooms, Count" (Berg said this with
"I have only my cap to pin on."
"I have quite lost the knack of talking to ladies," he said. "It was
"I have read our protests about the Oldenburg affair and was surprised
"I have received a refusal from Countess Rostova and have heard reports
"I have said nothing to you, but you have already been talked to. And I
"I have seen as much before now, mate!"
"I have seen the princess," she replied. "I heard that they were
"I have talked and talked at the Assembly of the Nobility," Prince
"I have the honor to congratulate you. General Mack has arrived, quite
"I have the honor to present myself," repeated Prince Andrew rather
"I have the honor to report to you the actual truth," said Alpatych.
"I have the honor to report, sir, that only eight rounds are left. Are
"I have the pleasure of addressing Count Bezukhov, if I am not
"I have the pleasure of being already acquainted, if the countess
"I have, good sir," she answered garrulously. "Just at Christmastime I
"I have."
"I have."
"I haven't been in the room. It must be where you put it."
"I hear that their affairs are in a very bad way," said Julie. "And he
"I hear they are expected very soon," said Pierre.
"I hear you have given orders to harness," she cried, panting (she had
"I hear you have made peace with Turkey?"
"I hear," Dron answered without lifting his eyes.
"I heard about that affair of hers at the time. It was a great pity."
"I helped you, but all the same I must tell you the truth; it is a
"I hope I may now congratulate Your Majesty on a victory?" said he.
"I hope this will prove the last drop that will make the glass run
"I imagine that Freemasonry is the fraternity and equality of men who
"I imagine, sir," said he, mumbling with his toothless mouth, "that we
"I intended to re-form them beyond the village, your excellency,"
"I knew someone who received that sacrament seven times."
"I knew the princess at once," put in Mademoiselle Bourienne.
"I knew you would be here," replied Pierre. "I will come to supper with
"I knew you'd give permission... so I'll tell them," and, having kissed
"I knew," thought Nicholas, "that I should never understand anything in
"I know a thing or two myself!" said Nastasya Ivanovna.
"I know everything!" Napoleon interrupted him. "I know everything. I
"I know for a fact that Kutuzov made it an absolute condition that the
"I know from reliable sources that the Dowager Empress is taking a keen
"I know it and shall prove it," said Rostov.
"I know it is, only listen to me for God's sake! Ask nurse too. They say
"I know myself that one cannot help one's sympathies and antipathies,"
"I know people consider me a bad man!" he said. "Let them! I don't care
"I know she will. She saw something last year."
"I know that man," he said in a cold, measured tone, evidently
"I know that no one can help if nature does not do her work," said
"I know that she loves... will love you," Princess Mary corrected
"I know the law very well, mates! I'll take the matter to the captain
"I know the will was made, but I also know that it is invalid; and you,
"I know who has taken it," repeated Rostov in an unsteady voice, and
"I know you were friendly with Natalie, and so... but I was always more
"I know your heart," repeated the prince. "I value your friendship and
"I know your outlook," said the Mason, "and the view of life you
"I know your sister too little," replied Prince Andrew, with a sarcastic
"I know! Cyril Matveich... but he is old."
"I know! I know that feeling," said Nicholas. "But I mustn't go
"I know, I expect you thought of him," said Nicholas, smiling as Natasha
"I know, I know," answered Prince Vasili in his monotonous voice.
"I know, my dear, kind princess," said Anna Mikhaylovna, seizing the
"I know," interrupted Bilibin, "you're thinking it's very easy to take
"I know. It is not right, darling!"
"I like that!" exclaimed Petya. "Why shouldn't I go?"
"I love you all, and have done no harm to anyone; and what have you done
"I love you awfully!" Natasha suddenly said. "Awfully, awfully!"
"I love you more, better than before," said Prince Andrew, lifting her
"I love you," said Prince Andrew.
"I make bold to ask your excellency to move a little for this
"I make bold to inform your honor that the rude peasants here don't
"I may have appeared strange and queer then," he thought, "but I was
"I may see him at any moment," thought Rostov. "If only I were to hand
"I met them the day before yesterday at the Arkharovs'. Natalie has
"I might ask," he thought, "but they'll say: 'He's a boy himself and so
"I much regret her illness," said Prince Andrew; and he smiled like his
"I must also inform you," said the Rhetor, "that our Order delivers its
"I must ask someone who knows," he thought, and addressed an officer who
"I must have that purse, I tell you," shouted Denisov, shaking his
"I must make up for that in Moscow," said Napoleon. "I'll see you
"I must... I must have a talk with you," said Prince Andrew. "You know
"I never could understand how Nataly made up her mind to marry that
"I never doubted the devotion of the Russian nobles, but today it has
"I never expected anything else of him," said Princess Mary to herself,
"I never go back on my word," he said. "Besides, Sonya is so charming
"I often think, though, perhaps it's a sin," said the princess, "that
"I often think," she continued after a short pause, drawing nearer to
"I only came in to look and did not notice... forgive me..."
"I only ran out to get some water," said Mishka.
"I only said that it would be more to the purpose to make sacrifices
"I only wished to say that ideas that have great results are always
"I only wonder that the fate of Russia could have been entrusted to such
"I ordered you not to let them eat that Mashka woot stuff!" Denisov was
"I ought to give them something!" he thought, and felt in his pocket.
"I ought to tell you that I do not believe... do not believe in God,"
"I owe my life to you and offer you my friendship. A Frenchman never
"I peg of you yourself not to mix in vot is not your business!" suddenly
"I prefer not to take lessons from anyone, but I can die with my men as
"I promised to go to a reception."
"I promised to pay tomorrow," said Nicholas.
"I quite agree with you!"
"I quite understand," answered Princess Mary, with a sad smile. "Calm
"I quite, quite approve, my dearest!" said he with a significant look,
"I received news of his death, yesterday," replied Prince Andrew
"I recognize you only too well, too well."
"I rely on you, my dear," said Anna Pavlovna, also in a low tone.
"I remember," answered Nicholas. "I remember that I came to you
"I request you to have the goodness to change your coat," he said as he
"I rescued such a lot of them!" said Nicholas.
"I said from the first," declared Anna Pavlovna referring to Pierre, "I
"I saw him myself," replied the man with a self-confident smile of
"I saw the Pavlograd hussars attack there, your excellency," chimed in
"I saw you riding this morning..." he added.
"I say so," he continued desperately, "because the Bourbons fled
"I say! Are the lads asleep?" asked Petya.
"I say, Balaga," said Anatole, putting his hands on the man's shoulders,
"I say, Berg, my dear fellow," said Rostov, "when you get a letter from
"I say, Father, joking apart, is she very hideous?" Anatole asked, as if
"I say, Fedeshon!... Did he say when the battles are to begin? You were
"I say, Rostov," said Dolokhov clearly, smiling and looking Nicholas
"I say, come round some evening and we'll have a game of faro!" said
"I say, do you remember our discussion in Petersburg?" asked Pierre,
"I say, fellow countryman! Will they set us down here or take us on to
"I say, is it true that we have been beaten?" "And what did you think?
"I say, shall we soon be clear? They say the cavalry are blocking the
"I say, this is folly! He'll be killed," said this more sensible man.
"I say, we've been in the front line! Our regiment attacked!" said Boris
"I see I'm intruding," Rostov repeated.
"I see someone with a mustache," said Natasha, seeing her own face.
"I see, Colonel, from all that is happening, that Providence requires
"I sent Uvarka at dawn to listen," his bass boomed out after a minute's
"I shall at any rate not run after a young man before visitors..."
"I shall be delighted to meet them," said the prince. "But tell me," he
"I shall be only too glad if you relieve me of that young man.... Here
"I shall come to a place and pray there, and before having time to get
"I shall not be at peace till you promise me this."
"I shall probably die before you. So remember, these are my memoirs;
"I shall scarcely be able to avail myself of your hospitality,
"I shan't be violent, don't be afraid!" said Pierre in answer to a
"I shan't believe anyone, I know she doesn't like me," replied Natasha
"I should be glad enough to fall asleep, so it's not my fault!" and her
"I should like to go to Kuragin's," thought he.
"I should like to know, did you love..." Pierre did not know how to
"I should like to see the great man," he said, alluding to Napoleon,
"I should like to speak well of them, but as far as I know the facts, I
"I should like," said the vicomte, "to ask how monsieur explains the
"I should never dare to say that I know the truth," said the Mason,
"I should never, never have believed that one could be so happy," she
"I should not be doing my duty, Count," he said in timid tones, "and
"I should not have believed anyone who told me that I was capable of
"I should think he has a score of them."
"I should think not," said Vera, "because there can never be anything
"I should think so!" he replied. "I have felt like that when everything
"I should think so!" replied Natasha's laughing eyes.
"I spent the evening with her yesterday. She is going to their estate
"I still can't understand what you are afraid of," said Prince Andrew
"I take them back, I take them back!" said Pierre, "and I ask you to
"I tell you," shouted Denisov, "he's a fine fellow."
"I thank you all! God be praised!" and he rode past that company and
"I thank you all!" he said, addressing the soldiers and then again the
"I thank your Serene Highness, but I fear I am no longer fit for the
"I think I may congratulate you," whispered Anna Pavlovna to the old
"I think I sent you?" he added, turning to the staff officer on duty.
"I think it is delightful," he said, referring to a diplomatic note that
"I think it would be best to appeal to that general," she continued,
"I think no one has been more courted than she," she went on, "but till
"I think not," answered the Frenchman, feeling himself over. "But I have
"I think not," he said, "and yet--yes. She does not deign to be
"I think she's asleep, Mamma," said Sonya softly.
"I think that before discussing these questions," Pierre continued, "we
"I think this used to be Natasha," thought Nicholas, "and that was
"I think, Princess, it is not convenient to speak of that now," she said
"I think, however, that these condemnations have some ground," returned
"I think," said the prince with a smile, "that if you had been sent
"I think..." Pierre replied, "that he has nothing to forgive.... If I
"I thought perhaps something had happened," she said with her unchanging
"I thought today's fete had been canceled. I confess all these
"I thought you would allow me to tell you this," she said. "I had come
"I told you it was all lumps and holes!" the little princess repeated.
"I told you that I have no will," Natasha replied. "Why can't you
"I understand why he" (Prince Andrew) "liked no one so much as him,"
"I understand."
"I want a great deal, Count! I want five hundred rubles," and taking out
"I want nothing, and I won't be anyone's adjutant."
"I want to become a Moscovite too, now," said Helene. "How is it you're
"I want to teach this young man how to shoe a horse," said Telyanin.
"I want to try to sing again," she said, adding as if by way of excuse,
"I wanted to listen at the door, but I knew you would tell me."
"I warn you, Captain," one of the officers, a short thin man, evidently
"I was attached; I'm on duty."
"I was coming to tell you so."
"I was driving past Yusupov's house just now," said Berg with a laugh,
"I was going to ask you. I know nothing except that it was all I could
"I was never pleased at Bolkonski's engagement to Natasha," said the
"I was so glad to hear of your safety. It was the first piece of good
"I was there," said Pierre.
"I was there," said Rostov angrily, as if intending to insult the
"I was told a charming Moscow story today and must treat you to it.
"I was told it would be dangerous because of the enemy. Dear friend, I
"I was told they are coming soon. I am also expecting Andrew any day. I
"I was very glad of his appointment, that's all I know," replied Prince
"I was very much surprised when I heard of it," said Prince Andrew.
"I went for another one," Tikhon continued, "and I crept like this
"I will allow no one to call me a liar!" cried Rostov. "He told me I
"I will bring him to you directly, Monsieur Dessalles. Good night!"
"I will come in all the same, I have to look through the books," said
"I will do it all, Father," he said.
"I will do so," said Prince Andrew, moving away from the map.
"I will give the order."
"I will make a match for you with the princess. Catherine Petrovna
"I will not tell you who I am. I am your prisoner--take me!" Pierre
"I will send her to you," said the countess, and left the room.
"I will speak to her when I have your consent.... Do you give it to me?"
"I will tell him, I will tell him everything once more," said Pierre.
"I will tell my sister to ask her to dinner," said Anatole. "Eh?"
"I will tell you frankly," said Prince Vasili in the tone of a crafty
"I will tell you this," he said, rising and trying with nervously
"I will the bridge fire," he said in a solemn tone as if to announce
"I will, I will, only tell me! You won't? Then I will go and tell at
"I will, your excellency," said Timokhin, showing by his smile that he
"I will," replied Natasha.
"I wished to get a nap, mon cousin, but I can't."
"I won't detain you longer, General. I wish success to your mission,"
"I won't say he is out of sorts, but I fancy he would like to be heard."
"I won't submit to your Napoleon! Others may if they please.... If you
"I won't!" cried Natasha, with one hand holding back the hair that hung
"I won't, I can't sleep, what's the use? Come now for the last time."
"I wonder, is it not too late to administer unction?" asked the lady,
"I would go with you but on my honor I'm up to here"--and he pointed to
"I write you in Russian, my good friend," wrote Julie in her Frenchified
"I'd be glad to sit beside you and rest: I'm tired; but you see how they
"I'd like to put you on a two days' march with a knapsack! Your fine
"I'll call him," said Petya.
"I'll dress up at once and go with them. I'll make Pashette open her
"I'll drink it! Let's have a bottle of rum!" shouted Pierre, banging the
"I'll flatten you into a pancake!" shouted the angry officer to the
"I'll give them armed force... I'll 'overresist' them!" uttered Rostov
"I'll give you a hundwed sharp lashes--that'll teach you to play the
"I'll give you something gently, you monkey you!" cried Mavra
"I'll go and ask them again directly," said Pierre, rising and going to
"I'll go there too, I too!" thought Pierre, and followed the general.
"I'll go," said Pierre.
"I'll go," said Sonya.
"I'll kill you!" he shouted, and seizing the marble top of a table
"I'll let two more letters pass, but the third I'll read," said the
"I'll really call in on the nuns," he said to the officers who watched
"I'll send someone at once. He shall be taken away--taken away at once,"
"I'll show them; I'll give it to them, the brigands!" said he to
"I'll show you, I'll show you! It's not a secret. And it's a horse
"I'll sing for you a whole evening," said Natasha.
"I'll stand guard on it myself!" said Ilyin.
"I'll stand, Theodore Ivanych."
"I'll stay here," muttered Natasha. "Do lie down," she added crossly,
"I'll teach you to run into the yards!"
"I'll tell you some things about myself. I had a cousin..."
"I'll tell you what to do," he continued, as Prince Andrew still did not
"I'll tell you what, my dear fellow," said Prince Andrew, who evidently
"I'll trust you."
"I'm afraid, I'm afraid!" she whispered, and a shudder ran down her
"I'm certain of it; you'll see."
"I'm glad, glad, to see you," he said, looking attentively into her
"I'm glad," answered Dolokhov briefly and clearly, as the song demanded.
"I'm heartily glad you have come and are staying with me. It was high
"I'm not a goose, but they are who cry about trifles," said Petya.
"I'm not afraid of anything," said Sonya. "May I go at once?" She got
"I'm not like that myself, but I understand. So you're not angry with
"I'm not such a fool.... Just you try it on.... Allez-vous promener," *
"I'm not to blame that the conversation began in the presence of other
"I'm quite worn out by these callers. However, I'll see her and no more.
"I'm sorry, sorry for that fine fellow. Give me the letter."
"I've been sent back to the regiment all on account of that devil, Mack.
"I've come at a bad time I think. I should not have come, but I have
"I've come to say good-by."
"I've come to sit with you a bit, Masha," said the nurse, "and here
"I've had an eye on him this long while," said the other.
"I've seen him myself!"
"I've spoken to him. He hopes we should be in time to get away tomorrow,
"I've taken twansports from the infantwy by force!" he said. "After all,
"I, I... I'll go with you!" cried Petya.
"I, I..." said Pierre, feeling it necessary to minimize his social
"I... I didn't think of it. I never promised, because..."
"I... don't..." he muttered, holding up two fingers to his cap. "I..."
"I... hope... for guidance... help... in regeneration," said Pierre,
"I... that's different. Why speak of me? I don't want any other life,
"I..."
"I? I? What did I tell you?" said Pierre suddenly, rising and beginning
"I? I? What of me? Leave me out of the question. I'm not going to get
"I? I?..." said the prince as if unpleasantly awakened, and not taking
"I? It was last Sunday they took me, out of a hospital in Moscow."
"I? Only nonsense."
"I? Wait a bit, wait.... Yes, first I thought that we are driving along
"I? What a question! I am going because... well, because everyone is
"I? What have I...?" stammered Pierre.
"I? Yes, yes, certainly!" cried Petya, blushing almost to tears and
"I?" said Nicholas, trying to remember. "Well, you see, first I thought
"I?... I'm going to Petersburg," answered Pierre, in a childlike,
"Ice pudding, but you won't get any," said Marya Dmitrievna.
"Idiot!" she screamed at her brother and, running to a chair, threw
"If Buonaparte remains on the throne of France a year longer," the
"If He were not," he said quietly, "you and I would not be speaking
"If I did not know you I should think you did not want what you are
"If I have time," answered Nicholas. "But I promised the Arkharovs; they
"If I may take the liberty, your excellency, it would be a good thing."
"If I seem not to notice he will think that I do not sympathize with
"If I were Tsar I would never go to war," said Nesvitski, turning away.
"If I were a woman I would do so, Mary. That is a woman's virtue. But
"If I were asking you to do something disagreeable now--but I only ask
"If I'd been in Nikolenka's place I would have killed even more of those
"If Mary is already persuading me forgive, it means that I ought long
"If Prince Andrew heard that I was in the power of the French! That
"If a battle takes place within the next three days the French will
"If all Russians are in the least like you, it is sacrilege to fight
"If anyone comes meddling again," said he, emitting the words separately
"If at least we had some women here; but there's nothing foh one to do
"If he could attack us, he would have done so today," said he.
"If he fell into my hands, when I'd caught him I'd bury him in the
"If he is accused of circulating Napoleon's proclamation it is not
"If he is an honorable man he should either declare his intentions or
"If he is one of the ordinary little staff dandies sent to earn a medal
"If he manages the business properly he will be able to pay off all his
"If he starts a row I'll go away," said Prince Anatole. "I can't bear
"If he weren't afraid of a battle why did he ask for that interview? Why
"If he" (he meant the enemy) "begins popping at the bridge now,"
"If his excellency had been at home, as a kinsman he would of course...
"If it does not weigh a hundredweight and won't break my neck... To
"If it is true that Monsieur Denisov has made you a proposal, tell him
"If it were hot," Prince Andrew would reply at such times very dryly
"If it were not for my sincere affection and devotion to Uncle," said
"If it were true that he has been beaten, news would have come."
"If it's inconvenient, please don't," said Berg. "Only I so wanted it,
"If no one fought except on his own conviction, there would be no wars,"
"If only I had known..." she said through her tears. "I was afraid to
"If only I knew that anything besides humiliation would come of it..."
"If only some fool would marry her!" Then he slammed the door, sent for
"If only they don't make me responsible for this delay! What a nuisance
"If only they would be quick!" thought Rostov, feeling that at last
"If she goes to her cousin first and then to another lady, she will be
"If the animals in front are continually changing and the direction of
"If the animals leading the herd change, this happens because the
"If the count had been at home..." Mavra Kuzminichna went on
"If there is a God and future life, there is truth and good, and man's
"If there is anything... come back, Yakov Alpatych! For Christ's sake
"If there was none of this magnanimity in war, we should go to war only
"If there were reasons..." she began.
"If there were treason, or proofs of secret relations with Napoleon,
"If they had known that you wished it, the entertainment would have been
"If they're sent out and brought back again later on it will do no harm,
"If this patience comes out," he said to himself after shuffling the
"If we don't take it tomowwow, he'll snatch it fwom under our noses," he
"If we fought before," he said, "not letting the French pass, as at
"If we get to Vienna I'll get rid of it there but in these wretched
"If we have been angels, why have we fallen lower?" said Nicholas. "No,
"If we live we shall see," replied Bilibin, his face again becoming
"If we're caught, I won't be taken alive! I have a pistol," whispered
"If you allow yourself in my drawing room..." whispered Helene, but
"If you are refusing for my sake, I am afraid that I..."
"If you are resolved, I must begin your initiation," said the Rhetor
"If you ask me," said Prince Andrew, without looking up (he was
"If you had told me sooner, Mamma, I would have gone," she replied as
"If you have nothing better to do, Count (or Prince), and if the
"If you like, your honor!"
"If you noticed some disorder in the garden," said Alpatych, "it was
"If you order it they will go away," said he.
"If you please, Miss! allow me," said the maid, who on her knees was
"If you please, your excellency, Petrusha has brought some papers,"
"If you really want it," said he.
"If you were counting on the evening soup, you have come too late," said
"If you won't answer, I'll tell you..." Helene went on. "You believe
"If you, sir, choose to make a buffoon of yourself," he said sharply,
"Illness or not, he'd better not cwoss my path. I'd kill him!" shouted
"Immediately, I'm coming, I'm coming!" replied the princess hurriedly,
"Immediately, Prince," said Kozlovski. "Dispositions for Bagration."
"Impossible!" cried Prince Andrew. "That would be too base."
"Impossible!" exclaimed Rostov.
"Impudence! Impudence!" they heard behind them the voice of Mavra
"Impudent fellows!" said the prince. "You know Metivier? I turned him
"In Kolyazin, master, a wonderful blessing has been revealed."
"In Moscow?" he said in a questioning tone. "Yes, in Moscow. Good-by!"
"In a minute! In a minute! Don't come in, Papa!" she cried to her father
"In a minute, in a minute," he said, dipping his pen.
"In a moment. A propos," she added, becoming calm again, "I am expecting
"In a word, a hearty one..." said the subaltern, laughing (the
"In a year you will learn to know yourself...."
"In an hour's time, I should say."
"In general we must turn this bloodthirsty soldier to more humane
"In our temples we recognize no other distinctions," read the Grand
"In peace let us pray unto the Lord."
"In short, hoping to settle matters by taking up a warlike attitude, it
"In that case he is inviting his doom by awaiting our attack," said
"In that case we can go," said Willarski. "My carriage is at your
"In that case..." began Willarski, but Pierre interrupted him.
"In the first place, I tell you we have no right to question the Emperor
"In the first place, Trunila is not a 'dog,' but a harrier," thought
"In the meadows... in the meadows!" he heard, accompanied by whistling
"In the seventh place, try, by the frequent thought of death," the
"In token of obedience, I ask you to undress."
"Indeed? Yes, yes!" said Boris, with a smile. "And we too have had a
"Inform the prince and princess that I knew nothing: I acted on the
"Inform the prince that I the bridge fired!" said the colonel
"Inform the prince that labor has begun," said Mary Bogdanovna, giving
"Into action! Into action! Bring him a bottle for such news! But how did
"Into the stove... into the fire with it! I tell you once for all, my
"Into the vewy chief..." Denisov repeated with a smile.
"Is Papa at home?" he asked.
"Is everything quite all right?"
"Is he in Moscow?" Pierre stammered with a guilty look.
"Is he really to be my husband, this stranger who is so kind--yes, kind,
"Is he still here?" she asked, quickly.
"Is he tall and with reddish hair?" asked the doctor.
"Is he weaker? Thinner?" asked the princess.
"Is it about Nicholas?" he asked.
"Is it certain?" she said.
"Is it for visitors you've got yourself up like that, eh?" said he.
"Is it over?" said Princess Mary when his body had for a few minutes
"Is it possible that I--the 'chit of a girl,' as everybody called me,"
"Is it possible that he died in the bitter frame of mind he was then in?
"Is it possible that this hand, that face, those eyes, all this treasure
"Is it possible to forget?" said she.
"Is it possible?" exclaimed Anna Mikhaylovna. "Oh, how awful! It is
"Is it satisfaction you want?" said Pierre ironically.
"Is it something very bad for me? What is it?" persisted Natasha with
"Is it true that Austrians have been beaten?" asked Dolokhov.
"Is my carriage ready?" asked Rostopchin, stepping back from the window.
"Is she clever?" she asked.
"Is she like him?" thought Natasha. "Yes, like and yet not like. But she
"Is that Mary practicing? Let's go quietly and take her by surprise."
"Is that so? And what did he say?" inquired Bolkonski.
"Is that their Tsar himself? He's not bad!" low voices could be heard
"Is that you, Clement?" he asked. "Where the devil...?" But, noticing
"Is the Englishman bragging?... Eh? Is it all right?" said Anatole.
"Is the cabman to be discharged, your honor?"
"Is the carriage ready?" he asked again.
"Is the general here?" asked the adjutant on reaching the knoll.
"Is there sufficient forage in Krems?"
"Is this good or bad?" Pierre asked himself. "It is good for me, bad
"Is this the way to the princesses' apartments?" asked Anna Mikhaylovna
"Is this your saber?" asked Petya. "Or is it yours?" he said, addressing
"Is this your saber?" he shouted.
"Isn't Duport delightful?" Helene asked her.
"Isn't it fine, eh, Uncle Ignat?" said the boy, suddenly beginning to
"Isn't she a Tartar!"
"Isn't she exquisite?" she said to Pierre, pointing to the stately
"Isn't she too young? I have heard that it harms the voice to train it
"It all depends on the bringing up," remarked the visitor.
"It can't be helped It happens to everyone!" said the son, with a
"It can't be helped: men must sometimes have masculine conversation,"
"It can't be!" said Rostov. "It must have been someone else."
"It did me so much good to tell all about it today. It was hard and
"It doesn't matter to me. I only wish it for your sake."
"It flew a hair's breadth past my ear," said the adjutant.
"It goes smoothly, too. Well, now, Zaletaev!"
"It has begun. Here it is!" thought Prince Andrew, feeling the blood
"It has, Your Majesty."
"It is a ray of light in the darkness, a shade between sadness and
"It is a very suitable spot," said the esaul.
"It is all, all her fault," he said to himself; "but what of that? Why
"It is an illness, there's no other way of explaining it," said the
"It is dawn," thought Pierre. "But that's not what I want. I want to
"It is disgraceful to run away from danger; only cowards are running
"It is done!" she said to the count, pointing triumphantly to the
"It is dreadful, dreadful!" she was saying, "but cost me what it may I
"It is for the reasson, my goot sir," said he, speaking with a German
"It is he, it is he, Nicholas!" said Countess Mary, re-entering the room
"It is long since we had the pleasure..." began the countess, but Prince
"It is not at all what you suppose; but that is what the German
"It is not the sugar I want, but only that your little hand should stir
"It is not too late yet, your Highness--the enemy has not gone away--if
"It is now my turn to ask you 'why?' mon cher," said Bolkonski. "I
"It is of great importance to me," she said, turning with a smile toward
"It is painful, but it does one good. It uplifts the soul to see such
"It is robbery! You'll answer for it, sir!" said the infantry officer,
"It is said that the Emperor was reluctant to give Kutuzov those powers.
"It is some letter of recommendation... what the devil do I want it
"It is the Buonapartists who say that," replied the vicomte without
"It is the sword of Frederick the Great which I..." she began, but
"It is too late now, it's done; besides I love her," thought Pierre.
"It is true that Natasha is still young, but--so long as that?..."
"It is true, believe it."
"It is unavoidable," said Prince Andrew with a sigh.
"It is very good of you, Monsieur Pierre, to come and visit a poor
"It is very strange, mon Monsieur Prince," said the staff officer. (He
"It is, your excellency," replied the adjutant.
"It isn't wanted, Petya. Tell them to take it away," replied Natasha.
"It may be he or it may be nothing," muttered the hussar. "It's dark...
"It may be treachery," said Prince Andrew, vividly imagining the gray
"It means that Anna Makarovna has finished her stocking," said Countess
"It must be daylight soon," said he, yawning, and went away.
"It must be from their food," said the sergeant major. "They used to
"It must be one of ours, a prisoner. Yes. Can it be that they will take
"It seems a little warmer today, my dear," she would murmur.
"It seems funny to me," said Pierre, "that you, you should consider
"It seems it's no use knocking one's head against a wall!" he said,
"It seems that even in the next world only the gentry are to have a
"It seems that there will be no need to bring Mary out, suitors are
"It seems to be that you can't love me, that I am so plain... always...
"It von't go begging," replied the German with a smile.
"It was a ruble an arshin, I suppose?"
"It was a small estate that brought in no profit," replied Prince
"It was all they could do to rescue the poor man," continued the
"It was my fault, mon pere," interceded the little princess, with a
"It was ours yesterday, but now it is his."
"It was the officer, your honor, stained it," answered the artilleryman,
"It was your son's turn to be conscripted, but no fear! You begrudged
"It will fit better still when it sets to your body," said Karataev,
"It will interest you," said he.
"It won't be just yet--someday. Think what fun it will be when I am his
"It won't do, my love! Not everyone will understand this friendship
"It won't hurt that devil--he's as strong as a horse!" they said of him.
"It would be good," thought Prince Andrew, glancing at the icon his
"It would have been hard to drive up, your honor," he added. "I heard,
"It would not be turned off the field even on the Tsaritsin Meadow."
"It'll be worse for you. Bogdanich is vindictive and you'll pay for your
"It's Andrew!" thought Princess Mary. "No it can't be, that would be too
"It's a bad business, eh?"
"It's a bad business," said the general without answering him, "our men
"It's a complicated story, you know," said the adjutant. "That
"It's a fine thing! First-rate!"
"It's a fraud, lads! Lead the way to him, himself!" shouted the tall
"It's a good day, eh? For a hunt and a gallop, eh?" asked Nicholas,
"It's a lackey's job!"
"It's a long time since we met," he said. "Thanks for coming. I'll just
"It's a pleasure to talk to a man like that; he is not like our
"It's a shame for a soldier to steal; a soldier must be honest,
"It's all God's scourge," said Dron. "What horses we had have been
"It's all about the war," the count shouted down the table. "You know my
"It's all nonsense, all rubbish--those discussions which lead to nothing
"It's all over; but I am a coward--yes, a coward!" thought Rostov, and
"It's all the fault of these fellows on the staff that there's this
"It's all the same now. If the Emperor is wounded, am I to try to save
"It's all the same to him," he muttered, turning quickly to a soldier
"It's all the same to me," he said. "I only want to see whether you will
"It's all this mania for opposition," he went on. "And who for? It is
"It's all up! I'm lost!" thought he. "Now a bullet through my
"It's all very well for you, Ivan Sidorych, to talk," said the first
"It's all very well for you... I am not envious... I love you and Boris
"It's ancient history," said another, guessing that it referred to a
"It's as if a dam had burst," said the Cossack hopelessly. "Are there
"It's as the old men have decided--there's too many of you giving
"It's awful! Oh, it's awful! awful!" Natasha suddenly cried, and again
"It's because Papa wanted to give up all the carts to the wounded," said
"It's certainly well written," said Tushin, "but that's not the point,
"It's different on different days," answered the captain. "One day he
"It's dirty," replied Prince Andrew, making a grimace.
"It's empty."
"It's even certain that I should have done the same, then why this duel,
"It's fine, lads! Now it's raging... It's fine!"
"It's getting light, it's really getting light!" he exclaimed.
"It's good, quite good, thank you," said the Frenchman, in French, "but
"It's here, close by," said she and, running across the yard, opened a
"It's horrid! It's abominable!" she screamed. "You can't possibly have
"It's impossible," replied another.
"It's in the inlaid portfolio that he keeps under his pillow," said the
"It's like this," he said thoughtfully, "if there's a battle soon, yours
"It's lucky for him that he escaped me; but I'll find him!" she said in
"It's more to the left, why, Little Mytishchi is over there, and this is
"It's no joke, you know! It's all very well if you're single. 'One man
"It's no use your going to the commander in chief. He would say a lot of
"It's not at all from friendship," declared Nicholas, flaring up and
"It's not going to be a ghost story?" said he, sitting down beside
"It's not my business!" he exclaimed, and strode on quickly down one of
"It's not nonsense, Papa. Fedya Obolenski is younger than I, and he's
"It's not that I don't remember--I know what he is like, but not as I
"It's not the soldiers only, but I've seen peasants today, too....
"It's not there."
"It's not true!"
"It's not true, not true!" cried Pierre. "I am not to blame for being
"It's nothing, Mamma, really it's nothing; only Petya startled me," she
"It's nothing, nothing; leave me alone!" sobbed Sonya.
"It's nothing," replied Prince Andrew.
"It's our intended that was--Prince Bolkonski himself! They say he is
"It's plain that they have not all gone yet, Prince," said Bagration.
"It's pleasant, your excellency!"
"It's ready, Miss," said the maid, holding up the shortened gauze dress
"It's ready, your honor; you can split a Frenchman in half with it!"
"It's shameful, sir!" he said to the adjutant. "What..."
"It's that protege of yours, that sweet Princess Drubetskaya, that Anna
"It's that, that..." said Sonya, with a white face and trembling lips.
"It's the business of us soldiers. But in a gentleman it's wonderful!
"It's the enemy?... No!... Yes, see it is!... for certain.... But how is
"It's the steam that spoils them," he added, stretching out his feet
"It's them! Gracious heavens! O Lord, four of them, horsemen!" she
"It's time, Count; it's time!" cried the adjutant.
"It's very nice, your excellency! Wouldn't you like to?" said he.
"It's wonderful what a lot of our troops have gathered, lads! Last
"J'ai assez fait l'empereur; il est temps de faire le general," * but
"Jacob, bring a bottle!" shouted the host, a tall, handsome fellow who
"Je vous aime!" * he said, remembering what has to be said at such
"Just a few oats?" said Misha, cheerfully and readily.
"Just as I may suppose you to be deluded," said Pierre, with a faint
"Just fancy, he didn't let me win a single cahd, not one cahd."
"Just imagine--I knew nothing about him!" said he. "I thought he had
"Just look at the master! A regular eagle he is!" loudly remarked the
"Just look! See what it's doing now. O Lord! You can even see the crows
"Just once more," said a girlish voice above him which Prince Andrew
"Just see where it carries to!" a soldier near by said sternly, looking
"Just see, the German sausage is making tracks, too!"
"Just so, just so," repeated the countess, and shaking all over, she
"Just so," said the Cossack.
"Just so. There's no need for me to marry him. But... just so."
"Just to flutter the nuns a bit. They say there are Italian girls among
"Just wait a minute, sir. One little moment," said she.
"Just what I think, Yakov Alpatych. What I say is: orders have been
"Karataev!" came to Pierre's mind.
"Karay, ulyulyu!..." he shouted, looking round for the old borzoi who
"Karay? Old fellow!..." wailed Nicholas.
"Kaysarov!" Kutuzov called to his adjutant. "Sit down and write out
"Ke..." Zaletaev, brought out with effort: "ke-e-e-e," he drawled,
"Keep in step! Ah... those peasants!" shouted an officer, seizing by
"Kill the Germans!" shouted one.
"Killed?" cried Denisov, recognizing from a distance the unmistakably
"Kind...ly let--them--pass!"
"Kindly let this cart pass. Don't you see it's a woman?" said Prince
"Kindly return to your posts," said the staff officer trying to preserve
"Kindly step in, my orders are to bring you in."
"Kiss me here," and he touched his cheek: "Thanks, thanks!"
"Kiss the doll," said she.
"Know that if you stir up Prussia against me, I'll wipe it off the map
"Know this, Masha: I can't reproach, have not reproached, and never
"Know what?" Natasha's eyes asked.
"Kuragin! Come back!" shouted Dolokhov. "Betrayed! Back!"
"Kuzmich... From all sides... and then tears," someone repeated
"La balance y est... * A German knows how to skin a flint, as the
"La femme est la compagne de l'homme," * announced Prince Hippolyte, and
"Lads! here's to our Sovereign, the Emperor, and victory over our
"Lads!" said he, with a metallic ring in his voice. "This man,
"Lads!" shouted Miloradovich in a loud, self-confident, and cheery
"Lanciers du 6-me," * replied Dolokhov, neither hastening nor slackening
"Late! It's nearly ten o'clock," answered Natasha's voice. A rustle of
"Later... later! Tomorrow. It's too late..."
"Laughing at us old fellows!"
"Lavwuska!" he shouted loudly and angrily, "take it off, blockhead!"
"Lazarev!" the colonel called, with a frown, and Lazarev, the first
"Le Roi de Prusse?" Hippolyte said interrogatively, again laughing, and
"Leave him alone," said Mary Hendrikhovna, smiling timidly and happily.
"Leave it to me," said Princess Mary. "I know..."
"Leave it, Vasilich will put it away. It's not wanted."
"Leave it," said Dolokhov, though he did not seem to be even looking at
"Leave me alone, please leave me alone! It is all quite the same to me,"
"Leave my room," she exclaimed, and burst into sobs.
"Leave off talking nonsense," said the countess.
"Leave off, Mamma! I don't think, and don't want to think about it! He
"Let God and our gweat monarch judge me afterwards!" said Denisov going
"Let go, I tell you! I will take the responsibility. I myself will go
"Let her alone, Kondratevna," said Natasha. "Go, Mavrushka, go."
"Let him do it, let him do it," said Dolokhov, smiling.
"Let me alone; it's not true!" she cried angrily to him.
"Let me ask her," said Pierre. "Did you see it yourselves?" he inquired.
"Let me be!... What is it to me?... I shall die!" she muttered,
"Let me introduce my brother to you," said Helene, her eyes shifting
"Let me kiss you, dear old fellow! Oh, how fine, how splendid!"
"Let no one know of it!" the Emperor added with a frown.
"Let others--the young--yield afresh to that fraud, but we know life,
"Let that woman alone!" exclaimed Pierre hoarsely in a furious voice,
"Let the bold and insolent Goliath from the borders of France encompass
"Let them have my wardrobe cart," said the countess. "Dunyasha can go
"Let them pass, I tell you!" repeated Prince Andrew, compressing his
"Let us go and have supper," he said with a sigh, going to the door.
"Let us go and see my sister," he said to Pierre when he returned.
"Let us go ourselves. I only came round to ask Denisov about yesterday's
"Let us go to her, I must say good-by. Or--go and wake and I'll come
"Let us go, Ivan Lukich," he said to the captain.
"Let us understand one another, Countess," said he with a smile, and
"Let's go. Let's go!" cried Anatole.
"Liar, indeed! It's the real truth."
"Liberty and equality," said the vicomte contemptuously, as if at last
"Lie down!" cried the adjutant, throwing himself flat on the ground.
"Lie down, darling; lie down, my pet," said the countess, softly
"Lie down? All right, I will. I'll lie down at once," said Natasha.
"Lieutenant Count Rostov."
"Lieutenant, he has a dagger," were the first words Pierre understood.
"Life as it is leaves one no peace. I should be thankful to do nothing,
"Life is everything. Life is God. Everything changes and moves and that
"Lift it two lines more and it will be just right," cried he in a feeble
"Like my father?" asked the boy, flushing crimson and looking up at
"Lise!" said Prince Andrew dryly, raising his voice to the pitch which
"Lise!" was all Prince Andrew said. But that one word expressed an
"Lise, I beg you to desist," said Prince Andrew still more emphatically.
"Listen to me, Count, you have managed matters so that we are getting
"Listen to me, Prince," said she. "I have never yet asked you for
"Listen!" said he; "don't worry about your wife: what can be done shall
"Listen, Bilibin," said Helene (she always called friends of that sort
"Listen, dear Annette," said the prince, suddenly taking Anna Pavlovna's
"Little countess!" the count's voice called from behind the door.
"Long ago," answered Rostov, "I have already been for the hay, and have
"Long-coat" which settled him. Bennigsen suddenly reddened and paced
"Look at Papa!" shouted Natasha to the whole company, and quite
"Look at our Anna Mikhaylovna--what a headdress she has on!"
"Look at the stars. It's wonderful how they shine! You would think the
"Look at them scurrying! It's burning! Just see the smoke! Fine! Grand!
"Look out!" came a frightened cry from a soldier and, like a bird
"Look out!" he shouted, in a voice plainly showing that he had long
"Look out, your soles will fly off!" shouted the red-haired man,
"Look sharp! Look sharp!" several voices repeated around him.
"Look then at thy inner self with the eyes of the spirit, and ask
"Look! Look there!" one soldier was saying to another, pointing to a
"Look! Yes, on my word, it's Bezukhov!" said Natasha, putting her head
"Look, Natasha, how dreadfully it is burning!" said she.
"Look, Prince," said another, who would have dearly liked to take
"Look, his mustache and eyelashes are all white!" said one of the
"Look, it must be in Moscow!"
"Look, look!" said this adjutant, looking not at the troops in the
"Loot everything, lads! Don't let those devils get it!" he cried, taking
"Looting continues in the city despite the decrees against it. Order
"Lord God of might, God of our salvation! Look this day in mercy and
"Lord God of might, God of our salvation!" began the priest in that
"Lord God! Hear us when we pray to Thee; strengthen with Thy might
"Lord Jesus Christ!" exclaimed the pilgrim woman, crossing herself. "Oh,
"Lord Jesus Christ, holy Saint Nicholas, Frola and Lavra! Lord Jesus
"Lord have mercy upon us!" she repeated while seeking her daughter.
"Louis XIV was a very proud and self-confident man; he had such and such
"Louis XVI was executed because they said he was dishonorable and a
"Louisa Ivanovna, may I?" asked Sonya.
"Love hinders death. Love is life. All, everything that I understand, I
"Love? What is love?" he thought.
"Lovely, lovely! Go on, Uncle, go on!" shouted Natasha as soon as he had
"Lower its head, lower it!" he said to a soldier who had accidentally
"Ma chere, there is a time for everything," said the countess with
"Ma foi!" said he, "tomorrow we shall see all that on the battlefield."
"Ma foi, sire, nous ferons ce qui sera dans notre possibilite, sire,"
"Ma tante, please let me stay," said he, going up to his aunt.
"Madame de Genlis! Madame de Genlis!" shouted laughing voices through
"Madame, I doubt my ability before such an audience," said he, smilingly
"Made what?"
"Made, made me an offer, Mamma! Mamma!" she exclaimed.
"Mais charmante!" said he, evidently referring to Natasha, who did not
"Mais, ma bonne amie," said Prince Andrew, "vous devriez au contraire
"Mais, mon cher, I did this for my own sake, to satisfy my conscience,
"Major Denisov," Rostov said again. "He was wounded at Molliten."
"Makar Alexeevich has the list," answered the assistant. "But if you'll
"Makarka" (their name for Makarin) "will go through fire and water for
"Malbrook s'en va-t-en guerre. Dieu sait quand reviendra." *
"Mamma darling!" said Natasha, kneeling by her mother and bringing her
"Mamma darling, it's not at all so... my poor, sweet darling," she
"Mamma told me to ask you to join the dancers."
"Mamma! Bolkonski has come!" she said. "Mamma, it is awful, it is
"Mamma! For heaven's sake don't ask me anything now! One can't talk
"Mamma! What are you saying..."
"Mamma! What sweets are we going to have?" Natasha again cried boldly,
"Mamma! What sweets are we going to have?" and Natasha's voice sounded
"Mamma!" rang out the clear contralto notes of her childish voice,
"Mamma!" she muttered, "give him to me, give him, Mamma, quickly,
"Mamma!... Mamma!... He has made me..."
"Mamma, I don't at all want to," replied Natasha, but all the same she
"Mamma, I want him. Why should I be wasted like this, Mamma?"
"Mamma, are you cross? Don't be cross, dear! Is it my fault?"
"Mamma, can we have a talk? Yes?" said Natasha. "Now, just one on your
"Mamma, darling, forgive me!"
"Mamma, don't cry! Only tell me that you wish it, and you know I will
"Mamma, it's impossible: see what is going on in the yard!" she cried.
"Mamma, one need not be ashamed of his being a widower?"
"Mamma, tell us what happened to you in the barn."
"Mamma, you used to try your fate yourself..." said her daughter.
"Mamma, your cap, more to this side," said Natasha. "I'll arrange it,"
"Mamma," said Sonya, "Prince Andrew is here, mortally wounded. He is
"Mamma," screamed Natasha, "I'll stake my head it's he! I assure you!
"Marriages are made in heaven," replied the elderly lady.
"Marry me, and I will be your slave!"
"Marry, marry, my boy!... A good family!... Clever people, eh? Rich,
"Mary Bogdanovna, I think it's beginning!" said Princess Mary looking at
"Mary came by way of Ryazan," said Natasha.
"Mary is so splendid," she said. "How she understands children! It is as
"Mary's is a face which such a coiffure does not suit in the least. Not
"Mary, dear, I think he is asleep--he was so tired," said Sonya, meeting
"Mary, don't talk nonsense. You ought to be ashamed of yourself!" he
"Mary, you know the Gosp..." but he broke off.
"Mary, you must despise me!" he would say. "I deserve it."
"Mary, you mustn't think me wicked. No? Mary darling, how I love you!
"Mary," he said softly, going up to her, "it will never happen again;
"Mary," said she, "tell me what I should do! I am afraid of being bad.
"Mary," she said timidly, drawing Princess Mary's hand to herself,
"Mary," she said, moving away from the embroidery frame and lying back,
"Marya Dmitrievna! What kind of ice pudding? I don't like ice cream."
"Marya Dmitrievna?" came her voice from there.
"Marya Lvovna Karagina and her daughter!" announced the countess'
"Mashka's sweet root." It was very bitter, but they wandered about the
"Master, not here--don't understand... me, you..." said Gerasim, trying
"Mavra, quicker, darling!"
"May I ask you," said Pierre, "what village that is in front?"
"May I call in that boy who was taken prisoner and give him something to
"May I go in and look?"
"May I join you?" said Dimmler who had come up quietly, and he sat down
"May I kiss Mamma?" he asked Natasha.
"May I make bold to trouble your honor?" said he respectfully, but with
"May I stay a little longer?" he said, letting his stout body sink into
"May the devil take them--the traitors!"
"May the kingdom of Heaven be his! God's will be done to us all!" He
"May the wounded men stay in our house?" she asked.
"Maybe I do love a poor girl," said Nicholas to himself. "Am I to
"Me petition the Empewo'!" exclaimed Denisov, in a voice to which he
"Merci, chere amie, d'etre venue." *
"Merci, monsieur," * said the drummer boy in a trembling almost childish
"Mercy on us! Your excellency!" answered Alpatych, immediately
"Michael Feoklitych," said he to the esaul, "this is again fwom that
"Michael Ivanovich!" cried the old prince to the architect who, busy
"Milashka, dear!" rose Nicholas' triumphant cry. It looked as if Milka
"Mind your own business," an old sergeant shouted at them. "If they've
"Mind, Annette, I hope you have not played a wicked trick on me," she
"Mind, I'll smash your face in! Don't make jokes!" cried Anatole,
"Mind, no holding on!" cried another.
"Mind, the count knows nothing. Behave as if you know nothing either,"
"Mind, walk him up and down well!"
"Mine, sir? All right. But how about you?"
"Missed!" shouted Dolokhov, and he lay helplessly, face downwards on the
"Mmm...ar...ate...ate..." he repeated several times.
"Mon Dieu! Mon Dieu! Oh!" she heard as she left the room.
"Mon Dieu, mon Dieu!" she muttered, and lifting her dress with one hand
"Mon cher, even in this case you can't do without Michael Mikhaylovich
"Mon cher," answered Anatole (their whole conversation was in French),
"Mon enfant!" she muttered, "je vous aime et vous connais depuis
"Monseigneur!" exclaimed Pierre, not in an offended but in a pleading
"Monster! Villain!" shouted the woman angrily, suddenly ceasing to weep.
"More, please, more!" cried Natasha at the door as soon as the balalayka
"Moscow has nothing else to do but gossip," Boris went on. "Everybody
"Most Gracious Sovereign and Emperor!" Prince Vasili sternly declaimed,
"Mot d'ordre," repeated the sentinel, barring the way and not replying.
"Mot d'ordre." *
"Mother! The dew is cold but clear.... It's well that I'm a
"Mount!" he commanded in a whisper. The men took their places and
"Move on a hundred yards and we are certainly saved, remain here another
"Mr. Aide-de-camp! Help me!... What does it all mean?" screamed the
"Mr. Aide-de-camp! Mr. Aide-de-camp!... For heaven's sake... Protect
"Mr. Dimmler, please play my favorite nocturne by Field," came the old
"Much as Mamma pressed her, she refused, and I know she won't change
"Mummy!... darling!... I am here, my dearest Mummy," she kept on
"Murderer!" he shouted suddenly to the publican. "Bind him, lads!"
"Must one die like a dog?" said he.
"My God! What does it all mean?" thought he. "And here, where at any
"My God! What is this? Why is he here?" said Prince Andrew to himself.
"My God, I'm a ruined and dishonored man! A bullet through my brain is
"My God, how happy I should be if he ordered me to leap into the fire
"My brother dined with me yesterday--we nearly died of laughter--he ate
"My carriage!" he said.
"My commands? Let them go away, that's all.... And let the lunatics
"My cousin has nothing to do with this and it's not necessary to mention
"My darling Mummy!" she repeated, straining all the power of her love to
"My darling!" he said--a word he had never used to her before. "God is
"My dear Anna Mikhaylovna," said he with his usual familiarity and
"My dear Boris," said Princess Anna Mikhaylovna to her son as Countess
"My dear Princess Catherine Semenovna," began Prince Vasili impatiently,
"My dear benefactor! This is what I expected from you--I knew your
"My dear boy, what a way to look at it! You know Sonya has nothing and
"My dear count, you were one of my best pupils--you must dance," said
"My dear fellow, how are you?" said he through the singing, making his
"My dear fellow, what have you been up to in Moscow? Why have you
"My dear fellow, with our five hundred thousand troops it should be easy
"My dear fellow, you are a hero!" said Bilibin.
"My dear fellow," Nesvitski whispered to Prince Andrew, "the old man is
"My dear friend?" said she, in a tone of pathetic inquiry, prepared to
"My dear!" exclaimed his mother imploringly, again laying her hand on
"My dear, I must tell you that this is a moment I shall never, never
"My dear, really... it's better not to wake him... he's asleep," said
"My dear, you order what is right.... You know I don't understand about
"My dear," Princess Mary entering at such a moment would say, "little
"My dear," he heard what seemed to him her despairing whisper behind
"My dear," said Anna Mikhaylovna to her son, "I know from a reliable
"My dear," said Princess Mary, addressing her brother from beside the
"My dear," she said to her son, once more stimulating him by a touch,
"My dearest darling... Mummy, my precious!..." she whispered
"My desire is never to leave you, Father, never to separate my life
"My father!" he thought. (Though there were two good portraits of Prince
"My father, to whom I have told my plans, has made it an express
"My friend," said Anna Mikhaylovna in gentle tones, addressing the hall
"My head, be it good or bad, must depend on itself," said he, rising
"My little Sasha! Look at Sasha!" she said.
"My mind, my mind aches?" questioned Princess Mary.
"My mother! My mother, my angel, my adored angel mother," and Dolokhov
"My part is played out," said Prince Andrew. "What's the use of talking
"My passion! I have had so many," replied Pierre.
"My poor husband is enduring pains and hunger in Jewish taverns, but the
"My vocation is a different one," thought Princess Mary. "My vocation
"My wife," continued Prince Andrew, "is an excellent woman, one of those
"My wretched lawsuit takes all I have and makes no progress. Would you
"Nastasya Ivanovna, what sort of children shall I have?" she asked the
"Natalie!" said Marya Dmitrievna. "I wish for your good. Lie still,
"Natalie, just a word, only one!" he kept repeating, evidently not
"Natalie?" he whispered inquiringly while she felt her hands being
"Nataly," he said, moving with rapid steps toward her, "decide my fate.
"Natalya Ilynichna behaves very well to me," remarked Boris. "I have
"Natalya Ilynichna," Pierre began, dropping his eyes with a feeling of
"Natasha does not know yet, but he is going with us," said Sonya.
"Natasha insists on seeing Count Peter Kirilovich," said she.
"Natasha is not quite well; she's in her room and would like to see you.
"Natasha! Natasha!..." cried the countess. "It's not true... it's not
"Natasha! Now it's your turn. Sing me something," they heard the
"Natasha!" he whispered in French, "do you know I have made up my mind
"Natasha!" moaned Sonya, aghast.
"Natasha!" she said, just audibly.
"Natasha, I am afraid for you!"
"Natasha, I am in earnest..."
"Natasha, I don't understand you. And what are you saying! Think of your
"Natasha, I have asked you not to speak of that. Let us talk about you."
"Natasha, I love you too much! More than anything in the world."
"Natasha, Natasha!" came Countess Mary's frightened whisper from the
"Natasha, he is no more, no more!"
"Natasha, undress, darling; lie down on my bed."
"Natasha, what are you about? Come here!" said the countess.
"Natasha, what is it about?" she asked. "What do they matter to you? It
"Natasha, you are sixteen. At your age I was married. You say Boris is
"Natasha, you love me?" she said in a soft trustful whisper. "Natasha,
"Natasha, you'd better lie in the middle," said Sonya.
"Natasha, your hair!..." whispered Sonya.
"Natasha," he said, "you know that I love you, but..."
"Natasha," said she, "you asked me not to speak to you, and I haven't
"Natasha?" she murmured.
"Nesvitski, Nesvitski! you numskull!" came a hoarse voice from behind
"Never mind what it's for...."
"Never mind! You're young folks yet, and please God may still have some.
"Never mind, I'll run it up, it won't show," said Dunyasha.
"Never mind, never mind, what does it matter? For one day we can move
"Never, never marry, my dear fellow! That's my advice: never marry till
"Nice! And so you no longer wish to marry Boris?"
"Nicholas has the weakness of never agreeing with anything not generally
"Nicholas is going away in a week's time, his... papers... have come...
"Nicholas! Come out in your dressing gown!" said Natasha's voice.
"Nicholas! Get up!" Natasha's voice was again heard at the door.
"Nicholas!" was all Sonya said, instantly turning white.
"Nicholas, I saw it... he was to blame, but why do you... Nicholas!" and
"Nicholas, I'll explain to you. Go away! Listen, Mamma darling," said
"Nicholas, don't tell me that!" she said.
"Nicholas, have you come? Come here, dear!" called the old countess from
"Nicholas, what a fine dog Trunila is! He knew me," said Natasha,
"Nicholas, when did you break your cameo?" she asked to change the
"Nicholas, will you come to Iogel's? Please do!" said Natasha. "He asked
"Nicholas, you are talking nonsense! Be quiet, be quiet, be quiet, I
"Nikolenka, what is the matter?" Sonya's eyes fixed on him seemed to
"Nikolenka... a letter... wa... a... s... wounded... my darling boy...
"Nikolenka... wounded... a letter," she announced in gleeful triumph.
"No apologies, none whatever," said Dolokhov to Denisov (who on his
"No good... no good..." said the prince rapidly, and thrusting his feet
"No it's not that, but her action seems so jerky," said Pierre in a
"No matter at all, my dear count," she said, meekly closing her eyes.
"No matter, Princess, don't be alarmed," said Mary Bogdanovna. "We'll
"No one can attain to truth by himself. Only by laying stone on stone
"No one is right and no one is to blame; so she too is not to blame," he
"No peace, damn them!" he muttered, angry he knew not with whom. "Ah
"No prisoners!" said he, repeating the aide-de-camp's words. "They
"No really, my dear, this dress is not pretty," said Lise, looking
"No talking in the ranks!... No talking, no talking!"
"No you won't, master!" he shouted.
"No! I shall not give up Moscow without a battle!"
"No! No! No! When your father writes to tell me that you are behaving
"No! What is there to talk about?" said Pierre. "It's all the same....
"No! What kind, Marya Dmitrievna? What kind?" she almost screamed; "I
"No!" he suddenly said to Berthier. "I can't send Claparede. Send
"No, Andrew, I must say you have changed. Oh, how you have..."
"No, Father," she replied in a frightened voice.
"No, I am not going," Pierre replied hastily, in a surprised tone and as
"No, I am used to this," said Petya. "I say, aren't the flints in your
"No, I came on business," replied Rostov, briefly.
"No, I considered it erroneous and did not follow it," said Pierre,
"No, I did not sleep," said Princess Mary, shaking her head.
"No, I don't believe we ever were in animals," said Natasha, still in
"No, I don't want that, I don't want to see and understand that. I want
"No, I hate my life," Pierre muttered, wincing.
"No, I have a wicked heart."
"No, I have been looking at you a long time. I felt you come in. No one
"No, I have been transferred to the line," said Anatole, hardly able to
"No, I have not; but this is what I have been thinking and wanted to
"No, I know all is over," she said hurriedly. "No, that can never be.
"No, I meant to ask..." Pierre began, but Prince Andrew interrupted him.
"No, I mustn't. I am so sorry for him! He's so nice."
"No, I only wonder how you managed to get away from your regiment. Dans
"No, I saw... At first there was nothing, then I saw him lying down."
"No, I shan't have such luck," thought Rostov, "yet what wouldn't it
"No, I tell you."
"No, I think I'll go home."
"No, I think the sale will come off in a few days," said someone.
"No, I went to look at the fire, and they arrested me there, and tried
"No, I will do it myself, only tell me what to say. It's all very well
"No, I won't miss my opportunity now, as I did after Austerlitz," he
"No, I won't promise that. You don't know how Kutuzov is pestered since
"No, I won't," said Pierre, pushing Anatole aside, and he went up to the
"No, I'll put it off for a bit. I'll tell you later. You must forgive
"No, I've come on my own," answered Pierre, and he went down the hill
"No, Mamma, I will lie down here on the floor," Natasha replied
"No, Mamma, I'm not in love with him, I suppose I'm not in love with
"No, Mamma, but I'm so sorry for him. I don't know how I'm to say it."
"No, Mamma, he doesn't want to sleep," said little Natasha with
"No, Monsieur Dessalles, I will ask my aunt to let me stay," replied
"No, Natasha and I sometimes don't go to sleep till after two, so please
"No, Papa is not back yet," said Sonya.
"No, Papa. Forgive me if I have caused you unpleasantness. I understand
"No, Peter Nikolaevich; I only want to show that in the cavalry the
"No, Prince, our regiment has gone to the front, but I am attached...
"No, Princess, I have lost your affection forever!" said Mademoiselle
"No, Sonya, I can't any longer!" she said. "I can't hide it from you
"No, Sonya, but do you remember so that you remember him perfectly,
"No, after dinner," said the old count, evidently expecting much
"No, ah... Likhachev--isn't that your name? Do you know I have only just
"No, and if I had I shouldn't have recognized her."
"No, and the general's out too."
"No, better not!" said another, inner voice.
"No, but I have been in love a thousand times and shall fall in
"No, but I must. It may be arrogant of me, but still it is best to say
"No, but I say," said Pierre, calming down, "you are a wonderful fellow!
"No, but I want something else. I want peasant clothes and a pistol,"
"No, but do promise! I won't let you go! My dear benefactor..."
"No, but don't you think it's nice?" she kept repeating.
"No, but imagine the old Countess Zubova, with false curls and her mouth
"No, but listen," she said, "now you are quite a man, aren't you? I'm
"No, but she said that it was all over and that he's now an officer."
"No, but what is it, my dear? Do you want me to go and tell him?" said
"No, but why do you think so?" Pierre suddenly began, lowering his
"No, bwother, I have gwown mustaches myself," said Denisov on reading
"No, call her you, please! I'll tell you all about it some other time.
"No, dearest, sweet one, honey, I won't give up--I know you know
"No, don't!" he exclaimed with a frown. "You go, Michael Ivanovich."
"No, don't... the island of Madagascar!" she said, and jumping off his
"No, fifty," replied the latter.
"No, friend, he is sharper-eyed than you are. Boots and leg bands... he
"No, friend," said a pleasant and, as it seemed to Prince Andrew, a
"No, gentlemen, no... you mustn't think... I quite understand. You're
"No, gentlemen, you have had your sleep, but I have not slept for two
"No, he is a Freemason, I have found out. He is fine, dark-blue and
"No, he thinks only of himself," muttered the princess without
"No, he will make his entry tomorrow," he replied, and continued his
"No, he would not have approved," said Pierre, after reflection. "What
"No, he's gone out."
"No, he's not a fool!" replied Natasha indignantly and seriously.
"No, he's not dead--it's impossible!" she told herself and approached
"No, if I hadn't thought of it being a treasure," said Rostov, "but I
"No, impossible!" said Prince Andrew, laughing and pressing Pierre's
"No, it can't be helped, lad," said the prince. "They're all like that;
"No, it cannot be! How happy I am! But it can't be.... How happy I am!
"No, it was not only that gay, kind, and frank look, not only that
"No, it will not do," she said decidedly, clasping her hands. "No, Mary,
"No, it's a sprain."
"No, it's impossible to do anything here," thought Rostov, lowering his
"No, it's not he. How can you talk such nonsense?"
"No, it's not possible!" he cried aloud.
"No, it's not that, but worse. You will see. O, Mary, he is too good, he
"No, it's not that. I never leave off loving you. And one couldn't love
"No, it's only indigestion?... Say it's only indigestion, say so,
"No, it's only the unexpectedness of it," thought Pierre. But as soon as
"No, it's the chorus from The Water-Carrier, listen!" and Natasha sang
"No, leave me alone," said Princess Mary.
"No, life is not over at thirty-one!" Prince Andrew suddenly decided
"No, ma'am! We must part, we must part! Understand that, understand
"No, madame!" Pierre continued in a tone of displeasure, "I have not
"No, merci, mon pere."
"No, mon pere."
"No, monseigneur, you cannot have known me. I am a militia officer and
"No, monseigneur," he said, suddenly remembering that Davout was a duke.
"No, my dear boy" (the count, too, felt embarrassed. He knew he had
"No, my dear fellow, I'll be a wallflower," said Denisov. "Don't you
"No, my fwiend! The Tugendbund is all vewy well for the sausage eaters,
"No, my love; I am frightened myself," answered her mother. "Now go!"
"No, no! A thousand times no! I shall never agree with you," said
"No, no! I'll do anything!" she said, suddenly checking her tears. "I am
"No, no!" cried Natasha, "she and I have already talked it over. We knew
"No, no, please not... You are Mademoiselle Bourienne," said the little
"No, no. I'll go out to them," said Princess Mary, and in spite of
"No, no. Why did you bring me away? She will be asking for me."
"No, not long..."
"No, not on any account! I will tell him myself, and you'll listen at
"No, not once! Everybody seems to imagine that being taken prisoner
"No, nothing."
"No, now that she has become a bluestocking she has finally renounced
"No, on my true word of honor," said Natasha, crossing herself, "I won't
"No, on my word it's not obstinacy! I can't describe the feeling. I
"No, on the contrary, on the contrary! His face was cheerful, and he
"No, one can't hear them. They'd be firing if we had."
"No, pardon me, I won't go now till the child is better," thought he,
"No, really! I'll drive home, I must have left them there. I'll
"No, really, give it up!" said Dolokhov. "I am speaking seriously. It's
"No, she either doesn't understand or is pretending," thought Pierre.
"No, she has dressed and gone into the drawing room," said Sonya.
"No, she's altogether different. I can't!"
"No, stop!" said Anatole. "Shut the door; we have first to sit down.
"No, tell them to bring a small table out here, my dear boy. I'll look
"No, tell them to harness."
"No, the chief point is that to Nicholas ideas and discussions are
"No, there is no change. I only came to have a talk about business,
"No, there's not much to be amused at here," said Rostov, and rode on a
"No, to kill a man is bad--wrong."
"No, wait a bit.... Oh, how funny you look!" cried Nicholas, peering
"No, wait a minute, please."
"No, wait, Pierre! The princess is too kind to wish to deprive me of the
"No, why be sorry? Being here, you had to pay your respects. But if he
"No, why disturb the old fellow?" said the countess. "Besides, you
"No, you can't understand what I learned from that illiterate man--that
"No, you don't understand!"
"No, you go on, I was talking nonsense," said Natasha.
"No, you have not understood me, don't let us talk about it," she
"No, you have not understood me," said his mother, not knowing how to
"No, you know it's too soon for news. But my father is anxious and I
"No, you'll never manage him that way," said Anatole. "Wait a bit and
"No," answered Nicholas, and lay back on his pillow.
"No," answered Pierre, evidently not considering awkward the meaning
"No," cried he, becoming more and more eager, "Napoleon is great because
"No," replied Princess Mary.
"No," said Natasha, though she had in reality been thinking about Prince
"No," said Pierre, with a laughing glance at his big, stout body. "I
"No," said Prince Andrew, "my father did not wish me to take advantage
"No," she replied, but she had not understood his question.
"No--promise that you will not refuse! It will give you no trouble
"No-o-o!" muttered Dolokhov through his teeth, "no, it's not over." And
"No. All I say is that it is not argument that convinces me of the
"No. Give me the book," said the stranger.
"No. I'm quite, quite all right. I feel so comfortable!" answered
"No. What did you say? Go on, go on."
"No."
"No."
"No."
"No... Why should it be? On the contrary... But why do you ask me?"
"No... why not, my dear, why shouldn't I? I like him. He is kind, he is
"No; I mean do you know Natasha Rostova?"
"No? She is very nice and kind and, above all, she's much to be pitied.
"Nobody wants me!" thought Rostov. "There is no one to help me or pity
"Non, dites-lui que je ne veux pas le voir, que je suis furieuse contre
"Non, madame." He smiled quite inappropriately.
"Nonsense!" he cried, and the veins on his forehead and neck stood out
"Nonsense, I tell you. Your mother's milk has hardly dried on your lips
"Nonsense, indeed! I am telling you the fact," said Natasha indignantly.
"Nonsense, nonsense!" cried the old man, shaking his pigtail to see
"Not 'very good' it's simply delicious!"
"Not Bonaparte. He is the Emperor! Sacre nom...!" cried he angrily.
"Not Kutuzov, but what's his name--well, never mind... there are not
"Not a bit! Please don't, Aunt!"
"Not a patriot at all, but simply..." Natasha replied in an injured
"Not all the columns have formed up yet, Your Majesty."
"Not all, for you will not be there; not all," said Prince Hippolyte
"Not at all bad!" he thought, examining her, "not at all bad, that
"Not at all, Mamma."
"Not at all," rejoined the adjutant in dismay. "Klyucharev had his own
"Not at all," replied Nicholas as if offended at the idea. "As befits
"Not at all," said Prince Andrew.
"Not bound to endure insults," Dolokhov concluded in loud, ringing
"Not hurt, Petrov?" asked one.
"Not in the least," replied the vicomte. "After the murder of the
"Not killed--wounded!" another officer corrected him.
"Not let the wife have him?" said the old man, and laughed.
"Not lower, who said we were lower?... How do I know what I was before?"
"Not more stupid than you, madam," said the nine-year-old Petya, with
"Not on any account!" exclaimed Rostov.
"Not only occupied, but Bonaparte is at Schonbrunn, and the count, our
"Not seen Duport--the famous dancer? Well then, you won't understand.
"Not take prisoners," Prince Andrew continued: "That by itself would
"Not that either. That puts the court in too bad a light," replied
"Not this way! To the infantry!" added another with loud laughter,
"Not unto us, not unto us, but unto Thy Name!... I too am a man like the
"Not yet!" interposed Napoleon, and, as if fearing to give vent to his
"Not yet. But where are you off to?"
"Nothing new, except that the soldiers are robbing and
"Nothing of the sort. Orders are issued for a battle."
"Nothing! What business is it of yours?" muttered the count angrily.
"Nothing, my dear."
"Nothing, nothing," replied Rostov.
"Nothing, nothing." She smiled at Pierre through her tears. "Good night!
"Nothing," answered Princess Mary, looking firmly with her radiant eyes
"Nothing," answered the countess. "If everything is ready let us start."
"Nothing," said he and turned again to the horses.
"Nothing. You mustn't cry here," he said, looking at her with the same
"Nothing... No..."
"Nothing... only I feel sad... sad about Andrew," she said, wiping away
"Nothing... only a shell..." he answered.
"Now I am all right," she said, and asking the vicomte to begin, she
"Now I must disclose to you the chief aim of our Order," he said, "and
"Now I see it all! I know who has been intriguing--I know!" cried the
"Now about your family. Do you know that since your daughter came
"Now come, come! Be reasonable. I know your excellent heart."
"Now for the recitation!" said Speranski on returning from his study. "A
"Now he is censured and accused by all who were enthusiastic about him
"Now just listen, Dronushka," said he. "Don't talk nonsense to me. His
"Now listen to me. I'm telling you this for the last time. Why should
"Now look out for the ball... we'll throw it back."
"Now softly, softly die away!" and the sounds obeyed him. "Now fuller,
"Now that's right!" said the one behind joyfully, when he had got into
"Now the fun begins," thought Anatole, sitting down with a smile beside
"Now then! Nearly ready? You're dawdling!" he shouted to the servants.
"Now then, Matvevna, dear old lady, don't let me down!" he was saying as
"Now then, Vaska," said Nicholas.
"Now then, all together, like bargees!" rose the merry voices of those
"Now then, all together--shove!" cried the voices, and the huge surface
"Now then, catch hold in twos! Hand up the lever! That's it... Where are
"Now then, go away and take your monstrosity with you," said the mother,
"Now then, go on, go on!" incited the officer, bending forward and
"Now then, let's see how far it will carry, Captain. Just try!" said the
"Now then, make haste and let me have this card and I'll take my cap
"Now then, niece!" he exclaimed, waving to Natasha the hand that had
"Now then, now then!" said she.
"Now then, now then, I'm only joking!" he said. "Remember this,
"Now then, now then, teach us how it goes! I'll soon pick it up. How is
"Now then, what do you want?" asked Napoleon in the tone of a man
"Now then, you devil's puppet, look alive and hunt for it!" shouted
"Now then, you foxes!" said another, laughing at some militiamen who,
"Now they will stop it, now they will be horrified at what they have
"Now thou hast seen the lesser light," uttered a voice. Then the candles
"Now to tell one's fortune in the empty bathhouse is frightening!" said
"Now we'll go into action. Oh, when he takes it in hand himself, things
"Now what does this mean, gentlemen?" said the staff officer, in the
"Now you don't know that at all!" said Nicholas. "But I must talk to
"Now you, young prince, what's your name?" said Prince Bolkonski,
"Now, Miss Sonya is sure to see something," whispered Dunyasha; "while
"Now, Nicholas," she added, turning to her husband, "I can't understand
"Now, Pierre nurses them splendidly," said Natasha. "He says his hand is
"Now, Sonya!" she said, going to the very middle of the room, where she
"Now, Vera, what does it matter to you?" said Natasha in defense,
"Now, all together! But wait a moment, boys... With a song!"
"Now, dear boy," said Prince Vasili playfully, "say 'yes,' and I'll
"Now, look out, master!" he cried.
"Now, my lad, we'll go and get dwy," he said to Petya.
"Now, quick march, lads!" said Anatole, rising.
"Now, remember," said Count Orlov-Denisov to the sergeant at parting,
"Now, what are you pestewing me for?" cried Denisov, suddenly losing his
"Now, why frighten them?" said Pelageya Danilovna.
"Now, why need you do it?" said Princess Mary. "Why did you come to
"Now?" repeated Natasha, and a happy smile lit up her face. "Have you
"Nowadays old friends are not remembered," the countess would say when
"O God! I am lost!" she said to herself. "How could I let him?" She sat
"O God, O God! What does it mean?" she suddenly exclaimed. "To bed then,
"O God, if he were here now I would not behave as I did then, but
"O Lord God! Thou who art in that heaven, save, forgive, and protect
"O Lord our God, in whom we believe and in whom we put our trust, let us
"O Lord! Oh, it will be the death of me! O Lord!" moaned the man in a
"O Lord! The people are like wild beasts! How could he be alive?" voices
"O Lord!"
"O Lord, O Lord! How starry it is! Tremendous! That means a hard
"O Lord, O Lord!" exclaimed the count. "Where is the manifesto?"
"O Lord, O Lord, it's always the same! Oh, where am I to go? What am I
"O Lord, have mercy!" added the deacon.
"O Lord, my Creator, Thou has heard our prayer..." said he in a
"O, Lord Jesus Christ!" she murmured.
"O, Natasha!" Sonya suddenly almost screamed, catching her companion's
"O-hoy!" came at that moment, that inimitable huntsman's call which
"O-ne! T-wo! Thwee!" he shouted angrily and stepped aside.
"Of course I can."
"Of course I do, I remember his teeth as if I had just seen them."
"Of course I would on no account wish to go away from him.... Alpatych
"Of course it is," he answered absently. "That's not the point. I beg
"Of course not!"
"Of course not!"
"Of course she will!" whispered Natasha, but did not finish... suddenly
"Of course! It's marvelous. So bold, so easy!"
"Of course, it is a very brilliant match, but happiness, my dear..."
"Of course, we only just missed one another," said the staff officer,
"Of course. I'm going into action! I've shaved, bwushed my teeth, and
"Of course. What is it?"
"Of four hundred thousand who crossed the Vistula," he wrote further
"Of whom you imagine me to be one?" said Prince Andrew, with a quiet and
"Oh God, what would happen to me if the Emperor spoke to me?" thought
"Oh come, that's enough!" said the other.
"Oh dear, what a beast I am!" muttered Rostov, as he read the letter.
"Oh dear, what a young lady!" said Foka, pretending to frown at Natasha.
"Oh dear, what am I thinking about? I've mixed everything up. One has so
"Oh goodness! What has happened? Really it was not my fault!"
"Oh mio crudele affetto."... One, two, three... one, two, three...
"Oh my God! Why?" Nicholas cried in despair.
"Oh no!" Pierre replied, looking at Prince Andrew with frightened,
"Oh no!" said Iogel, hastening to reassure him. "You were only
"Oh no, let me off, Countess," Denisov replied.
"Oh no, not at all too young!" replied the count. "Why, our mothers used
"Oh no, not at all! On the contrary, I am very glad to make your
"Oh no, we are good friends with him," said Nicholas in the simplicity
"Oh nothing, only a trifle," said Natasha, smilingly still more
"Oh well... it can't be helped!" said he in a tone of vexation and
"Oh yes!" said Pierre, rousing himself and rising hurriedly. "Look
"Oh yes, I heard it today," said Shinshin, coming into the Rostovs' box.
"Oh yes, I know, I know, I know!" Natasha interrupted him. "When I was
"Oh yes, I sent that announcement. But I don't want to interrupt you,"
"Oh yes, I understand," said the governor's wife.
"Oh yes, an artful tale! Follow her into slavery! Pull down your houses
"Oh yes, and what do the Masonic brothers say about war? How would they
"Oh yes, another thing! Please, my dear fellow, will you sharpen my
"Oh yes, it is horribly stupid," said Pierre.
"Oh yes, like that, I know, I only forgot," said he.
"Oh yes, one sees that plainly. Paris!... A man who doesn't know Paris
"Oh yes, the war," he said. "No! What sort of warrior should I make? And
"Oh yes, very much! My brother knows him, he's dined with him--the
"Oh yes, why not? They may," he said.
"Oh yes, your plan. To join the hussars? I'll mention it, I'll bring it
"Oh yes," assented Princess Mary, "perhaps that's it. I'll go. Courage,
"Oh yes," she answered. "You noticed nothing?" her look asked.
"Oh! And my coachman has gone."
"Oh! I thought you were in your room," she said, for some reason
"Oh! Oh! Oh! Well, au revoir, Bolkonski! Au revoir, Prince! Come back
"Oh! Oh! Oh!" groaned Kutuzov despairingly and looked around....
"Oh! Oh! Oh!" he muttered, looking down from the window at the stones of
"Oh! Oh!" exclaimed several voices.
"Oh! Oh!" groaned Nesvitski as if in fierce pain, seizing the officer of
"Oh! Oh, ooh!" he sobbed, like a woman.
"Oh!" said Pierre, looking over his spectacles in perplexity at Prince
"Oh, Denisov is quite different," replied Nicholas, implying that even
"Oh, Heaven! How ill he is!" exclaimed the mother.
"Oh, I am really in despair at what has occurred," said Pierre rapidly,
"Oh, I am so happy!" she replied, smiled through her tears, bent over
"Oh, I beg your pardon," she said as if waking up. "Are you going
"Oh, I don't know, it is all so strange," replied Sonya, clutching at
"Oh, I must give you a treat," Bilibin whispered to Bolkonski. "Kuragin
"Oh, I really did not mean to hurt her feelings. I understand them so
"Oh, I took one all right," said Tikhon.
"Oh, I'll go across and have a look...."
"Oh, I'll go and see," said Pierre, jumping up. "You know," he added,
"Oh, I'm all right," said he, "but why did they shoot those poor
"Oh, I've forgotten..." she replied. "But none of you would go?"
"Oh, Mamma, how is it you don't understand that the Holy Father, who has
"Oh, Natasha!" said Sonya, looking ecstatically and earnestly at her
"Oh, Natasha!" she cried.
"Oh, Nicholas, how can you talk like that?" cried Sonya, hardly able to
"Oh, Nikita, please go... where can I send him?... Yes, go to the yard
"Oh, Papa! how nice you look! Charming!" cried Natasha, as she stood in
"Oh, Sonya, if you knew him as I do! He said... He asked me what I had
"Oh, Yakov Alpatych! What have you come for?"
"Oh, a very wise man is Prince Kutuzov! I have known him a long time!"
"Oh, but he was a regular good-for-nothing," said Tikhon. "The clothes
"Oh, but it's so... You take everything so to heart," said Pierre, and
"Oh, but you were there?" said Prince Bagration, addressing Prince
"Oh, come now! As if you could come at a wrong time!" said Boris, and he
"Oh, come, ma cousine! Where do you get your information from? On the
"Oh, come, my dear count! C'est la fable de tout Moscou. Je vous admire,
"Oh, dear sir!" she cried, seizing him by the legs. "My benefactor, set
"Oh, dear! Well then, wait. That's right, Sonya."
"Oh, do as you like! Am I hindering anyone?" she said, not surrendering
"Oh, do the best you can! Isn't it all the same?" The doctor noticed
"Oh, do you know? While you were talking in the study I was looking at
"Oh, don't ask me, don't ask me! I don't know myself. Tomorrow... But
"Oh, don't mention it, Count! I quite understand," said Berg, getting up
"Oh, don't speak of his going, don't! I won't hear it spoken of," said
"Oh, don't speak to me of Austria. Perhaps I don't understand things,
"Oh, don't talk to me of my regiment," replied Pierre, kissing his
"Oh, every bullet has its billet," answered Vaska Denisov, turning in
"Oh, go to the devil!" called out a voice, drowned by the laughter of
"Oh, go to the devil, all of you! To the devil, the devil, the devil..."
"Oh, gracious me, a man beaten to death--killed!..." screamed a woman
"Oh, he is in a dreadful state," said the mother to her son when they
"Oh, he is so kind!" answered Princess Mary.
"Oh, he loves me so!" said Helene, who for some reason imagined that
"Oh, he's a hard nut to crack," said one of the officers who was sitting
"Oh, he's all right, a good horse," answered Rostov, though the horse
"Oh, how absurd you are! It is not beauty that endears, it's love that
"Oh, how delightful it is!" she kept saying, running up to Sonya.
"Oh, how dreadful! How can you laugh at it, Count?"
"Oh, how good! How splendid!" said he to himself when a cleanly laid
"Oh, how lovely! Now go to sleep, and there's an end of it."
"Oh, how nice, how splendid!" she said to everything.
"Oh, how nice," thought Natasha; and when Sonya and Nicholas had gone
"Oh, how oppressive this continual delirium is," thought Prince Andrew,
"Oh, how strange you are with that mustache and those eyebrows!...
"Oh, how terrible," said Sonya returning from the yard chilled and
"Oh, hush, please!" said another.
"Oh, if anyone knew how little anything matters to me now," she said.
"Oh, if only he would come quicker! I am so afraid it will never be!
"Oh, is it you, Prince, who have freed your serfs?" said an old man of
"Oh, it is really too late," said Count Orlov, looking at the camp.
"Oh, it would be a terrible loss, she is an enchanting woman."
"Oh, it's a fresh broadsheet."
"Oh, it's nothing. I only wished to say..." (he wanted to repeat a joke
"Oh, it's terrible to feel oneself so in this man's power," thought
"Oh, it's wetched! Well, what are you standing there for, you sca'cwow?
"Oh, ja," said the other, "der Zweck ist nur den Feind zu schwachen,
"Oh, leave off!" said the accountant with a beaming but rather cunning
"Oh, leave off, you always talk nonsense and keep putting things
"Oh, let me be! Why have you interfered at all? Why? Why? Who asked
"Oh, little countess!"... and the count began bustling to get out his
"Oh, master, master, what a sin! And you who have a son!" she began, her
"Oh, master, what are you saying?" exclaimed the horrified Pelageya,
"Oh, my God! My God! Schmidt!" he exclaimed in German. "What a calamity!
"Oh, my God! thank God!" said Princess Mary. "I must go and meet him, he
"Oh, my God, Count, there are moments when I would marry anybody!" she
"Oh, my bower new...!" chimed in twenty voices, and the castanet player,
"Oh, my bower, oh, my bower...!"
"Oh, my dear fellow, we're in such a stew here these last two days."
"Oh, my dear general!" Murat again interrupted him, "with all my heart I
"Oh, my enchantress!" she cried to the blushing Natasha. "Charming! No,
"Oh, no!" exclaimed Natasha.
"Oh, no, Mary Hendrikhovna," replied the officer, "one must look after
"Oh, no, no!" And besides the pallor and the physical suffering on the
"Oh, no, no!" warmly rejoined Prince Vasili, who would not now yield
"Oh, no, not at all," said Boris. "But if you are tired, come and lie
"Oh, no," agreed the other.
"Oh, nonsense, nonsense!" Anatole ejaculated and again made a grimace.
"Oh, nothing," said he, as if weary of being continually asked the same
"Oh, nurse, I'm so glad!"
"Oh, oh, oh! What have they done?" the prisoners on one side and another
"Oh, please!" said he. "I understand your reasons. You are an officer...
"Oh, please... May I stay with you?" cried Petya.
"Oh, quicker, quicker! To get back to that time and have done with all
"Oh, quite right! I had a quarrel with Mamma some time ago about it.
"Oh, she nearly knocked our gentleman's hat off!" cried the red-faced
"Oh, so that is Vereshchagin!" said Pierre, looking at the firm, calm
"Oh, take those off... those..." she said, pointing to his spectacles.
"Oh, tell that blockhead," he said in reply to the question from the
"Oh, that count of yours!" said the princess malevolently. "He is a
"Oh, that is all the same," Dolgorukov said quickly, and getting up he
"Oh, that is dreadful, dreadful!" said Pierre. "I don't understand how
"Oh, that would be so dread..." she began and, prevented by agitation
"Oh, that's it!" said Rostov, evidently thinking of something else.
"Oh, the coxcombs!" he muttered reproachfully.
"Oh, the devil!" exclaimed Denisov angrily, and showing his teeth he
"Oh, the faiwy! She can do anything with me!" said Denisov, and he
"Oh, the nasty beasts!" said he with disgust.
"Oh, there was childish love?" suddenly asked Prince Andrew, blushing
"Oh, those Moscow gossips!" said Dolokhov, and he took up the cards with
"Oh, those damned fellows!" muttered the officer who followed him,
"Oh, those servants!" said the count, swaying his head.
"Oh, to die, to die for him," thought Rostov.
"Oh, undoubtedly!" said Prince Andrew, and with sudden and unnatural
"Oh, very interesting!" said Mademoiselle Bourienne.
"Oh, very well, you may stay in attendance on me."
"Oh, vile and heartless brood!" he exclaimed, and left the room.
"Oh, wait, please!" And Natasha began rapidly and deftly sorting out the
"Oh, well then, good-by: go and dress. Is he very terrible, Denisov?"
"Oh, well, well!" remarked the regimental commander. "Still, one must
"Oh, well, you know people often invent things. I only say what I
"Oh, what a formidable one!" said he. "A formidable one, eh?" he asked
"Oh, what a nuisance," said Dolgorukov, getting up hurriedly and
"Oh, what a pig I am, not to have written and to have given them such
"Oh, what a terrible state he is in! One would not know him, he is so
"Oh, what are you talking about?" said another. "Where is he to go? That
"Oh, what nonsense!" cried Natasha, laughing. "I don't think about him
"Oh, what sleep-?" said the countess, waking up just as she was dropping
"Oh, women, women!" and the captain, looking with glistening eyes at
"Oh, yes!"
"Oh, yes!" said Pierre, with a forced smile. "I am very grateful to you.
"Oh, yes!" said Pierre.
"Oh, yes, Aunt. Who is she?"
"Oh, yes, I quite understand," answered Rostov, who was under his new
"Oh, yes, he has been waiting to start for some time."
"Oh, yes, in a minute; wait... or no! No, of course... go and say I will
"Oh, yes, master, I was found worthy. Such a brightness on the face like
"Oh, yes, yes!" replied the commander in chief. "How is he?..."
"Oh, yes, yes, yes!" said the count hastily. "I shall be very pleased,
"Oh, yes," replied Natasha.
"Oh, yes," said Petya, nodding at the first words Denisov uttered as if
"Oh, yes... I'll lie down at once," said Natasha, and began hurriedly
"Oh, you Don Juan! You serpent!" cried several voices.
"Oh, you Guards!" said Rostov. "I say, send for some wine."
"Oh, you are there!" said Sonya with a start, and came near and
"Oh, you damned dandies! Clean and fresh as if you'd been to a fete,
"Oh, you don't understand anything! Don't talk nonsense, just listen!"
"Oh, you fine fellows, my kind, kind friends! These are men! Oh, my
"Oh, you fool! Why talk rubbish, lout that you are--a real peasant!"
"Oh, you fool!" said the old man, spitting angrily. Some time passed in
"Oh, you know him?" said Peronskaya. "I can't bear him. Il fait a
"Oh, you only spoil things for me. All right, go, go!"
"Oh, your excellency!" said Franz, with difficulty rolling the
"Oh--why, that was in a dream!" Petya said to himself, as he lurched
"Oh-h-h! Dear souls, dear kind souls! Don't let me die! My good
"Oh?" said "Uncle" in surprise, looking inquiringly at Natasha, who
"On Tuesday between eight and nine. It will give me great pleasure."
"On account of your spells of ill health, will your excellency please
"On my honor!"
"On my word, I don't know what I've done with it," he said.
"On ne passe pas!" * cried a voice.
"On that day I always go to pay my devotions to the relics of Prince
"On the 4th, the first courier arrives from Petersburg. The mails
"On the box. You'll sit on the box, won't you, Petya?" cried Natasha.
"On the contrary it's very interesting!" replied Pierre not quite
"On the contrary, I will do what I can. Only I thought..."
"On the contrary, Your Majesty," said Balashev, hardly able to remember
"On the contrary, but what dignity? A princess!" he whispered to her.
"On the contrary, that coiffure suits the princess very well," said
"On the contrary, things seem satisfactory, ma cousine," said Pierre
"On the contrary, your Highness, in indecisive actions it is always
"On the contrary," he said, in a querulous and angry tone that
"On the contrary," replied the prince, who had plainly become depressed,
"On the feeling that is in me and in him," he pointed to Timokhin, "and
"On the same business. But you are damp! Let me wring you out!"
"Once again, Colonel," said the general, "I can't leave half my men
"Once she had missed it and turned it away, any mongrel could take it,"
"One can see them with the naked eye... Why, there!"
"One can't everywhere say all one thinks, mon cher. Well, have you
"One can't write so fast, your honor," said the clerk, glancing angrily
"One might easily get killed that way! What do they mean by it? Killing
"One moment, Princess, one moment, my dear! Is this his son?" said the
"One moment, one moment!" replied the adjutant, and riding up to a stout
"One moment, your excellency."
"One more question, Count," he said, "which I beg you to answer in
"One must admit," continued Prince Andrew, "that Napoleon as a man was
"One must be indulgent to little weaknesses; who is free from them,
"One of Platov's Cossacks says that Platov's corps is joining up with
"One should make up to the husbands of pretty women," said Denisov.
"One step beyond that boundary line which resembles the line dividing
"One thing I ask of your excellency," Dolokhov said in his firm,
"One thing I thank God for is that I did not kill that man," said
"One thing has come on top of another: her rags to buy, and now a
"One thing would be terrible," said he: "to bind oneself forever to a
"One used to have to be a German--now one must dance with Tatawinova
"One was damaged," answered the staff officer, "and the other I can't
"One word, just one, for God's sake!" cried Anatole.
"One would have thought quill drivers enough had sprung up," remarked
"One would think that as an artillery officer you would set a good
"One!" came the command.
"Only don't blame me!" the doctor shouted up after him.
"Only fancy!" answered Ignat, surprised at the broadening grin on his
"Only fools and rakes fall ill, my boy. You know me: I am busy from
"Only let me report this gentleman's business, and I shall be at your
"Only not for this..." Pierre suddenly exclaimed with a laugh, and
"Only our holy brotherhood has the real meaning of life, all the rest
"Only she lets her love of her husband and children overflow all
"Only take care you and your Cossacks are not all captured!" said the
"Only that?" said Bolkonski.
"Only when will all that be? I am afraid never.... It would be too
"Only, for Christ's sake..." the girl went on, as Natasha, without
"Only, for God's sake, Princess dear, have them sent away and don't go
"Only, please let me command something, so that I may really command..."
"Onterkoff," said the captain and looked at Pierre for some seconds with
"Oo-oo, my beauty!" exclaimed the count, "she looks better than any of
"Ooh!" wailed the girl, pointing to the wing. "That's it, that was our
"Ooh, ooh, ooh!" grunted the Tartar, and suddenly lifting up his swarthy
"Oooh! For Christ's sake let me alone!" cried the wounded man, but still
"Or are you afraid to play with me?" Dolokhov now asked as if guessing
"Or being upset because someone else's borzoi and not mine catches
"Or perhaps they amuse your honor?" remarked Alpatych with a staid air,
"Orders?" Denisov repeated thoughtfully. "But can you stay till
"Other territories have been offered in exchange for the Duchy of
"Ou-rou-rou!" yelled the crowd, echoing the crash of the collapsing roof
"Oui, madame," replied he, looking around him.
"Our business is to do our duty, to fight and not to think! That's
"Our fire is mowing them down by rows, but still they hold on," said the
"Our lives and property--take them, Your Majesty!"
"Our position?" replied the officer with a smile of satisfaction. "I
"Our sovereign the Emperor will be here in a moment," said Rostopchin.
"Ours is a common misfortune and we will share it together. All that is
"Owing to the present state of things Sophia Danilovna has gone to the
"Ozheg-zheg, Ozheg-zheg..." hissed the saber against the whetstone,
"Papa! Here's Berg coming to see us," said she, looking out of the
"Papa! Mamma! May I see to it? May I?..." asked Natasha. "We will still
"Papa! Pa-pa!" he called after him, sobbing, "forgive me!" And seizing
"Papa, I have come on a matter of business. I was nearly forgetting. I
"Papa, he is a blackguard and a thief! I know he is! And what I have
"Papa, is it all right--I've invited some of the wounded into the
"Papa, we shall be late," said Princess Helene, turning her beautiful
"Papa, what are you doing that for?" asked Natasha, who had followed him
"Papa," said his beautiful daughter in the same tone as before, "we
"Pardon me! A snuffbox with the Emperor's portrait is a reward but not a
"Paris--the capital of the world," Pierre finished his remark for him.
"Pass on, pass on!" the captain reiterated, frowning sternly, and
"Pe... Petya... Go, go, she... is calling..." and weeping like a child
"Peace has been concluded..." he began.
"People are always too clever with their eldest children and try to make
"People are being arrested..." said the count. "I've told the countess
"People speak of misfortunes and sufferings," remarked Pierre, "but if
"Perhaps I have. Perhaps all is over between me and Bolkonski. Why do
"Perhaps he is not asleep; I'll have an explanation with him," she
"Perhaps it's the state of affairs?"
"Perhaps later on I may tell you, my dear boy, that if I had not been
"Perhaps the count did not ask for me," said Pierre when he reached the
"Perhaps the heart took no part in that speech," said Anna Pavlovna.
"Perhaps we'd really better not wake him," he said hesitating.
"Perhaps," coldly and angrily replied Dolokhov, glancing at Sonya, and,
"Permit me, Princess, to know what is necessary and what is not
"Peter Kirilovich, come here! We have recognized you! This is
"Peter Kirilovich, come here! We have recognized you," he now seemed
"Peter Kirilovich," she began rapidly, "Prince Bolkonski was your
"Peter Kirilych."
"Petrusha has come with papers from your father," whispered the maid.
"Petya! Be quiet, I tell you!" cried the count, with a glance at his
"Petya! Petya!" she called to him. "Carry me downstairs."
"Petya, you're a stupid!" said Natasha.
"Pick him up, lift him, it's all the same!" cried someone.
"Pierre! Been back long?" someone shouted. Pierre raised his head. In
"Pierre!" she said.
"Pierre, my dear, come here. I think he will not be out of place in a
"Piti-piti-piti and ti-ti and piti-piti-piti boom!" flopped the fly...
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
"Plans!" repeated Prince Andrew ironically. "My plans?" he said, as if
"Platoche! Eh, Platoche! Keep them yourself!" And handing back the odd
"Platon Karataev?" he repeated, and pondered, evidently sincerely
"Platonic love, clouds..." he muttered.
"Plea..." began Dolokhov, but could not at first pronounce the word.
"Please be quick," he said.
"Please come and visit us... you know my brave boy... been together out
"Please come in here. The masters are going away and the whole house
"Please come to tea. The prince will be out in a moment," came the
"Please come, Princess... The Prince," said Dunyasha in a breaking
"Please keep it. I have several like it," said Petya, blushing.
"Please step into the gallery, your excellency," said the major-domo.
"Please, Andrew, for my sake!..."
"Please, Denisov, let me lend you some: I have some, you know," said
"Please, Miss!" whispered a maid entering the room with a mysterious
"Please, Vasili Dmitrich," Natasha was saying, "do come!"
"Please," he uttered with an effort.
"Plenty of time, your excellency," muttered Kutuzov in the midst of a
"Possibly," remarked Pierre, looking about him absent-mindedly. "And who
"Posterity will do him justice," he concluded, and at once turned to
"Preparing for tomorrow, your Serene Highness--for death--they have put
"Prince Andrew's? We shall pass it and I'll take you to him."
"Prince Auersperg is on this, on our side of the river, and is defending
"Prince Hippolyte Kuragin, M. Krug, the charge d'affaires from
"Prince Vasili arrived in Moscow yesterday. I hear he has come on some
"Prince, I did not ask you here. Go, please go!" And he jumped up and
"Prince, humanum est errare, * but..." replied the doctor, swallowing
"Prince, what I have said is all there is in my heart. I thank you for
"Prince," said Berg, recognizing Prince Andrew, "I only spoke because
"Princess Drubetskaya to see Prince Vasili Sergeevich," he called to a
"Princess Yusupova wore one exactly like this," said Berg, pointing to
"Princess!"
"Princess, I must warn you," she added, lowering her voice and evidently
"Princess, come here!" he shouted.
"Princess, for God's sake!" he exclaimed, trying to stop her.
"Princess, it's God's will! You must be prepared for everything," said
"Princess, my dear, there's someone driving up the avenue!" she said,
"Princesse, au revoir," cried he, stumbling with his tongue as well as
"Probably," said Prince Andrew moving toward the outer door.
"Puff! puff!"--and two clouds arose pushing one another and blending
"Puff!"--suddenly a round compact cloud of smoke was seen merging from
"Put him there."
"Put on your white dress. I like it," was what he said.
"Put that down, that's bad... very bad," sternly remarked the general
"Qu' est-ce qu'il chante?" * asked a Frenchman.
"Qu'on m'amene les boyars," * said he to his suite.
"Quand un officier fait sa ronde, les sentinelles ne demandent pas le
"Quartier, quartier, logement!" said the officer, looking down at the
"Qui s'excuse s'accuse," * said Julie, smiling and waving the lint
"Quite avare, your excellency," suddenly shouted the colonel, touching
"Quite beside themselves, Yakov Alpatych; they've fetched another
"Quite different and yet the same," thought Nicholas, looking at her
"Quite right," said the Englishman.
"Quite well? All right then, sit down." He took the exercise book
"Read this if you like, Father," said the princess, blushing still more
"Ready, ready, dear fellow!" said Karataev, coming out with a neatly
"Ready, your Serene Highness," replied the general.
"Really I don't care about that, I don't care at all," said Prince
"Really!" he cried, "you are such a hero! Oh, how fine, how splendid!
"Really, I don't yet know. I don't like either the one or the other."
"Really, Papa, I believe Prince Bagration worried himself less before
"Really, madam, it is not at all too long," said Mavra, crawling on her
"Really, truly!" answered Natasha, pushing in a crisp lock that had
"Really? Where is she? I should like very much to see her," said Pierre.
"Really?" asked Princess Mary, looking into Pierre's kindly face and
"Really?" he asked.
"Really?" said Pierre, gazing over his spectacles with curiosity and
"Really?" said Pierre. "Where is that?"
"Reinforcements!" thought Napoleon to himself. "How can they need
"Reinforcements?" said Napoleon in a tone of stern surprise, looking at
"Remember that you will answer for the consequences," said Prince Vasili
"Remember, for you everything depends on this."
"Retire! All to retire!" he shouted from a distance.
"Ride over to Prince Peter Ivanovich and find out about it exactly," he
"Rides well, eh? And how well he looks on his horse, eh?"
"Right enough, friend," said he, and, having sat down, took out of his
"Robber!... Ungrateful wretch!... I'll hack the dog to pieces! I'm not
"Robbery and pillaging continue. There is a band of thieves in our
"Rostov! How d'you do? We missed one another," he said, and could
"Rostov!"
"Rostov, where are you?"
"Rousseau's Contrat social," said the vicomte with a tolerant smile.
"Routed up the earth like a pig," said another.
"Rubbish, nonsense, humbug!" exclaimed Nicholas, and he thought: "How
"Rugay, Rugayushka! That's it, come on!" came a third voice just then,
"Rugay, here's a pad for you!" he said, throwing down the hare's muddy
"Rugay, hey, hey!" he shouted. "Rugayushka!" he added, involuntarily by
"Run to the reserves and bring up the ammunition boxes!" he yelled,
"Russia is done for!" he cried. "Alpatych, I'll set the place on fire
"Russia's ancient and sacred capital!" he suddenly said, repeating
"Saber him!" the dragoon officer almost whispered.
"Saddle! Second platoon!"
"Satisfactory, indeed! Very satisfactory! Barbara Ivanovna told me today
"Say what you like," exclaimed Sonya, in a despairing voice as she
"Say what you like.... She is like a sister to me, and I can't tell you
"Schon fleissig?" * said Rostov with the same gay brotherly smile which
"Schubert, the colonel of the Pavlograd Hussars, is dining with us
"Scoundrel, what are you doing?" shouted the innkeeper, rushing to the
"Scoundrels! Blackguards!" shrieked the old man, turning his face away
"Second line... have you written it?" he continued dictating to the
"See how it's flaring," said one. "That's a fire in Moscow: either in
"See how smart she's made herself! Oh, the devils!"
"See what you believed in! This is he! Do you now see that it was not he
"See where we've met again!" said the little man. "Tushin, Tushin, don't
"See, I'm standing! See!" she said, but could not maintain herself on
"See, it fits well!" Platon kept repeating, pulling the shirt straight.
"Sell me the missis," said another soldier, addressing the German, who,
"Sell us that horse!" Denisov called out to the Cossacks.
"Semen! Do you know the Daniel Cooper?"
"Send Claparede's division, sire," replied Berthier, who knew all the
"Separate! That's a thing to frighten me with!"
"Separate? Very well, but only if you give me a fortune," said Helene.
"Sergey Kuzmich--From all sides-" he said, unbuttoning the top button of
"Seriously, you'd better drop it! You'll only get yourself into a mess!"
"Settled!" replied Boris.
"Seven new and three old imperials."
"Shall I call up our men from beyond the hill?" he called out.
"Shall I join the army and enter the service, or wait?" he asked himself
"Shall I loose them or not?" Nicholas asked himself as the wolf
"Shall I serve them up?"
"Shall we have three cold dishes then?" asked the cook.
"Shall we have time to change clothes?"
"Shall you write to him?" she asked.
"Sharpshooters of the 86th, forward!" shouted someone. The fifth
"She does, I know," Pierre cried fiercely.
"She has come to stay with me," said Princess Mary. "The count and
"She has written to you. How she torments herself, poor thing! She's
"She is a splendid match, a millionairess," said Peronskaya. "And look,
"She is a very admirable and excellent young woman," said she, "and you
"She is much better. She spoke so well today," said Princess Mary.
"She is not very well," answered Mademoiselle Bourienne with a bright
"She is very ill," said Pierre.
"She is well, but sad. But do you know who rescued her? It is quite a
"She kept begging to go away. She's a woman! 'Take me away,' says she,
"She let the hawk fly upward from her wide right sleeve," went the song,
"She loves you."
"She must be a wonderful woman. A real angel!" he said to himself.
"She must certainly go on taking them morning and evening," said
"She needs rest," said Prince Andrew with a frown. "Don't you, Lise?
"She really is a dear little thing," said Rostov to Ilyin, who was
"She said... Oh yes! She said, 'Girl,' to the maid, 'put on a livery,
"She was so tired that she has fallen asleep on the sofa in my room. Oh,
"She went. Suddenly there was a great wind. The girl lost her hat and
"She will go to the country."
"She will run away with him!" thought Sonya. "She is capable of
"She'd tired herself out, she'd run it down three times by herself,"
"She'll be ours!" said Lavrushka to Ilyin, winking.
"She'll get away! No, it's impossible!" thought Nicholas, still shouting
"She's as good as many a man!"
"She's first-rate, my dear fellow, but not for us," replied Dolokhov.
"She's much thinner, but all the same she's pretty!"
"Shelter?" Pierre repeated. "The German for shelter is Unterkunft."
"Short and energetic!" he remarked when he had read over the
"Shouldn't we now send for Berg?" asked Boris. "He would drink with you.
"Show it to me.... Oh, ooh... Oh! Oh, ooh!" his frightened moans could
"Show me the way, show me, I... I'll do it," gasped Pierre rapidly.
"Shut up!"
"Shut up!" cried Dolokhov, pushing him away from the window. The lad
"Si vous envisagez la question sous ce point de vue," * he began,
"Sideways! Cover yourself with your pistol!" ejaculated Nesvitski.
"Since Prince Bagration is not coming, we may begin," said Weyrother,
"Since the day of our brilliant success at Austerlitz," wrote Bilibin,
"Since yesterday evening my fate has been sealed; to be loved by you or
"Singers to the front" came the captain's order.
"Sir," he said, "permit me to ask you to stand aside. You must not be
"Sire! The Emperor, my master..." but the sight of the Emperor's eyes
"Sire!" said Michaud with a subtle, scarcely perceptible smile on his
"Sire!" said he, "Your Majesty is at this moment signing the glory of
"Sire, I ask your permission to present the Legion of Honor to the
"Sire, I expected nothing less than to find you at the gates of Moscow,"
"Sire, all Paris regrets your absence," replied de Beausset as was
"Sire, the prince..." began the adjutant.
"Sire, will you allow me to speak frankly as befits a loyal soldier?" he
"Sire," he said, with respectful playfulness, "they are only afraid lest
"Sire?" asked the adjutant who had not heard the remark.
"Sit down with me a little," said the countess.
"Sit down, Natasha; perhaps you'll see him," said Sonya.
"Sit down," said he. "Prince Bolkonski?"
"Sit down; nonsense! Have a drink!" said Anatole, and filled a large
"Six hundred rubles, ace, a corner, a nine... winning it back's
"Smack at 'em, lads!" he kept saying, seizing the guns by the wheels and
"Smart lads! Only fit for a fair!" said one.
"Smart, that!" said the esaul.
"Smolensk is being abandoned. Bald Hills will be occupied by the enemy
"So I can fire when I like!" said Pierre, and at the word "three," he
"So I come, master, and the people say to me: 'A great blessing has been
"So Monsieur Kuragin has not honored Countess Rostova with his hand?"
"So it does," thought Pierre.
"So it is all finished!" he thought. "And how has it all happened? How
"So it is! It is!"
"So it seems you're a hero, eh? Come now, what was this duel about? What
"So long as a single armed foe remains on Russian soil," but some
"So much the better! I shall see it close," he thought.
"So she knows I am engaged, and she and her husband Pierre--that good
"So tell them that I shall await a reply till the tenth, and if by the
"So that's what I'm sorry for--human dignity, peace of mind, purity, and
"So that's what she is like; what a fool I have been!" he thought gazing
"So that's what they hit with?" asked the accountant. "How awful!"
"So that's why! That's why!" a voice whispered in Princess Mary's soul.
"So the attack is definitely resolved on?" asked Bolkonski.
"So then what do you think, Vasili Dmitrich?" said he to Denisov. "It's
"So there's nothing?"
"So they are!" said the officers. "Won't the soldiers be glad!"
"So they will," said Nesvitski. "No, but what I should like," added he,
"So this gruel isn't to your taste? Oh, you crows! You're scared!" they
"So this is what the Emperor is!" thought Petya. "No, I can't petition
"So we are to have visitors, mon prince?" remarked Mademoiselle
"So what are your orders? Are you starting tomorrow?" asked Savelich.
"So you are glad and I have done right?"
"So you are going to Petersburg tomorrow?" she asked.
"So you are not afraid to play with me?" repeated Dolokhov, and as if
"So you are really going to the war, Andrew?" she said sighing.
"So you don't want to do anything? Well then, say so!" Rostov almost
"So you have never noticed before how beautiful I am?" Helene seemed to
"So you say ideas are an amusement to him...."
"So you think he is powerless?" said Langeron.
"So you think we shall win tomorrow's battle?" asked Pierre.
"So you understand the whole position of our troops?" Prince Andrew
"So you want to smell gunpowder?" he said to Pierre. "Yes, it's a
"So you've decided to go, Andrew?" asked his sister.
"So you've found your folk?" said one of them. "Well, good-by, Peter
"So-o-onya! Look here! How can you torture me and yourself like that,
"Some are, and some aren't--like us."
"Some fellows do things just anyhow, without preparation, and then
"Some herb vodka? Certainly!" said Tushin. "But still, to conceive a
"Somebody has come."
"Something special is always said in such cases," he thought, but could
"Something very important is happening between them," thought Pierre,
"Sonya! Sonya!" he again heard the first speaker. "Oh, how can you
"Sonya! What is anyone in the world to me? You alone are everything!"
"Sonya! What is it? What is the matter?... Oo... Oo... Oo...!" And
"Sonya! When will he come back? When shall I see him! O, God, how afraid
"Sonya!" said the countess, raising her eyes from her letter as her
"Sonya!... Nicholas!"... was all they said. They ran to the barn and
"Sonya, are you asleep? Mamma?" she whispered.
"Sonya, do you remember?" asked Nicholas.
"Sonya, don't believe her, darling! Don't believe her! Do you remember
"Sonya, go and wake him," said Natasha. "Tell him I want him to come and
"Sonya, is it well with thee?" he asked from time to time.
"Sonya, one can't doubt him! One can't, one can't! Don't you
"Sonya, wait a bit--we'll pack everything into these," said Natasha.
"Sonya, what is the matter with you? How can you?" said he, running up
"Sonya, what is this?" she cried, twanging a thick string.
"Sonya, will he live?" she asked. "Sonya, how happy I am, and how
"Sonya, you've read that letter?" she demanded.
"Sonya," she suddenly exclaimed, as if she had guessed the true reason
"Sonya?" she thought, glancing at that curled-up, sleeping little kitten
"Sophie," he began, timidly at first and then more and more boldly,
"Soyez tranquille, Lise, you will always be prettier than anyone else,"
"Speak quicker, quicker! Don't torture me!" Kutuzov interrupted him.
"Spies, traitors, traitors everywhere! Not a moment's peace in my own
"Splendid! Excellent!" exclaimed Natasha. "Another verse," she said,
"Splendid! What a horse he will be!" he thought with a smile, and
"Spring, love, happiness!" this oak seemed to say. "Are you not weary of
"Still aching?" Tushin asked Rostov in a whisper.
"Still the same," she said to her husband.
"Still the same. Wait, for heaven's sake. Karl Ivanich always says that
"Still the same; but what can you expect, this noise..." said the
"Still, I am not the same as his own mother," said Countess Mary. "I
"Still, as the prince is unwell my advice is that they should go to
"Still, don't ruin yourself!" said Dolokhov with a side glance at Rostov
"Stop it!" he exclaimed peremptorily. "There's a fight, lads!" And,
"Stop jesting," said Prince Andrew sadly and seriously. This news
"Stop playing--there's a time for everything," said the old woman.
"Stop that!" cried Alpatych sternly. "I see through you and three yards
"Stop them!" he shouted, and at the same moment, probably realizing that
"Stop this jesting," he said
"Stop those wretches!" gasped Kutuzov to the regimental commander,
"Stop! Pull up, I tell you!" he cried in a piercing voice, and again
"Stop, stop! You have your whole life before you," said he to her.
"Strange and impossible as such happiness seems, I must do everything
"Stretchers!" shouted someone behind him.
"Such an insolent scoundrel!" he cried, growing hot again at the mere
"Such demands as to retreat beyond the Vistula and Oder may be made to a
"Supper, it's time for supper! And here are the gypsies!"
"Suppose he finds out, and your brother, and your betrothed?"
"Surely he will leave something to Boris," said the countess.
"Surrounded! Cut off? We're lost!" shouted the fugitives.
"Tafa-lafa! But what he's jabbering no one can make out," said a
"Take a glass of boiled water and put a pinch of cream of tartar," and
"Take a stick between your legs, that'll suit you for a horse!" the
"Take care, you'll fall out."
"Take him away!" he said, pointing with a gracefully majestic gesture to
"Take it if you like," said the officer, giving the girl an apple.
"Take it right out, or they'll think I'm holding on," said Dolokhov.
"Take off your cap... your caps!" These words went from one to another
"Take this and deliver it," said he to his adjutant, handing him the
"Take this road, your honor, that way you will be killed at once!" a
"Take this, little Lady-Countess!" she kept saying, as she offered
"Talk indeed!" cried the thin one. "In my three shops here I have a
"Teach me what I should do, how to live my life, how I may grow good
"Tell Bezukhov to come. I'll put his name down. Is his wife with him?"
"Tell him to come later. He'll be coming out directly, we must go."
"Tell me about that!" he said.
"Tell me, Mamma! He's nice?"
"Tell me, my dear," said she to Natasha, "is Mimi a relation of yours? A
"Tell me, tell me, friend," said he to Bolkhovitinov in his low, aged
"Tell me, when did the battle begin?" he asked hurriedly.
"Tell me, you did not know of the countess' death when you decided to
"Tell the King of Naples," said he sternly, "that it is not noon yet,
"Tell them to give me a seat, for God's sake!"
"Tell these devils, these fiends, to let me pass!" shouted Denisov
"Tell what happened to the young lady!" said the second Melyukov girl.
"Thank God that I can," replied Prince Andrew. "I am very sorry you
"Thank God!"
"Thank God!" he exclaimed. "Yes, thank God!" he repeated, listening to
"Thank God!" said Prince Vasili. "My wife has told me everything!" (He
"Thank God!" said Sonya, crossing herself. "But perhaps she deceived
"Thank God!" said the voice. "And Father?"
"Thank God, there is no more of that!" he thought, covering up his head
"Thank God," said his son smiling.
"Thank you very much, I will go on alone," said Prince Andrew, wishing
"Thank you very much, Prince," answered one of the officers, pleased to
"Thank you, Princess," he added softly. "Sometimes it is hard."
"Thank you, my dear, you have cheered me up," said she as she always
"Thank you, my dear." She kissed him on the forehead and sat down again
"Thank you," said Pierre.
"Thank you... daughter dear!... for all, for all... forgive!... thank
"Thank you; you saved me, my dear fellow!" said Tushin.
"Thanks, thanks, old fellow.... But the bits left over?" said the
"That abbe is very interesting but he does not see the thing in the
"That comes of your talking!" said she.
"That depends on our luck in starting, else why shouldn't we be there
"That is Bezukhova's brother, Anatole Kuragin," she said, indicating a
"That is all nonsense." Prince Andrew again interrupted him, "let us
"That is doubtful," said Prince Andrew. "Monsieur le Vicomte quite
"That is enough for me," said Sonya, blushing.
"That is for me to know, but not for you to ask," shouted Rostopchin.
"That is just why I do not begin, sire," said Kutuzov in a resounding
"That is life," said the old teacher.
"That is metempsychosis," said Sonya, who had always learned well, and
"That is no business of mine," he thought. He had not ridden many
"That is perfectly true. And I am sorry I went to see him and took her,"
"That is probably the work of Vinesse," said Pierre, mentioning a
"That is the Dutch ambassador, do you see? That gray-haired man," she
"That is what I ask you. No one, not even Bonaparte, knows why."
"That is what we shall see! That is what we shall see!" he added aloud.
"That is why I beg to be sent to that detachment," he said.
"That is, with Ilya Rostov who married Nataly Shinshina," said Anna
"That kind of amiable talk would be suitable from this young count of
"That must be very interesting," said Dessalles. "Prince Andrew is in a
"That one? Yes, she's a good dog, gets what she's after," answered
"That passion which more than all others caused you to waver on the path
"That peasant near Mozhaysk where the battle was said the men were all
"That used to be Sonya," thought he, and looked at her closer and
"That was a Daniel Cooper!" exclaimed Marya Dmitrievna, tucking up her
"That was a nice snub for the little aide-de-camp," came a voice from
"That was a real battle," said an old soldier. "It's the only one worth
"That will do, please, that will do. Have the goodness--please, sir, to
"That will teach them to start fires," said one of the Frenchmen.
"That would be a fine thing!" said she. "I never wanted anything and I
"That would be fine, gentlemen!"
"That would take too long to tell," answered the son.
"That'll do, that'll do!" replied the sergeant major quietly.
"That'll do, that'll do--nonsense...."
"That's Ilagin's huntsman having a row with our Ivan," said Nicholas'
"That's Mary Nikolievna! They went inside the garden when these wolves
"That's Mitka, my coachman.... I have got him a good balalayka. I'm fond
"That's Rostova, the one who..."
"That's a fine death!" said Napoleon as he gazed at Bolkonski.
"That's a good thing, but don't move from Prince Vasili's. It is good to
"That's a miwacle."
"That's a sign of a good harvest next year."
"That's a true friend!" said Helene beaming, and again touching
"That's admirable!" he shouted. "He will take you with your dowry and
"That's all right. No one thinks you a coward, but that's not the point.
"That's all the same," continued Marya Dmitrievna. "If they hear of
"That's always the way," thought Countess Mary. "He talks to everyone
"That's another matter. That's necessary for the people," said the
"That's as may happen," answered Rostov. "Karay, here!" he shouted,
"That's better, Count," said the staff captain, beginning to address
"That's capital!"
"That's capital; of course she'll forget her childish promises and
"That's delightful music!" said he.
"That's enough, Natasha," said Sonya. "I see you were right, but just
"That's fine," said he.
"That's for Belova? Excellent!" She felt the quality of the material.
"That's for them all," he said to the officer who came up.
"That's grand, it bucks one up!" laughed the first. "Lucky you jumped
"That's happiness!"
"That's his again," said the officer. (It was the Shevardino Redoubt.)
"That's how everything is done with us, all topsy-turvy!" said the
"That's how we used to dance in our time, ma chere," said the count.
"That's it, that's it!" exclaimed the count, and gaily seizing his son
"That's it--not against it! You've filled your belly...."
"That's it. Come on!... I was sure of it," began "Uncle." (He was
"That's just it, my dear fellow. You see it's hurrah for the Tsar, for
"That's just it," answered Bilibin. "Listen! The French entered
"That's just it," interrupted Dolgorukov quickly, laughing. "You know
"That's not he himself, that's the father of the fellow who wrote the
"That's not right! That's not right!" cried the prince, and himself
"That's not right, sir. Come to your room, please, and rest. Allow me to
"That's not the point, my dear."
"That's not the point. I'm not going to discuss the matter. I do not
"That's not the way, that's not the way, Sonya!" cried Natasha turning
"That's our battery," said the staff officer indicating the highest
"That's right, hit him on the snout--on his snout! Like this, we
"That's right, my dear," chimed in the old count, thoroughly aroused.
"That's right, quite right! Just so!"
"That's right, young countess, that's it, come on! I never saw anyone
"That's right," said the man, whom Petya took to be an hussar. "Was the
"That's so, your excellency, all they have to do is to eat a good
"That's so. But we must know what troops they are and their numbers,"
"That's the owner himself," cried several voices.
"That's the way," said Dolokhov, "and then so!" and he turned the collar
"That's true!"
"That's twue, devil take it!" shouted Denisov, jumping up. "Now then,
"That's what I say. Folks are foolish! Always afraid of the French."
"That's what comes of a modern education," exclaimed the visitor. "It
"That's where I'm going. Shall we join up our packs?" asked Nicholas.
"That, my dear, you must ask the doctor," he replied, and again making
"The Anferovs? No," said the woman. "They left in the morning. That must
"The Apsherons must be stopped, your excellency," cried he. But at that
"The Berlin cabinet cannot express a feeling of alliance," began
"The Cossack, not knowing in what company he was, for Napoleon's plain
"The Cossacks have taken their boots. They were clearing the hut for the
"The Cossacks!" one of them shouted, and a moment later a crowd of
"The Duke of Oldenburg bears his misfortunes with admirable strength of
"The Eighteenth."
"The Elder.... He wants the Elder!... Dron Zakharych, you!" meek and
"The Elder? What do you want with him?..." asked Karp.
"The Emperor Alexander," said she, with the melancholy which always
"The Emperor is extremely displeased that despite the strict orders to
"The Emperor returns these Austrian banners," said Bilibin, "friendly
"The Emperor! The Emperor! The Marshal! The Duke!" and hardly had the
"The Emperor! The Emperor!" a sudden cry resounded through the halls and
"The Emperor! The Emperor!" was suddenly heard among the hussars.
"The Emperor's appeal? Oh yes!"
"The Emperor," Pierre repeated, and his face suddenly became sad and
"The Emperor? He is generosity, mercy, justice, order, genius--that's
"The Emperor?... No, a minister.... prince... ambassador. Don't you see
"The First Column will march here and here," "the Second Column will
"The French at Vitebsk, in four days' march they may be at Smolensk;
"The French battalion rushes to the bridgehead, spikes the guns, and the
"The French have abandoned the left bank?"
"The French," replied Ilyin jestingly, "and here is Napoleon
"The Gospels. I haven't one."
"The Grand Marshal of the palace," wrote the governor, "complains
"The Karagins, Julie--and Boris with them. One can see at once that
"The King of Rome!" he said, pointing to the portrait with a graceful
"The Lord be thanked, yes!"
"The Niemen?" repeated Napoleon. "So now you want me to retire beyond
"The Pavlograd hussars?" he inquired.
"The Russians are very devout," replied Balashev.
"The Smolensk Mother of God," another corrected him.
"The ammunition for the guns in position is exhausted, Your Majesty,"
"The auditor wrote out a petition for you," continued Tushin, "and
"The campaign began only a week ago, and you haven't even been able to
"The cavalry ride to battle and meet the wounded and do not for a moment
"The chairman of the Committee on Army Regulations is my good friend
"The chessmen are set up, the game will begin tomorrow!"
"The children will live just the same. With such masters one can live."
"The colonel of those Wurttembergers is delightful," he suddenly said.
"The commander in chief is engaged," repeated Kozlovski calmly.
"The commander in chief is engaged," said Kozlovski, going hurriedly up
"The count had a sty," replied the adjutant smiling, "and was very much
"The count has not left, he is here, and an order will be issued
"The count is pathetic, they say. He cried like a child when the doctor
"The count is suffering physically and mentally, and apparently you have
"The count's books."
"The count's things? Bring them here," she said, pointing to the
"The count--Count Ilya Andreevich Rostov."
"The countess told me to inquire whether your excellency was at home,"
"The day before yesterday it was 'Napoleon, France, bravoure';
"The devil knows! They've killed everybody! It's all up now!" he
"The devil only knows what they're about!" muttered Denisov. "Ah,
"The devil only knows! They say so."
"The devil skin your Emperor."
"The dishes must go in here among the carpets," said she.
"The dispositions!" exclaimed Kutuzov bitterly. "Who told you that?...
"The divine mercy is inexhaustible! Unction is about to be administered.
"The doctor says that he is not in danger," said the countess, but as
"The doubt is flattering," said "the man of profound intellect," with a
"The eggs... the eggs are teaching the hen," muttered the count through
"The enemy has been repulsed on the left and defeated on the right
"The enemy has entered the borders of Russia with immense forces. He
"The enemy has quenched his fires and a continual noise is heard from
"The enemy is still far away, your excellency. According to the
"The exchange horses have just come," answered the servant. "Will you
"The execution of the Duc d'Enghien," declared Monsieur Pierre, "was a
"The fact of the matter is," said she significantly, and also in a half
"The field marshal is angry with the Emperor and he punishes us all,
"The first man that turns up--she forgets her father and everything
"The fowls of the air sow not, neither do they reap, yet your Father
"The general on duty, quick! It's very important!" said he to someone
"The general orders them all to be driven out at once, without fail.
"The head of the garrison at Glogau, with ten thousand men, asks the
"The herd goes in that direction because the animal in front leads
"The highest wisdom and truth are like the purest liquid we may wish to
"The highest wisdom is not founded on reason alone, not on those worldly
"The hollow is impassable--there's a swamp there," said the esaul. "The
"The hoof's cracked! That's nothing. I'll teach you what to do and show
"The hours are the same, and the lathe, and also the mathematics and my
"The island of Madagascar," she said, "Ma-da-gas-car," she repeated,
"The king's heart is in the hands of the Lord."
"The landlord's grain is all safe," replied Dron proudly. "Our prince
"The law, religion... What have they been invented for if they can't
"The limits of human life... are fixed and may not be o'erpassed,"
"The marshal, a Count Rostov, hasn't sent half his contingent. He
"The master is not in, he's gone to headquarters," said Telyanin's
"The masters won't object..." she said.
"The means are... the balance of power in Europe and the rights of the
"The militia have put on clean white shirts to be ready to die. What
"The mummers from the count's. I know by the horses," replied some
"The neighborhood of my ward continues to be pillaged by soldiers of
"The news is reliable," said Bolkhovitinov. "Prisoners, Cossacks, and
"The old men have met to talk over the business of the commune," replied
"The one in pink is mine, so keep off!" said Ilyin on seeing Dunyasha
"The only question is what will come of the meeting between the Emperor
"The only thing is, we mustn't have children too soon," he continued,
"The only thing that is hard for me... I will tell you the truth,
"The other day when he came out from Mass in full uniform, Michael
"The past always seems good," said he, "but did not Suvorov himself
"The path to Warsaw, perhaps," Prince Hippolyte remarked loudly and
"The peasants are ruined? They have no bread?" she asked.
"The people are still hoping to see Your Majesty again."
"The picket is still on the hill, your excellency, just where it was
"The position?" repeated the doctor. "Well, that's not my line. Drive
"The potatoes are grand!" he said once more. "Eat some like that!"
"The power is in your hands," Dron rejoined sadly.
"The praise of a great commander is a soldier's highest reward," said
"The prince is not very well: bile and rush of blood to the head.
"The prince says nothing about that," he remarked gently.
"The prince wants to bathe."
"The princess ordered me to ask your regiment and your name."
"The reserves, sire!" replied a voice, a very human one compared to that
"The rice too?"
"The scoundrels! What are they doing?" shouted the officer, turning to
"The second hundred," replied the Cossack.
"The servants say he is still the same."
"The signal!" said he.
"The snow is deep. I am having the avenue swept, your honor."
"The soldiers say it feels easier without boots," said Captain Tushin
"The sovereigns? I do not speak of Russia," said the vicomte, polite but
"The squadron quartermaster!" said Lavrushka.
"The squadwon can't pass," shouted Vaska Denisov, showing his white
"The step must be taken but I cannot, I cannot!" thought Pierre, and he
"The third, I said the third!" cried the prince abruptly, pushing the
"The unpleasant things were said to me," remarked Vera, "I said none to
"The vicomte knew the duc personally," whispered Anna Pavlovna to of
"The wascal!" said Denisov.
"The ways of God are past finding out!" she thought, feeling that the
"The weather is beautiful, Princess; and besides, in Moscow one feels as
"The whole plan of our order should be based on the idea of preparing
"The wife!" said the old prince, briefly and significantly.
"The will will show that, my dear; our fate also depends on it."
"The withdrawal of your army beyond the Niemen, sire," replied Balashev.
"The word attack is always on your tongue, but you don't see that we are
"The wound is not here, it is there!" said Kutuzov, pressing the
"The young man's a real hussar!" shouted the colonel, again thumping the
"Then I may reckon on it, your excellency?"
"Then I should advise you..." Boris began, wishing to sting her; but at
"Then I won't let it come to that... I shall tell!" cried Sonya,
"Then I'll have it brought round," said Rostov wishing to avoid
"Then I'm not mistaken," thought Countess Mary. "Why is he cross with
"Then allow me to express your regrets, and I am sure your opponent
"Then am I to order those large sterlets?" asked the steward.
"Then hand to the governor in person a letter about the deed."
"Then he is alive," thought Princess Mary, and asked in a low voice:
"Then how about our position?"
"Then it is certain?" said the prince.
"Then it is not true that he's married!"
"Then it must be so!" thought Prince Andrew as he drove out of the
"Then it will mean that I must go to the army," said Pierre to himself.
"Then it's all right?" said Nicholas, again scrutinizing the expression
"Then put off feeding them."
"Then she is here still?" said Prince Andrew. "And Prince Kuragin?" he
"Then they've not gone to bed yet? What do you think? Mind now,
"Then tomorrow you will speak to the Emperor?"
"Then what is this blood on the gun carriage?" inquired Tushin.
"Then when am I to have it?"
"Then why are you crying? I am happy for your sake," said Princess Mary,
"Then why are you here? You should have gone on long ago, now you won't
"Then why are you leaving?"
"Then why was it forbidden?"
"Then you are Russians?" the peasant asked again.
"Then you are serving?"
"Then you do not think, like some others, that we must retreat?"
"Then you don't consider the Emperor Alexander the aggressor?" he asked
"Then you have nobody in Moscow?" she was saying. "You would be more
"Theodore Ivanych!" he said, bowing.
"There are a thousand reasons why," laying special emphasis on the why.
"There are gentry here; the general himself is in that hut, and you
"There are precedents, I may mention Schwarzenberg."
"There are so many prisoners today, nearly the whole Russian army, that
"There are some like ourselves and some worse," she thought.
"There are two, an officer and a Cossack. But it is not presupposable
"There can be no doubt about it, your Highness."
"There he is!" said Boris, thinking Rostov had said "His Highness,"
"There he is, always losing everything!" remarked the countess.
"There is in Moscow a lady, une dame, and she is very stingy. She must
"There is nothing so refreshing after a sleepless night as a cup of this
"There is one thing I constantly pray God to grant, mon cousin," she
"There is one thing I wanted to tell you, Princess," said Rostov. "It
"There is only one Paris in the world. You have been to Paris and have
"There is something so enchanting in the smile of melancholy," she said
"There is something up," thought Nicholas, and he was further confirmed
"There is still much, much before us," he said, as if with an old man's
"There is still time, my dear. You must remember, Catiche, that it was
"There is your child! Oh, a girl, so much the better!" said the
"There it is!... It again!..." said Pierre to himself, and an
"There now! Confess that this is delightful," said he. "This affair of
"There now! Didn't I tell you, Michael Mitrich, that if it was said
"There now! It's true that all you women are crybabies," remarked Petya,
"There now!" said one of the soldiers.
"There now!" said the officer of the suite, "that's grapeshot."
"There now!... So you, too, are in the great world?" said he to Pierre.
"There now, Denisov has been worrying," said Rostov, "and here are the
"There now, Prince! We can't stop those fellows," said the staff officer
"There now, Zikin, they ought to put you on a horse. You'd look fine,"
"There now, the Kurskies have also gone past," was being said in the
"There now, the gentry and merchants have gone away and left us to
"There now, we're sad," said he, touching Pierre's hand. "Have I
"There now, you wish to liberate your serfs," he continued; "that is a
"There now, young lady, you do take things into your head! Even if we
"There now, your excellency! That's the truth, the real truth," said
"There they are... bringing her, coming... There they are... They'll be
"There was a letter from Prince Andrew today," he said to Princess
"There was no one else in the room except myself. So that if it is not
"There was one like that," said the doctor, as if pleased. "That one is
"There we are!" Rostopchin shouted at Pierre louder than before,
"There will be a council of war at Kutuzov's tonight, though; you can
"There will be room for everybody, this is a big house. Oh, what a
"There! Here's a patriot for you!" said Shinshin.
"There! I said if only we waited--and so it was!" was being joyfully
"There! That's just how she started and just how she came up smiling
"There! There! Women's fuss! Women, women!" said Alpatych, puffing and
"There! There!" shouted the Frenchman at the window, pointing to the
"There! They are bringing another!" cried one of the officers,
"There! What did I say?" said Alpatych, coming into his own again. "It's
"There'll hardly be another such chance to fall on a transport as today.
"There's a child in that house. Haven't you seen a child?" cried Pierre.
"There's no need for you to go at all," said Denisov, addressing
"There's no need to talk! He receives his orders and will marry you or
"There's nothing for me to understand," she cried out with resolute
"There's nothing to be done, we'll have to wake him," said Shcherbinin,
"There's nothing to be gay about," answered Bolkonski.
"There's one thing I don't understand," he continued. "Who will plow the
"There's someone coming," said he.
"There's someone else we know--Bolkonski, do you see, Mamma?" said
"There's the corner at the crossroads, where the cabman, Zakhar, has his
"There, Fedotov, you should be quartered on them!"
"There, Sonya, you were talking all sorts of nonsense about him,"
"There, by the wheel!"
"There, how that devil hits out! He's made my face all bloody," said he
"There, it's just as I thought," said Rostov to himself. "He wishes to
"There, lads... oh, oh!" they mimicked the peasants, "they don't like it
"There, leave Bruin alone; here's a bet on."
"There, look at that," said Karataev, swaying his head. "People said
"There, my dear princess, I've brought you my songstress," said the
"There, there! Do you feel it? I feel so strange. And do you know, Mary,
"There, they kept telling us: 'It's dangerous, it's dangerous,'"
"There, what egotists men all are: all, all egotists! Just for a whim of
"There, you see how strangely fate has brought us together," said he,
"There, you see, mon cher! I expect you know that Messrs. Speranski and
"There... he's puffing again," muttered Tushin to himself, as a small
"They always will forget everything!" said the countess. "Don't you know
"They are bringing her, our Protectress!... The Iberian Mother of God!"
"They are men too," said one of them as he wrapped himself up in his
"They are regular brigands, especially Dolokhov," replied the visitor.
"They are repulsed everywhere, for which I thank God and our brave army!
"They are talking about us, about me and him!" thought Natasha. "And he
"They are waiting for their younger son," Pierre replied. "He joined
"They can still be called back," said one of his suite, who like Count
"They can't be far off, probably just beyond the stream," he said to the
"They can't do anything... always make some muddle," he muttered.
"They can't hold all that line. It's impossible. I will undertake to
"They coax me as if I were Vaska the cat!" said Denisov jokingly.
"They don't even give one time to dwink!" answered Vaska Denisov. "They
"They even say," remarked the "man of great merit" who did not yet
"They even tell me wonders I myself never dreamed of! Mary Abramovna
"They give little hope," replied the prince.
"They have brought the cock, Miss," she said in a whisper.
"They have gone away, sir. Went away yesterday at vespertime," said
"They have gone to bed and put out their lights, your excellency."
"They impose on the people," he repeated.
"They killed him almost before my eyes."
"They march splendidly," remarked someone in Bagration's suite.
"They may die tomorrow; why are they thinking of anything but death?"
"They may. He says they may!" whispered Natasha.
"They meet, as we shall meet tomorrow, to murder one another; they kill
"They might call a halt here or we'll have to do another four miles
"They must be feeling dull, too," said one of the bolder officers,
"They must understand that we can only lose by taking the offensive.
"They probably recognized that I am French, by my name," replied
"They probably think I am offering them the grain to bribe them to
"They received me and my news as one receives a dog in a game of
"They say that the rivals are reconciled, thanks to the angina..." and
"They say the ball will be very good," replied the princess, drawing up
"They say the poor countess is very ill. The doctor says it is angina
"They tell me this is the room the Emperor Alexander occupied? Strange,
"They told her that all Moscow has been burned down, and that..."
"They want more!" croaked Napoleon frowning. "Let them have it!"
"They want more!..." said Napoleon in a hoarse voice.
"They want to run to see how they have wounded it. Wait and we shall
"They were in a hurry enough to start us, and now here we stand in
"They were there this evening, but now I don't know, your excellency.
"They will be left!..."
"They'll be announcing that the gentlemen are in the drawing room and we
"They'll cweep up to the garden; you'll wide up fwom there with the
"They'll put it out, no fear!"
"They'll soon be issuing us new ones. They say that when we've finished
"They're coming!... they're coming!... Stand aside, make way, please
"They're dying of hunger," said Dron. "It's not a case of carting."
"They're frightened," he said confidentially in a hoarse voice. "I say I
"They're having such fun," said he, coming back. "Two Frenchies have
"They've been saying so a long while," said the count, "and they'll say
"They've brought us all to ruin... the brigands!" he repeated, and
"They've made up splendid packs for me--fit to cross the Bohemian
"They've put two regiments as outposts, and they're having such a spree
"They've withdrawn the front line, it has retired," said they, pointing
"They, the soldiers at the battery, Prince Andrew killed... that old
"Things get worse from hour to hour!" ejaculated Marya Dmitrievna. "A
"Things would have been different if your Serene Highness had not told
"Think what you please! I know you are just like Father. Think as
"Think? What about?" asked Prince Andrew with surprise.
"Thirdly," Pierre continued without listening to him, "you must never
"Thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, sixteen," she counted on her slender
"This cold is tiresome. They talk about medicine--what is the good of
"This establishment is dedicated to my dear mother." Or no, it should
"This is Count Rostov, squadron commander, and I am your humble
"This is Dolokhov," said Prince Andrew.
"This is all very fine, but things must be settled," said Prince Vasili
"This is for Boris from me, for his outfit."
"This is how I look at this affair: I know nothing about it and won't
"This is my cup," said he. "Only dip your finger in it and I'll drink it
"This is my niece," said the count, introducing Sonya--"You don't know
"This is not at all the thing," he said. "What sort of Polish mazuwka is
"This is the cause!" In historical events (where the actions of men are
"This is the first act. Those that follow are naturally increasingly
"This is what I think. Austria has been made a fool of, and she is not
"This is what I want, my dear fellow," said the count to the deferential
"This is what I will say. You are right that to speak to her of love at
"This is what comes of knowing how to conduct oneself."
"This is what comes of knowing how to make acquaintances," thought Berg.
"This is what they have done with Russia! This is what they have done
"This is what you must do," said Boris. "I will do the honors of the
"This poor army!" he suddenly remarked. "It has diminished greatly since
"This unfortunate fete at the ambassador's deprives me of a pleasure,
"This way, uncle," cried the girl. "We'll pass through the side street,
"This way, your excellency... Where are you going?... This way,
"This won't do, Princess; it won't do," said he, when Princess Mary,
"This, you see, is how I am finishing my days... Death will come. That's
"This," answered Nicholas. "You say it rests with me. Well, I don't like
"Those are Mary's 'God's folk,'" said Prince Andrew. "They have mistaken
"Those are ours."
"Those brigands are everywhere," replied an officer from behind the
"Those verses... those verses of Marin's... how do they go, eh? Those he
"Those were extremes, no doubt, but they are not what is most important.
"Those were horses!" Balaga continued the tale. "That time I'd harnessed
"Those who pass the examinations, I suppose," replied Kochubey, crossing
"Thou hatest it. Then change it, purify thyself; and as thou art
"Though it is madness to buy anything in Moscow now."
"Though it was tete-a-tete," Anatole continued, "still I can't..."
"Three and a half miles, Your Majesty."
"Three days?" said Natasha. "It seems to me I've loved him a hundred
"Thrice have they slain me, thrice have I risen from the dead. They
"Tiens!" said the captain.
"Tikhon, what did we talk about at dinner?"
"Time to harness, time to harness, your excellency! Your excellency!"
"Tit! I say, Tit!" said the groom.
"To Moscow, our ancient Capital!
"To Mozhaysk."
"To Petersburg!" she repeated as if unable to understand.
"To Petersburg? Go there? Very well, I'll go. But I may come again
"To Prince Vasili. He was so kind. He at once agreed to everything,
"To arms! Board them! No, you shan't get it," he yelled.
"To attain this end we must secure a preponderance of virtue over vice
"To be a soldier, just a soldier!" thought Pierre as he fell asleep,
"To be on the march in such weather..." he began.
"To be quite frank, Mary, I expect Father's character sometimes makes
"To be sure, we all have to die. I'm not against the commune," said
"To be sure, your excellency," replied the architect.
"To change the water in this glass. I am just finishing the design."
"To combat the evil which sways the world..." Pierre repeated, and a
"To endure war is the most difficult subordination of man's freedom to
"To enter Russia without declaring war! I will not make peace as long as
"To hand in a letter, a petition, to His Majesty," said Nicholas, with a
"To him who has borne himself most bravely in this last war," added
"To his Honor Baron Asch, from General-in-Chief Prince Bolkonski," he
"To please Moscow girls nowadays one has to be melancholy. He is very
"To return to your ladies--I hear they are lovely. What a wretched idea
"To search far..." repeated the count, evidently sorry Simon had not
"To see the Governor by his excellency's order," answered Alpatych,
"To speak to her now wouldn't do," said the princess all the same.
"To tell Pierre? Oh, yes. What a splendid man he is!" said Princess
"To tell you the truth, between ourselves, God only knows what state our
"To the Committee on Army Regulations, and I have recommended that your
"To the Emperor."
"To the Governor's, as you ordered," answered the coachman.
"To the Head of the French Government... Au chef du gouvernement
"To the army."
"To the crossing!" said the general coldly and sternly in reply to one
"To the fifth gun, wheel it up!" came shouts from one side.
"To the health of our Sovereign, the Emperor!" he cried, and at the same
"To the left!... Keep to the right!" the men shouted to him.
"To the right from the corridor, Euer Hochgeboren! There you will find
"To try his luck or the certainty?" Rostov asked himself.
"To what Mistress? Who are you?" asked Anatole in a breathless whisper.
"To what committee has the memorandum been referred?" inquired Prince
"To whom shall it be given?" the Emperor Alexander asked Koslovski, in
"To whomever Your Majesty commands."
"To your barrier!" and Pierre, grasping what was meant, stopped by his
"To your health!" said Balaga who also emptied his glass, and wiped his
"To your places!" cried the young officer to the men gathered round
"Today--it was the same affair. Oh, Mary, don't remind me of it!" and
"Told whom?"
"Tomorrow our squadron is to be in reserve. May I ask to be attached to
"Tomorrow very likely I may be sent with some message to the Emperor,"
"Tomorrow we shall have to deal with Kutuzov!" said Napoleon. "We shall
"Tomorrow, I hear, the Preobrazhenskis will give them a dinner."
"Tomorrow," replied Rostov and left the room.
"Tonight, not later," said he in a low voice, and he moved away with a
"Too dear!" Natasha remarked. "How pleased the children will be and
"Too hot!" she replied, blushing with pleasure.
"Tproo! Get out of the way! Hi!... Tproo!..." The shouting of Balaga
"Troubles, troubles, my dear fellow!" he said to Pierre. "What troubles
"True enough," answered Nesvitski; "two smart fellows could have done
"Trust in His mercy!" and pointing out a small sofa for him to sit
"Try to serve well and show yourself worthy," added he, addressing Boris
"Tss, tt...!" said the little man. "Ah, what a sin... what a sin!" he
"Turn this way!" he shouted, jumping over the ice which creaked under
"Tut, tut, tut! Tell that to others," said the officer, waving his
"Two, I think."
"Twy me for wobbewy... oh! Some more water... Let them twy me, but I'll
"Typhus, sir. It's death to go in. Only we two, Makeev and I" (he
"Ugh! I don't like that fellow," he said, regardless of the
"Ugh. The hussars will get it hot!" said Nesvitski; "they are within
"Ulyulyu!" cried Nicholas, in a voice not his own, and of its own accord
"Ulyulyulyu! ulyulyu!..." he cried. When he caught sight of the count
"Ulyulyulyu!" whispered Rostov, pouting his lips. The borzois jumped up,
"Ulyulyulyulyu!" shouted Nicholas.
"Uncle Pierre, you... no... If Papa were alive... would he agree with
"Uncle" did not answer, but smiled.
"Uncle" dismounted at the porch of his little wooden house which
"Uncle" led the visitors through the anteroom into a small hall with a
"Uncle" looked round disapprovingly at Petya and Natasha. He did not
"Uncle" played another song and a valse; then after a pause he cleared
"Uncle" rose, and it was as if there were two men in him: one of them
"Uncle" sang as peasants sing, with full and naive conviction that the
"Uncle" sternly.
"Uncle's" face was very significant and even handsome as he said this.
"Uncle's" huntsman was galloping from the other side across the wolf's
"Uncle's" offer was accepted. A huntsman was sent to Otradnoe for a
"Uncle's." "That's a good player of ours," she added.
"Uncle, forgive me, I did that... unintentionally," he said, pointing to
"Uncle," and setting her arms akimbo also made a motion with her
"Uncle." "And then I was saying to myself all the way, 'How well Anisya
"Und die ganze Welt hoch!" *
"Und vivat die ganze Welt!" Though neither the German cleaning his
"Under the lower pillow."
"Undress him! What are you waiting for?" he cried angrily to the
"Une maitresse-femme! * That's what is called putting things squarely.
"Unterkunft," Pierre repeated.
"Use your finger, Mary Hendrikhovna, it will be still nicer," said
"Vasili Denisov, your son's friend," he said, introducing himself to the
"Vasili Dmitrich, I thank you for the honor," she said, with an
"Vasili Dmitrich, I'm so sorry for you!... No, but you are so nice...
"Vasili Dmitrich, entrust me with some commission! Please... for God's
"Ve must vight to the last tr-r-op of our plood!" said the colonel,
"Vera," she said to her eldest daughter who was evidently not a
"Vereshchagin was tried and condemned to death," thought Rostopchin
"Vereshchagin! Hasn't he been hanged yet?" shouted Rostopchin. "Bring
"Very glad," answered Nicholas. "He is an excellent fellow.... And are
"Very good!" said Bagration.
"Very good!" said the prince closing the door behind him, and Tikhon did
"Very good, very good," said Bagration. "Thank you, officer."
"Very good," answered Nesvitski.
"Very good?" said Natasha reproachfully, noticing her brother's tone.
"Very interesting."
"Very large," answered Rostov. "But why have you collected here?" he
"Very likely it would be splendid, but it will never come about..."
"Very lovely," said Prince Andrew.
"Very much," said Nicholas flushing, and with a stupid careless smile,
"Very pleased to see you, Prince," he said. "One moment..." he went on,
"Very pleased, mon cher," she then said, holding out her hand to
"Very possibly the theater of war will move so near to us that..."
"Very sad, sire," replied Michaud, lowering his eyes with a sigh. "The
"Very silly," said Vera. "I am ashamed of you. Secrets indeed!"
"Very well, then!" shouted the little officer, undaunted and not riding
"Very well, then, be so good as to wait," said Prince Andrew to the
"Very well, very well!" muttered the officer, threateningly, and turning
"Very well, very well!... Oh, what a fellow you are!"
"Very well, very well..."
"Very well," said Smolyaninov, and went on at once: "Have you any idea
"Very," said Pierre.
"Very."
"Vesenny? Oh, he's thrown himself down there in the passage. Fast asleep
"Vienna considers the bases of the proposed treaty so unattainable that
"Vile woman!" shouted the princess, darting unexpectedly at Anna
"Vivarika! Vif-seruvaru! Sedyablyaka!" repeated the soldier, flourishing
"Vivat!" shouted the Poles, ecstatically, breaking their ranks and
"Vive Henri Quatre! Vive ce roi valiant!" sang Morel, winking. "Ce
"Vive l'Empereur! Vive le roi de Rome! Vive l'Empereur!" came those
"Voila l'agrement des camps, monsieur le Prince," * said the staff
"Vous etes le bourgeois?" * the officer asked Gerasim.
"Vous voyez le malheureux Mack," he uttered in a broken voice.
"Voyons, Pas de betises!" * he cried.
"Wait a bit and listen. It's fine!" answered Sidorov, who was considered
"Wait a bit, I have something in view for you this evening." (She
"Wait a bit, Sonya, you'll understand everything. You'll see what a man
"Wait a bit, he is not drunk yet! A bottle here," said Anatole, taking a
"Wait a bit, here's a letter for you," said the old man suddenly, taking
"Wait a little, gentlemen," said he. "The battle is won, and there is
"Wait a moment, I'll fetch it," said Mademoiselle Bourienne, and she
"Wait a moment, I'll get my work.... Now then, what are you thinking
"Wait a moment, I'll light a candle. You damned rascal, where do you
"Wait till tomorrow morning, we'll find out everything tomorrow."
"Wait!" cried Dolokhov, hammering with the bottle on the window sill to
"Wait, I have not finished..." he said to Prince Andrew, seizing him
"Wait, I must..."
"Wait, haven't you dropped it?" said Rostov, picking up the pillows one
"Wait--just a word! When he has been transferred to the Guards..." she
"Wait?... Hurrah-ah-ah!" shouted Petya, and without pausing a moment
"Waiting, Your Majesty," repeated Kutuzov. (Prince Andrew noted that
"Wants to turn on the other side," whispered the servant, and got up to
"Was Kutuzov well? When had he left Krems?" and so on. The Emperor spoke
"Was it from the cold?" asked someone.
"Was it not fate that brought him to Bogucharovo, and at that very
"Was that grapeshot?" he asked Denisov.
"Wasn't it fine when those Germans gave us lifts! You just sit still and
"We all have our weaknesses," said Kutuzov smiling and walking away from
"We are again retreating. They say we're already near Smolensk," replied
"We are all in God's hands," said he, with a sigh.
"We are all very thankful for your bounty, but it won't do for us to
"We are going, but only wolf hunting: it would be dull for you."
"We are not diplomatic officials, we are soldiers and nothing more," he
"We are not fighting pour le Roi de Prusse, but for right principles.
"We are such friends, such friends! All that ruler business was just
"We are to spend the night in Znaim."
"We can harness at once, your excellency."
"We can take four more men," said the steward. "They can have my trap,
"We can't have less--yes, three... the mayonnaise, that's one," said he,
"We couldn't take Murat prisoner this morning or get to the place in
"We don't do the French any harm," said Tikhon, evidently frightened by
"We don't expect to get him home! We must ask the doctor."
"We don't riot, we're following the orders," declared Karp, and at that
"We drove them back!" said Boris with animation, growing talkative. "Can
"We had better separate," he muttered in a broken voice.
"We have been looking for you everywhere," said the adjutant. "The count
"We have been told," Princess Mary interrupted her, "that you lost two
"We have orders to drive you off here, and we shall drive you off," said
"We heard so," replied the man.
"We here in Moscow are more occupied with dinner parties and scandal
"We kicked him out from there so that he chucked everything, we grabbed
"We knew nothing of it when we started from Moscow. I did not dare to
"We know that you have Bonaparte and that he has beaten everybody in
"We may as well go back," said the son in French.
"We must distinguish between the Vienna cabinet and the Emperor of
"We must give reserves," he said, moving his arms slightly apart.
"We must let him see Amelie, she's exquisite!" said one of "ours,"
"We ought to go, don't you think so?" said Nicholas. "Come to me with
"We ourselves will not delay to appear among our people in that Capital
"We see light again, since his Serenity has been appointed, your
"We shall if everybody wants it; it can't be helped.... But believe
"We shall probably advance," replied Bolkonski, evidently reluctant to
"We shall see."
"We shall want some more wood."
"We should ask him... that's he himself?"... "Yes, ask him indeed!...
"We want to give the Senate new juridical powers, but we have no laws.
"We were ordered to be at the place before nine, but we haven't got
"We were talking to him about you a few days ago," Kochubey continued,
"We will talk of it later," said Anna Pavlovna with a smile.
"We won't speak of it any more, my dear," said Pierre, and his gentle,
"We won't speak of it, my dear--I'll tell him everything; but one thing
"We'll clear it out for you in a minute," said Timokhin, and, still
"We'll make you dance as we did under Suvorov...," * said Dolokhov.
"We'll reckon up! Well, have you been to the Governor's?" asked
"We'll send the infantwy down by the swamps," Denisov continued.
"We'll try to," replied Berg, touching a pawn and then removing his
"We're going into action, gentlemen!"
"We're not willing. Let them ruin us! We won't take your grain. We don't
"We're to go into action, gentlemen! Mack has surrendered with his whole
"We've been told to keep order, and that no one is to leave their homes
"We've given it 'em hot, mate! They won't make another push now," said
"We've got to it at last--why did you not tell me about it sooner?"
"We've said good-by. Go!" he suddenly shouted in a loud, angry voice,
"We've stayed too long!" said the count with involuntary vexation. "The
"Weally! And I've been losing, bwother. I lost yesterday like a damned
"Well and when the money's gone, what then?"
"Well begin!" said Dolokhov.
"Well done!... Fine fellow!... There's a bet for you!... Devil take
"Well done, lads!" said Prince Bagration.
"Well it won't be for long. Next summer I'll take him to Petersburg,"
"Well now, gentlemen," said Bilibin, "Bolkonski is my guest in this
"Well now, good-by. Tell Denisov, 'at the first shot at daybreak,'" said
"Well now, isn't she a fool!" shouted the prince, pushing the book aside
"Well then, Peter Kirilych, come along with us, we'll take you there."
"Well then, accept his offer. It's high time for you to be married,"
"Well then, be quick. We'll all have breakfast together."
"Well then, go, go, go..." said Rostov, and refusing supper and
"Well then, mind and have cocks' comb in the turtle soup, you know!"
"Well then, remember, this is not a joke!"
"Well then, sell it," said he. "What's to be done? I can't draw back
"Well then, tell him so."
"Well then, that's excellent," said he. "We'll talk it over later on.
"Well then, till tomorrow at Sokolniki," said Dolokhov, as he took leave
"Well then, what do you want? You're all in love nowadays. Well, if you
"Well then," continued Prince Andrew to Alpatych, "report to them as I
"Well there certainly are disgusting people," thought Rostov as he
"Well! How d'ye do? How d'ye do? Glad to see you!"
"Well!" he said, turning to his wife.
"Well!..." said the old count, spreading out his arms and sinking
"Well, General, it all looks like war," as if regretting a circumstance
"Well, I am glad to see you," Denisov interrupted him, and his face
"Well, I am like any other dog as long as it's not a question of
"Well, I am taking it off," replied Lavrushka's voice.
"Well, I did not expect you, I am very glad," said Prince Andrew.
"Well, I don't know about that, but I am uncomfortable with him. And do
"Well, I don't know. It's awkward and would make me ashamed."
"Well, I don't think you need reproach yourself on his account. All that
"Well, I have Pryanichnikov serving under me, a splendid man, a
"Well, I have got all I need into packs for two horses," said Nesvitski.
"Well, I shall live. Ah, how splendid!"
"Well, I suppose it is time we were at table?" said Marya Dmitrievna.
"Well, I think it is. The bigwigs here think so too, but they daren't
"Well, I think you must be sleepy," said he, and began rapidly crossing
"Well, I will leave you in your little corner," came Anna Pavlovna's
"Well, I will read them, then!" Bagration seemed to say, and, fixing
"Well, I'll ask."
"Well, Karabakh! We'll do some service tomorrow," said he, sniffing its
"Well, Lelya?" he asked, turning instantly to his daughter and
"Well, Mamma? Everything is ready. What's the matter?" asked Natasha, as
"Well, Mamma?... Well?..."
"Well, Michael Ivanovich, our Bonaparte will be having a bad time of it.
"Well, Michael Mitrich, sir?" he said, addressing one of the battalion
"Well, Nastasya Ivanovna!" whispered the count, winking at him. "If you
"Well, Papa, I tell you definitely, and Mamma too, it's as you please,
"Well, Peter Kirilych, let's go and have a smoke," he said.
"Well, Prince, may God give you great luck!" said Matrena in her gypsy
"Well, Prince, so Genoa and Lucca are now just family estates of the
"Well, Prince?" asked Kozlovski.
"Well, Rapp, do you think we shall do good business today?" Napoleon
"Well, Savelich, do you still not wish to accept your freedom?" Pierre
"Well, Vasilich, is everything ready?" asked the count, and stroking his
"Well, adorer and courtier of the Emperor Alexander, why don't you say
"Well, all I can make out is that everything is abominable, abominable,
"Well, all right, all right."
"Well, all right, thanks. You can go!"
"Well, all the same, you must refuse him."
"Well, all wight," said Denisov.
"Well, and all this idiocy--Gossner and Tatawinova?" Denisov asked. "Is
"Well, and are you still true to Boris?" he continued.
"Well, and he?" asked the count.
"Well, and how is Prince Alexander to blame? He is a most estimable
"Well, and how is she?" asked Pierre.
"Well, and is that all?" he asked.
"Well, and so he never got farther than: 'Sergey Kuzmich'?" asked one of
"Well, and that boy?"
"Well, and then, Sonya?..."
"Well, and to whom did you apply about Bory?" asked the countess. "You
"Well, and what are you going to do? Will you stay here if the enemy
"Well, and you, have you a family estate, sir? And a house? So you have
"Well, and you, young man," said he. "How do you feel, mon brave?"
"Well, and you? What are your plans?"
"Well, anyhow we're going to end it. He won't come here again," remarked
"Well, anyway," thought Sonya as she stood in the dark passage, "now or
"Well, are they all right?" said the soldier with a smile. "You should
"Well, are you glad?" Natasha asked. "I am so tranquil and happy now."
"Well, are you ready?" asked Balaga.
"Well, aren't you ashamed of yourself, Captain Tushin?" he continued.
"Well, as you see. So far everything's all right, but I confess I should
"Well, at last I've finished, now I'll rest," thought the prince, and
"Well, au revoir! Good-by! You hear her?"
"Well, but supposing Mary Hendrikhovna is 'King'?" asked Ilyin.
"Well, dear heart," said he, "I wanted to tell you about it yesterday
"Well, do you recognize your little madcap playmate?" asked the
"Well, do you think I shall prevent her, that I can't part from her?"
"Well, everything is going to ruin! Robbery in the law courts, in the
"Well, friends, I have now thought the whole matter over and this is
"Well, fwiend? So you've smelt powdah!" shouted Vaska Denisov just above
"Well, gentlemen, I see that it is I who will have to pay for the broken
"Well, go and see," he said, after a pause.
"Well, go on!" said his son.
"Well, go on, go on!"
"Well, go on, go on. I am very glad," said Pierre, and his face really
"Well, go, go! If anything more is wanted I'll send after you."
"Well, good night, Mary!" said Natasha. "Do you know, I am often afraid
"Well, good night," said Natasha.
"Well, good-by!" said Prince Andrew, bending over to Alpatych. "You
"Well, good-by, Matrena," said Anatole, kissing her. "Ah, my revels here
"Well, good-by, Prince," said he to Bagration. "My blessing, and may
"Well, good-by, Theodore. Thank you for everything and farewell!" said
"Well, good-by, my dear fellow; remember that with all my heart I share
"Well, good-by, your excellency, keep well!" said Rostopchin, getting up
"Well, have it so, and you talked a lot of nonsense to him and must
"Well, have you finished?" said he to Kozlovski.
"Well, have you heard the great news? Prince Kutuzov is field marshal!
"Well, he's a poor sort of soldier..."
"Well, he's really a good fellow, one can serve under him," said
"Well, how are you going to get out of that?" he remarked.
"Well, how are you? Still getting stouter?" he said with animation, but
"Well, how are you?" he asked.
"Well, how d'you do, my dear fellow?" said Dolgorukov, who was sitting
"Well, how is he?"
"Well, if it's too long we'll take it up... we'll tack it up in one
"Well, if you do, so much the better, and you can go back to her!"
"Well, if you hadn't told me you were Russian, I should have wagered
"Well, in that case, I drink to our friendship!" he cried gaily, filling
"Well, is ev'wything weady?" asked Denisov. "Bwing the horses."
"Well, is it true that it's peace and capitulation?" asked Nesvitski.
"Well, is she pretty? Ah, friend--my pink one is delicious; her name is
"Well, it doesn't matter," said Prince Andrew. "Tell Countess Rostova
"Well, it seems that no one has noticed," thought Rostov. And this was
"Well, it seems to be getting quieter," remarked Ferapontov, finishing
"Well, it's as you like," said the staff captain. "And what has become
"Well, lad," and a smile changed the tone of his voice "we thought it
"Well, let her sleep," said Marya Dmitrievna as she went out of the room
"Well, let it be bad," said Denisov.
"Well, let's go and sing 'The Brook.'"
"Well, let's go," said Denisov, and rode all the way to the watchhouse
"Well, let's have another bottle of this Moscow Bordeaux, shall we?
"Well, listen, Balaga! Drive all three to death but get me there in
"Well, little countess; that's it--come on!" cried "Uncle," with a
"Well, little countess? What a saute of game au madere we are to have,
"Well, madam," he began, stooping over the book close to his daughter
"Well, may be!" said Prince Andrew. "Go, Masha; I'll come immediately."
"Well, messieurs et mesdames," said Nicholas loudly and with apparent
"Well, mon cher, have you got the manifesto?" asked the old count. "The
"Well, mon cher," said the vicomte, having seated himself beside
"Well, my boy, you'll get along wherever you go--foot or horse--that
"Well, my dear boy, I hear you've been educated abroad, not taught to
"Well, my dear fellow, I was still living at home," he began. "We had
"Well, my dear fellow, so you still want to be an adjutant? I have been
"Well, my dear fellow, tomorrow we are off at last," said Prince Vasili
"Well, my dear?" asked the countess.
"Well, my dear?" said Prince Vasili, taking her hand and bending it
"Well, nephew, you're going for a big wolf," said "Uncle." "Mind and
"Well, never mind, some of the things can be unloaded," he added in a
"Well, never mind; I only..."
"Well, now he'll come away," Petya thought every moment as he stood by
"Well, now tell me about your exploits," said he.
"Well, now to the health of handsome women!" said Dolokhov, and with
"Well, now we'll arrange something quite simple and becoming," she said.
"Well, now we'll talk. I congratulate you on your betrothed. You've
"Well, now you've done what you wanted," put in Nicholas--"said
"Well, now, good-by!" He gave his son his hand to kiss, and embraced
"Well, of course! That's what we were saying," replied the first
"Well, of course, of course! Let me have some more strips of linen."
"Well, of course, of course!"
"Well, of course, what more is there to explain?"
"Well, of course," replied Platon quickly, "the horses' saints. One must
"Well, old fellow," said he to the peasant guide, "lead us to
"Well, perhaps," said he with a sigh. "We don't expect to get him home
"Well, really, Catiche! Can't you understand! You are so intelligent,
"Well, really, Mamma! Why should you? What is there to be surprised at?"
"Well, say you went to the barn now, and listened. It depends on what
"Well, send for him... and how do you get on with that German?" asked
"Well, send number three company again," the officer replied hurriedly.
"Well, she loves me and you like that."
"Well, sit down, sit down here. Let's have a talk," said Kutuzov. "It's
"Well, so that's finished, my dear fellow! I am very glad to have seen
"Well, stand us some of your herb vodka, Tushin," it said.
"Well, supposing I do love him?" thought Princess Mary.
"Well, supposing N. N. swindled the country and the Tsar, and the
"Well, talk as much as you can, anyway. He has a passion for giving
"Well, tell me... now, how did you get food?" he would ask.
"Well, thank God! We've been sitting here too long!"
"Well, thank you for it. Do you think I am not grateful?" And Anatole
"Well, that can't happen twice! Eh?" said Anatole, with a good-humored
"Well, that is hardly a sufficient reason, Mamma..."
"Well, that's all right," continued the regimental commander. "A cup of
"Well, that's all!" said Kutuzov as he signed the last of the documents,
"Well, that's all--everything," said Natasha.
"Well, that's it then! You know that there is a there and there is a
"Well, that's only till the first engagement."
"Well, that's right. As soon as the countess wakes we'll be off, God
"Well, the Lord be thanked, Princess," said Mary Bogdanovna, not
"Well, the Lord have mercy on us!" said the count, half in jest, half
"Well, then go to your Buonaparte! Mademoiselle Bourienne, here's
"Well, then, I won't; only forgive me, Sonya!" He drew her to him and
"Well, then, I'll go if you wish it."
"Well, then, are you refusing Prince Andrew?" said Sonya.
"Well, then, au revoir!" said the count, and went out of the room.
"Well, then, go back to the army," he said, drawing himself up to his
"Well, then, let's be quick. Boris, come here," said Natasha. "But where
"Well, then, listen! I'll go to the police officer, and you tell them
"Well, then, mates... that very prince who..." some voice at the other
"Well, then, old chap, mon tres honorable Alphonse Karlovich," said
"Well, then, you know more than anyone else, be it who it may," said
"Well, then, you know," Nicholas went on, growing hot at the mere
"Well, there you see!"
"Well, they say," continued the adjutant with the same smile, "that
"Well, they've sent you a tidy sum," said Berg, eying the heavy purse
"Well, this is strange! Do you suppose I... who could think?... I know
"Well, till we meet again..." he said, holding out his hand to Tushin.
"Well, to mention only firewood and fodder, let me inform you. Why, when
"Well, what about it?" said he to Denisov. "It won't come to a fight.
"Well, what about my plan? Peter Kirilych, for heaven's sake! You are my
"Well, what do you think about it?" Pierre asked. "Why are you silent?"
"Well, what do you think? They make soldiers of all classes there."
"Well, what does that lead up to?" said Nicholas.
"Well, what happened? What did he say? Natasha, how glad I am you're not
"Well, what is it tonight?" said the mother, having arranged her pillows
"Well, what is it? From whom?" he asked immediately but without hurry,
"Well, what is it?" came a sharp, unpleasant voice.
"Well, what then?"
"Well, what then?" said she.
"Well, what would you do?" asked Denisov.
"Well, what's this now? What have you been up to now, I should like to
"Well, what's to be done if it cannot be avoided? What's to be done?
"Well, where did you disappear to?" inquired Denisov.
"Well, why are you going to the war?" asked Pierre.
"Well, why don't you speak? Whom have you got there dressed up as a
"Well, why not, if you're not afraid?"
"Well, won't you go on? I had a splendid card all ready," as if it were
"Well, yes," said she, "it may be that he has other sentiments for me
"Well, you can do that later, but the chief thing is the left flank."
"Well, you know it's burned, so what's the use of talking?" said the
"Well, you know whom," said Pierre, with a meaning glance from under
"Well, you know, I wanted to see..."
"Well, you know, Maman," Nicholas interposed, knowing how to translate
"Well, you know," said the sharp-nosed man they called Jackdaw in a
"Well, you must excuse me, because... because... I shall go, and that's
"Well, you see, I'll tell you the whole secret of dueling in two
"Well, you see, my dear princess and cousin, Catherine Semenovna,"
"Well, you should get some sleep now," said the Cossack.
"Well, you'd better not play," Dolokhov added, and springing a new pack
"Well, you've told me nothing new," and the old man repeated,
"Well, young cavalryman, how is my Rook behaving?" he asked. (Rook was a
"Well, young man?" he said with a sigh, and from under his lifted brows
"Well, your excellency, what? Your excellency! But what about your
"Well," began the old maid, "a young lady once went out, took a cock,
"Well," he said, "Khvostikov must have two thousand."
"Well," he went on with an evident effort at self-control and coherence.
"Well," said she, "how's my Cossack?" (Marya Dmitrievna always called
"Well--had a good time?" said the old count, smiling gaily and proudly
"Well..." Anatole looked at his watch. "We'll start at once. Mind,
"Well? Are you satisfied now?" said he. "You've made me quarrel with my
"Well? Has he been degraded into a field marshal, or into a soldier? If
"Well? How do you feel?" he asked.
"Well?" asked Napoleon.
"Well?" asked Pierre, seeing his friend's strange animation with
"Well?" he asked.
"Well?" returned the old man.
"Well?... Well?..." he said.
"Were you kept under lock and key? Who hindered his coming to the house?
"Weren't you asleep?"
"Wetched business," he muttered to himself. "How much is left in the
"Wetched!" he muttered, throwing down a purse with some gold in it.
"Wh-what is the matter?" asked both the young and old Rostov.
"What I have certainly gained is freedom," he began seriously, but did
"What a beast!" said Denisov with his former look of vexation. "What has
"What a beauty--a very queen!" said the nurse as she came to the door.
"What a bwute you are!... Well?"
"What a charming creature your younger girl is," said the visitor; "a
"What a clever man your father is," said she; "perhaps that is why I am
"What a dandy you are today!" said Nesvitski, looking at Denisov's new
"What a darling Uncle is!" said Natasha, when they had come out onto the
"What a darling our Papa is!" she cried, kissing him, and she again
"What a darling that girl is!" thought he. "And what have I been
"What a darling this Nicholas of mine is!" thought Natasha.
"What a delightful woman this little princess is!" said Prince Vasili to
"What a fine fellow you are, friend!" said the Cossack to a convoy
"What a lot of men have been crippled today--frightful!"
"What a lot of those Frenchies were taken today, and the fact is that
"What a matchmaker you are, Aunt..." said Nicholas, kissing her plump
"What a nice figure the policeman must have cut, my dear!" shouted the
"What a pity you weren't at the Arkharovs' on Thursday. It was so dull
"What a splendid reign the Emperor Alexander's might have been!"
"What a strange antipathy," thought Pierre, "yet I used to like him very
"What a strange fate, Masha darling!" And having taken off his cloak and
"What a stupid beast! Why is it howling?" thought Pierre.
"What a style! How charmingly he describes!" said she, reading the
"What a treasure that Dmitri is," added the count with a smile when
"What a wonderful coincidence! Just during the service. But what a loss
"What a young lady she is!" remarked the major-domo.
"What about capitulation?"
"What about the left flank?" asked Pierre
"What about your master?" he asked Lavrushka, Denisov's orderly, whom
"What am I to do with the people?" said Dron. "They're quite beside
"What am I to say to him?" thought Prince Andrew, looking down on the
"What an extraordinary genius!" Prince Andrew suddenly exclaimed,
"What are 'God's folk'?" asked Pierre.
"What are they about?" thought Prince Andrew as he gazed at them. "Why
"What are you about?" shouted Rostov, looking at him in an ecstasy of
"What are you disputing about?" said the major angrily. "What does it
"What are you doing here, sir, in civilian dress?" asked a deep voice.
"What are you doing!" she cried vehemently. "He is dying and you leave
"What are you making such a noise about over there?" Marya Dmitrievna's
"What are you pushing for? Is the fire only for you? Look how he's
"What are you saying about the militia?" he asked Boris.
"What are you sharpening?" asked a man coming up to the wagon.
"What are you shoving for, young lordling? Don't you see we're all
"What are you staring at, you good-for-nothing?... The count will be
"What are you staring at?" he shouted to the cook, who in her red skirt,
"What are you up to?" suddenly came the authoritative voice of a
"What are you waiting for? Come along!"
"What are you writing, Mary?" Nicholas asked.
"What are your commands, little countess?"
"What are your orders about the pictures?"
"What audacity! Hand it in through your commander. And go along with
"What book?"
"What brings you here?" cried the officers turning to the newcomer.
"What business is it of yours?" cried the count.
"What can I do with them?" thought Natasha.
"What can decent men do?" Nicholas inquired, frowning slightly. "What
"What can happen?"
"What can have happened? And what can they want with me?" thought he
"What can he say? Tra-di-ri-di-ra and so on... merely to gain time. I
"What can it be?" he thought. "The enemy in the rear of our army?
"What can one say about it?" replied the prince in a cold, listless
"What can one say or think of as a consolation?" said Pierre. "Nothing!
"What companion, my dear boy? Eh? You've already been talking it over!
"What could he wish or look for that he would not have obtained
"What could we fasten this onto?" asked the servants, trying to fix a
"What crowds! Just look at the crowds!... They've loaded goods even on
"What d'you think of the treat? All on silver plate," one of them was
"What decision have you been pleased to come to?" said he.
"What delicacy!" thought the princess. "Is it possible that Amelie"
"What devil brought them here?" thought he, while Tikhon was putting the
"What devils these quartermasters are! See, the fifth company is turning
"What did I tell about Kutuzov?" Prince Vasili now said with a
"What did he say? What did he say?" Pierre heard them ask.
"What did you say?"
"What did you want to see the count for?" she asked.
"What division are you?" shouted an adjutant, riding up.
"What do I care? Let him hear! We're not dogs," said the ex-captain of
"What do I think about it? I am listening to you. It's all very well....
"What do you mean? For God's sake... If you tell, you are my enemy!"
"What do you mean?" asked Speranski quietly, lowering his eyes.
"What do you thank me for?"
"What do you think of it, Prince?" Dessalles ventured to ask.
"What do you think of this?" said he, unrolling a piece of stuff like a
"What do you think, dear fellows? That murderer confessed to the
"What do you think?" Vera was saying with an arch smile. "You are so
"What do you want, my pretty?" said Ilyin with a smile.
"What do you want, sir?" said the doctor. "What do you want? The bullets
"What do you want, your honor?" asked an artilleryman, standing close
"What does harm to another is wrong," said Pierre, feeling with pleasure
"What does he want the bits for?" said Karataev. "They'd make fine leg
"What does it mean? What is it? Whom are they firing at? Who is firing?"
"What does she want?" he murmured. "She is bringing me my daughter whom
"What does that prove?" he was saying as Rostov rode up. "They might
"What does that woman want?" asked the officer.
"What does this fellow want?" shouted one of them referring to Pierre.
"What does this mean?" she brought out.
"What else did he say to you? What are those verses? Read them..." said
"What else do you expect?" answered the soldier. "She has no mercy, you
"What for? I don't know. I must. Besides that I am going..." He paused.
"What for? Why? What is going on in the world?" he would ask himself in
"What for?" asked Alpatych.
"What force! What a style!" was uttered in approval both of reader and
"What force!" remarked one. "Knocked the roof and ceiling all to
"What good are they? They're led about just for show!" remarked another.
"What has Speranski to do with the army regulations?" asked Prince
"What has happened to her?" he asked himself with still greater
"What has happened?" asked Nicholas.
"What has happened?" asked Pierre, entering Marya Dmitrievna's room.
"What has happened?" he asked himself. "I have killed her lover, yes,
"What have I said and what have I done?" thought she, as soon as she was
"What have the young people come to nowadays, eh, Feoktist?" said he.
"What have they taken a baby in there for?" thought Prince Andrew in the
"What have you done to Mlle Scherer? She will be quite ill now," said
"What if the Smolensk people have offahd to waise militia for the
"What is 'the talk of all Moscow'?" Pierre asked angrily, rising to his
"What is a 'ticket'?" Nicholas inquired.
"What is a trick?" asked Princess Mary in surprise.
"What is bad, Father?"
"What is he talking about?" thought Prince Andrew. "Oh, the spring,
"What is it tonight?--But I have to tell you..."
"What is it you are afraid of, Lise? I don't understand," said he.
"What is it you have got into your heads, eh?... What are you thinking
"What is it you wish, Colonel? I am at your service."
"What is it, Natasha?" said Princess Mary.
"What is it, Nicholas?"
"What is it, dear?"
"What is it, my dear? Come, let's sit down here," said she.
"What is it? A petition?"
"What is it? Some new relics?" asked Prince Andrew.
"What is it? What has happened?"
"What is it? What is it?" he asked, but his comrade was already
"What is it? What's the matter?"
"What is it? What?" asked both princesses when they saw for a moment at
"What is it? Who is it? What is it for?" he kept asking.
"What is it?"
"What is it?" asked Pierre.
"What is it?" asked the countess, startled; but seeing by her daughter's
"What is it?" asked the person in the other room.
"What is it?" he asked.
"What is it?" he said crossly, and, his hand shaking unintentionally,
"What is that?" asked the countess as if she did not know what the
"What is the German for 'shelter'?"
"What is the commander in chief doing here?" he asked.
"What is the connection of that man with my childhood and life?" he
"What is the matter with you, my darling? You look pale. Oh, you
"What is the matter with you, my dear?" she said crossly to the maid who
"What is the matter, Count?" asked the countess in a surprised and
"What is the matter, Mary?"
"What is the matter?" she asked.
"What is the something?" asked he.
"What is there to see?" said the assistant.
"What is this, my dear? I hear that the luggage is being unloaded."
"What is this?" thought Nicholas, listening to her with widely opened
"What is to be done? In a few months the year will be up. The thing is
"What is wrong? What is it, Princess?"
"What is your conception of Freemasonry?"
"What is your petition?" asked Arakcheev.
"What is your pleasure?"
"What knights? What do you mean?" demanded Pierre, blushing.
"What makes you think so? You think I may hope? You think...?"
"What manners! I thought they would never go," said the countess, when
"What marvels!" she exclaimed, but hearing her master's voice she turned
"What misfortune? What misfortune can happen to them? They just live
"What news, sir?" asked the officer, evidently anxious to start a
"What next? Have you gone mad?... No one would let you!... Why, you go
"What next?" the princess interrupted, smiling sardonically and not
"What nonsense it is," Natasha suddenly exclaimed, "about honeymoons,
"What nonsense! Much I need it!" said Rostov, throwing the letter under
"What nonsense..."
"What now?" the officer asked with a cold look as if not recognizing
"What of it? It's the truth!" and he himself smiled his gentle childlike
"What officers? Whom have they brought? I don't understand anything
"What orders, your excellency?" said the huntsman in his deep bass, deep
"What people are these?" he shouted again, receiving no answer.
"What people are these?" he shouted to the men, who were moving singly
"What prayer was that you were saying?" asked Pierre.
"What prince? Ours?" said many voices, and the men were in such haste
"What proof have I that you are not lying?"
"What relation are you to Intendant General Kiril Andreevich Denisov?"
"What right has he not to wish to receive me into his family? Oh, better
"What rubbish sometimes enters one's head!" thought Prince Andrew, "but
"What rubbish you're talking!" said the countess.
"What shall we sing?" she said.
"What sort of another blackguard are you? I'll have you shot!
"What stupid orders! They don't themselves know what they are doing!"
"What sunshine, Monsieur Kiril!" (Their name for Pierre.) "Eh? Just like
"What swells they are! Why, the water streams from them! Don't make our
"What then? Eh?" repeated Anatole, sincerely perplexed by a thought
"What trouble would it be to you?" he said. "I have not got one. Please
"What was he thinking when he uttered that word? What is he thinking
"What was it about?" asked Nicholas.
"What was it?"
"What was the good of bringing him?" Tikhon interrupted hastily and
"What were you saying?" he asked the general, who continuing his report
"What were you thinking about just now, Nicholas?" inquired Natasha.
"What will happen now?" thought she.
"What would it cost you to say a word to the Emperor, and then he would
"What would you have me do?" he said at last. "You know I did all a
"What would you have, my dear fellow?" answered Pierre, shrugging his
"What year did you enter the service?" he asked with that affectation
"What you have with you: watch, money, rings...."
"What you said just now was splendid!" said his partner Julie.
"What! Are you going to remain as you are, dear princess?" she began.
"What! It is as if I were glad of a chance to take advantage of his
"What! To whom?... Nonsense!" cried the count, suddenly reddening with
"What! You don't remember Boris?" asked Sonya in surprise.
"What's burning?" asked Natasha. "Oh, yes, Moscow."
"What's happening here? May I come with you?" he asked.
"What's he talking about? Get along!" said several voices, and one of
"What's in it?" asked Natasha.
"What's it all about? Why, the French have crossed the bridge that
"What's that that has fallen?" asked the accountant with a naive smile.
"What's that? What do you make of it?" said Rostov to the hussar beside
"What's the good of denying it, my dear? Our dear countess was too
"What's the good of freedom to me, your excellency? We lived under the
"What's the matter with her?" thought Pierre, glancing at her. She was
"What's the matter with you? Are you ill?"
"What's the matter with you? Who are 'they'? What do you want?"
"What's the matter? I only congratulated them," said Zherkov.
"What's the matter?" exclaimed Prince Andrew standing still in his
"What's this? Am I falling? My legs are giving way," thought he, and
"What's this?" said the doctor, rising from his bed. "Please go away,
"What's this?" thought Nicholas. "Where's that huntsman from? He is not
"What's to be done? She's pretty! I will do everything. Make your mind
"What's your name?"
"What, Monsieur Pierre... Do you consider that assassination shows
"What, are you wounded, my lad?" said Tushin, approaching the gun on
"What, outside our line?"
"What, teasing again? Go to the devil! Eh?" said Anatole, making a
"What, to Petersburg? What is Petersburg? Who is there in Petersburg?"
"What... what they have brought us to!" Kutuzov suddenly cried in an
"What? A minister? What minister? Who gave orders?" he said in his
"What? Has it begun? Is it time?" Pierre asked, waking up.
"What? Here? But why did they not blow up the bridge, if it was mined?"
"What? His Serene Highness? I expect he'll be here soon. What do you
"What? Occupied? Vienna occupied?"
"What? Revolution and regicide a grand thing?... Well, after that... But
"What? Saw the real Mack? With hands and feet?"
"What? What did he say?" was heard in the ranks of the Polish Uhlans
"What? What did you say?" asked Pierre.
"What? What do you say?" asked Napoleon. "Yes, tell them to bring me my
"What? What is it?" asked Natasha.
"What? What's that? From whom?" came a sleepy voice.
"What? What's that?" asked Anna Pavlovna, securing silence for the mot,
"What? What? How dare you? What?" said Telyanin.
"What? What? Why? Don't ask me," said Pierre, and looked round at
"What?"
"What?" answered the old man absent-mindedly.
"What?" asked Countess Mary, surprised.
"What?" asked the commander.
"What?" he answered, not recognizing Boris.
"What?" said Kutuzov, in the midst of Denisov's explanations, "are you
"Whatever are you bothering about, gentlemen?" said Bilibin, who, till
"Whatever happens to you," he said, "you must bear it all manfully
"Whatever is this? This!" he shouted and stood still. "Commander of the
"Whatever the European sovereigns and commanders may do to countenance
"Whatever trouble may come," Prince Andrew continued, "I beg you,
"When I saw, your excellency, that their first battalion was
"When I tell you that I must talk to you!..." repeated Pierre.
"When I told him that duty and the oath were above everything, he
"When am I to receive the money, Count?"
"When am I to wear it?" and Natasha stuck it in her coil of hair. "When
"When are you starting?" he asked.
"When did my father and sister leave?" meaning when did they leave for
"When did you get the letter? Was it from Olmutz?" repeated Prince
"When he looked at my feet, friend... well, thinks I..."
"When her confinement is due, send to Moscow for an accoucheur.... Let
"When loving with human love one may pass from love to hatred, but
"When my father built Bald Hills he thought the place was his: his
"When speaking to the Emperor, try as far as you can to praise the way
"When the snow melts they'll sink in the Polish swamps. Only they
"When they are dead, what shall I drive?" said Balaga with a wink.
"When will her mother come? She has worried me to death! Now mind, don't
"When would you like them, your excellency?" asked Dmitri. "Allow me to
"When you are here he can't tear himself away," she said.
"When you see my sister, Princess Mary, you'll get on with her," he
"When, when did the abandonment of Moscow become inevitable? When was
"Whenever will you be ready?" asked the count coming to the door. "Here
"Where am I? Oh yes, in the skirmishing line... pass and
"Where are all the folks going?"
"Where are headquarters?"
"Where are they off to now?" thought Rostov.
"Where are they taking you to, you poor dear?" said she. "And the little
"Where are we? In Moscow, I know. I don't matter, but I have killed her,
"Where are we?" thought he. "It's the Kosoy meadow, I suppose. But
"Where are you going to now, my dear sir?"
"Where are you going?" asked an infantry officer who was eating an
"Where are you going?" shouted Pierre to the man, who was driving to
"Where are you off to so early?" asked Speranski.
"Where are you off to? Stop here!" voices whispered to Lazarev who did
"Where are you off to?" asked Boris.
"Where are you off to?" he said suddenly to Prince Andrew who had risen
"Where are you off to?... Where?..." he shouted to three infantrymen
"Where are you shoving to? Devil take you! Can't you wait? It'll
"Where did I disappear to? I went to get Frenchmen," answered Tikhon
"Where has he gone? Where is he now?..."
"Where have you been? To Kiev?" Prince Andrew asked the old woman.
"Where have you put it, Wostov?"
"Where have you to go to? Tell us!" said one of them.
"Where is Dolokhov?" asked Kutuzov.
"Where is he? Can I see him--can I?" asked the princess.
"Where is he?"
"Where is he?"
"Where is he?" he inquired. And as he spoke he saw a young man coming
"Where is he?" she asked again, addressing them all.
"Where is it, that lofty sky that I did not know till now, but saw
"Where is it? Where?" said Pierre.
"Where is she?" asked Bolkonski. "Excuse me!" he added, turning to the
"Where is the Emperor? Where is Kutuzov?" Rostov kept asking everyone he
"Where is the commander in chief?" asked Bolkonski.
"Where is the princess?" he asked. "Hiding?"
"Where is your dispatch?" he inquired. "Give it to me. I will send it to
"Where the devil have the leg bands been shoved to?" said an orderly,
"Where there's law there's injustice," put in the little man.
"Where to now, your excellency?" asked the coachman.
"Where to?"
"Where to?"
"Where to?" Pierre asked himself. "Where can I go now? Surely not to the
"Where would I not go at the countess' command!" said Denisov, who at
"Where you are, there is vice and evil!" said Pierre to his wife.
"Where's the Elder?" demanded Rostov in a loud voice.
"Where? At Bykov's, at the rat's... I knew it," replied a piping voice,
"Where? I send them away and take a weceipt for them," shouted Denisov,
"Where? Where?" asked Pierre.
"Whether Dolokhov comes or not, we must seize it, eh?" said Denisov with
"Whew... whew... whew!" he whistled just audibly as he rode into the
"Which house is it?" asked the driver.
"Which is he? Which?" asked Petya in a tearful voice, of those around
"Which is it? Which is your house?" he asked.
"Which is the senior?" he asked, on seeing the prisoners.
"Which lady?"
"Which one do you want, Ma'am'selle?" said he, screwing up his eyes and
"Who are they? Why are they here? What do they want? And when will all
"Who are you talking about?"
"Who are you? Bonaparte!..." shouted Makar Alexeevich.
"Who are you?"
"Who are you?" asked the interpreter in poor Russian. "You must answer
"Who brought it?" asked Kutuzov with a look which, when the candle was
"Who can tell, your honor?" replied the hussar reluctantly.
"Who do you belong to?" he asked.
"Who do you think should be sent there?" he asked of Berthier (whom he
"Who do you want, sir?" asked a voice in the darkness.
"Who do you want?"
"Who gave the report?" inquired Shcherbinin, taking the envelope.
"Who has told them not to capture me these twenty times over? But if
"Who is he?" asked Petya.
"Who is it you want?" he asked. "The commander in chief? He was killed
"Who is it?" asked someone in the porch.
"Who is to blame for it? Who has let things come to such a pass?" he
"Who is your Elder here? Hey?" shouted Rostov, coming up to the crowd
"Who looks after the sick here?" he asked the assistant.
"Who sacrificed everything for him," chimed in the princess, who would
"Who should it be? You yourself told him to come. It's the quartermaster
"Who the devil has put the logs on the road?" snarled he.
"Who told you that? Who?" cried the prince. "Suvorov!" And he jerked
"Who was that? The Military Governor himself?" was being asked at the
"Who was that?" asked Boris.
"Who's that curtseying there? Cadet Miwonov! That's not wight! Look at
"Who's that running on the middle of the bridge? To the right! Come
"Who's that? Why? Wait a moment!" Anatole's face seemed to say. Princess
"Who's that?" asked the old prince, noticing Pierre as he got out of the
"Who's to put it out?" Daniel Terentich, who had hitherto been silent,
"Who? I?" said Karataev. "I say things happen not as we plan but as God
"Who? Kutuzov?" asked Rostov.
"Who? Who?"
"Who?"
"Who?"
"Who?" asked Rostov.
"Whom do you mean, Aunt?" asked Nicholas.
"Whom do you want?" someone inquired.
"Whom have you come from? Who are you?"
"Whose caleche is that?" she inquired, leaning out of the carriage
"Whose company?" asked Prince Bagration of an artilleryman standing by
"Why 'What the devil'?" said Boris, picking it up and reading the
"Why a blue coat? Off with it... Sergeant major! Change his coat... the
"Why am I not free? Why was I in such a hurry with Sonya?" And he
"Why are there none?" asked the princess.
"Why are they down on me?" thought Tushin, looking in alarm at his
"Why are they leaving the town?" asked Alpatych.
"Why are you crying, Mamma?" asked Vera. "From all he says one should be
"Why are you going? I know you think it your duty to gallop back to
"Why are you going? Why are you upset?" asked Natasha, and she looked
"Why are you here?"
"Why are you here?" Prince Andrew repeated.
"Why are you here?" he asked.
"Why are you so glum?" asked Nesvitski noticing Prince Andrew's pale
"Why are you wandering about like an outcast?" asked her mother. "What
"Why aren't you asleep, sir?" said a Cossack who was sitting under a
"Why aren't you beginning, Michael Ilarionovich?" said the Emperor
"Why aren't you serving in the army?"
"Why ask me? General Armfeldt has proposed a splendid position with an
"Why could that not be as well?" she sometimes asked herself in complete
"Why did I utter those words? It was by some accident I said them....
"Why did Sonya run away?" asked Rostov.
"Why did they write, why did Lise tell me about it? It can never
"Why did you not succeed in impressing on Bonaparte by diplomatic
"Why did you push yourself in there by daylight? You ass! Well, why
"Why didn't you capture one, just one, marshal for us?"
"Why didn't you mention it, Prince? I would have offered you something."
"Why didn't you say who you were?" and turning with a smile he held out
"Why do they want to make her sing? How can she sing? There's nothing to
"Why do you say that?" Natasha interrupted him. "You know that from the
"Why do you say that?" replied Princess Mary. "Why do you say that,
"Why do you say this young man is so rich?" asked the countess, turning
"Why do you shout so? You'll frighten them!" said Boris. "I did not
"Why does she come prowling here? What does she want? I can't bear these
"Why doesn't he openly ask for your hand? You know Prince Andrew gave
"Why don't you enter the service, Uncle?"
"Why don't you play?" he asked.
"Why don't you renew the acquaintance?" said Dolokhov to Rostov.
"Why don't you speak, cousin?" suddenly shrieked the princess so loud
"Why don't you speak?" she inquired of a very old man who stood just
"Why don't you want to go? I promise to house and feed you, while here
"Why have we stopped? Is the way blocked? Or have we already come up
"Why have you come here, Count?" he asked with a smile. "Still
"Why have you thrown that away?" asked Boris.
"Why haven't they carried him away?" Pierre was about to ask, but seeing
"Why is it hard to imagine eternity?" said Natasha. "It is now today,
"Why is it others see things and I don't?" she said. "You sit down now,
"Why is it true?" Natasha asked, looking attentively into Pierre's eyes.
"Why is it wrong?" urged Prince Andrew. "It is not given to man to know
"Why is it you were never at Annette's?" the little princess asked
"Why joke?" said the driver, laughing. "As if I'd grudge my gentlemen
"Why no, my dear fellow," said the astonished narrator, shrugging his
"Why not wash? That is not cleanly," said Prince Andrew; "on the
"Why not, if he likes to?"
"Why not?" Dolokhov answered absently, scrutinizing the face of the
"Why not?" asked Natasha in a frightened tone.
"Why not?" inquired Boris.
"Why not?" said Natasha, without changing her position.
"Why ride into the middle of the battalion?" one of them shouted at him.
"Why run risks, Captain? You should dismount," he said.
"Why should I envy them? My chance is not lost, and maybe I shall see
"Why should I mind Monsieur Pierre being here?" exclaimed the little
"Why should we agree? We don't want the grain."
"Why should we give up everything? We don't agree. Don't agree.... We
"Why should you be God knows where out of sight, during the battle?" he
"Why should you be ashamed?"
"Why shouldn't I marry her?" he asked his daughter. "She'll make a
"Why shouldn't I speak? I can speak as I like, and I tell you plainly
"Why shouldn't you go away, your excellency? You can go," said Dron.
"Why so?" asked Pierre.
"Why so?" asked Prince Andrew. "To kill a vicious dog is a very good
"Why such a quantity of churches?"
"Why talk nonsense? Say what you want."
"Why talk nonsense?" rejoined voices in the crowd. "Will they give
"Why talk of me?" she said quietly and glanced at Natasha.
"Why terrible?" asked Nicholas. "No, Vaska is a splendid fellow."
"Why this delay? Why no betrothal?" he thought. Once, when he had
"Why this," began Pierre, not sitting down but pacing the room,
"Why too much?... Well, what do you, what do you feel in your soul, your
"Why's that fellow in front of the line?" shouted somebody at him again.
"Why, I didn't recognize you!" he said. But Rostov was otherwise
"Why, I've not said anything! I only say that I'll certainly go with
"Why, are you a soldier then?"
"Why, didn't you know, Miss?" replied the maid. "The wounded prince: he
"Why, don't you hear it?" Rostov asked again, after waiting for a reply.
"Why, fleas, crickets, grasshoppers," answered the buffoon.
"Why, for this reason! My father is one of the most remarkable men of
"Why, have you too much money?"
"Why, is it late?"
"Why, it's a mercy if we can get the carpets alone into three cases,"
"Why, nothing," answered Pierre without raising his eyes or changing the
"Why, so as not to lay waste the country we were abandoning to the
"Why, that must be the Anferovs," said an old deacon, addressing a
"Why, that one, right at the end, the big one. Don't you see? That's our
"Why, that's our Tikhon," said the esaul.
"Why, the position of assistants. The society need not be secret if the
"Why, the wounded! It's impossible, Mamma. It's monstrous!... No, Mamma
"Why, there, over at Echkino," said a Cossack officer, pointing to a
"Why, this gentleman's saber."
"Why, this is a palace!" she said to her husband, looking around with
"Why, this one seems..." he began, turning to the assistant.
"Why, this..."
"Why, to the police, of course!"
"Why, we've not done any harm! We did it just out of foolishness. It's
"Why, whatever is the matter, my dearest?"
"Why, you remember before you went away?... Well, she says you are to
"Why, you said yourself you don't want even to see her. She is a very
"Why," thought Prince Andrew, "that's the captain who stood up in
"Why... she's wounded!" said the adjutant. "In the off foreleg above the
"Why? Did the Tugendbund which saved Europe" (they did not then venture
"Why? I love you more than ever," said Princess Mary, "and I will try to
"Why? Let him be," said Pierre, taking Nicholas by the arm and
"Why? No, tell me!" Natasha began resolutely and suddenly stopped.
"Why?"
"Why?"
"Why?" asked Julie. "You don't think Moscow is in danger?"
"Why?" said the eldest Melyukov girl.
"Will Your Highness please take command of the first army?"
"Will Your Majesty allow me to consult the colonel?" said Alexander and
"Will there be any orders, your honor?" he asked Denisov, holding his
"Will they bring our horses or not?" thought Petya, instinctively
"Will they burn the bridge or not? Who'll get there first? Will they get
"Will you bet? The ribbon of the order is a different matter...."
"Will you have the portmanteaus brought in? And a bed got ready, and
"Will you have them fetched back?"
"Wine? Gluttony? Idleness? Laziness? Irritability? Anger? Women?" He
"With Natasha Rostova, yes?" said he.
"With a message to His Majesty."
"With a short coat and his hair cropped; just as if, well, just as if he
"With my father and sister, remember," said Prince Andrew gently.
"With our business, how can we get away?" said Ferapontov. "We'd have
"With you I will be quite frank," said Anna Mikhaylovna. "There are not
"With young Count Peter, by the Zharov rank grass," answered Simon,
"Without doubt, sire," replied Rapp.
"Women's fuss, women's fuss!" said Alpatych.
"Women, women! Women's fuss!" muttered Alpatych to himself and started
"Women," he said in a low, scarcely audible voice.
"Won't you come over to the other table?" suggested Anna Pavlovna.
"Wonderful!" answered Natasha. "She's a woman one could easily fall in
"Wostov! Petya!" exclaimed Denisov, having run through the dispatch.
"Wostov, deah fellow, just see how much there is left and shove the
"Wostov, you've not been playing schoolboy twicks..."
"Would not such a meeting be too trying for him, dear Anna Mikhaylovna?"
"Would not the French ladies leave Paris if the Russians entered it?"
"Would not your Serene Highness like to come inside?" said the general
"Would not your excellency like a little refreshment?" he said.
"Would you believe it, Count, I was not at all alarmed, because I knew
"Would you like a little mash?" the first soldier asked, and handed
"Would you marry him?"
"Write and tell your brother to wait till I am dead.... It won't be
"Write to her and let me know how her father looks at the matter. Au
"Yakov Alpatych, discharge me! Take the keys from me and discharge me,
"Yes and no mistake!" cried Denisov. "You worked like wegular bwicks and
"Yes! I knew it! Thank God!" murmured Sonya. "He will live."
"Yes!" she replied. "And with thee?"
"Yes, Count," she would say, "he is too noble and pure-souled for
"Yes, Dmitri, clean ones, please," said the countess, sighing deeply.
"Yes, Father, I have come to you and brought my wife who is pregnant,"
"Yes, God be thanked! Yes! They've just finished supper. Let me have a
"Yes, I am a Mason," Pierre replied.
"Yes, I am very glad," he said.
"Yes, I am, but please don't let us do like that.... In another four
"Yes, I belong to the Brotherhood of the Freemasons," said the stranger,
"Yes, I do believe in God," he repeated.
"Yes, I do wish it," said he.
"Yes, I do," said Pierre. "But what was that you said: Frola and Lavra?"
"Yes, I feel a kind of oppression," she said in reply to the prince's
"Yes, I had forgotten... I really must go home... business..." said
"Yes, I have heard of his scheme for perpetual peace, and it is very
"Yes, I have just seen him."
"Yes, I have noticed that," said Countess Mary.
"Yes, I knew it long ago but had forgotten. I knew that I could expect
"Yes, I know him..."
"Yes, I know you have made peace with the Turks without obtaining
"Yes, I know," said Countess Mary. "Natasha told me."
"Yes, I never loved her," said he to himself; "I knew she was a depraved
"Yes, I saw him, and am convinced that he fears nothing so much as a
"Yes, I saw him," she said.
"Yes, I shall be very glad to see him. Is he quite well?"
"Yes, I should think..." Natasha began.
"Yes, I think so," he said reluctantly, and left the study.
"Yes, I think so," said Princess Mary with a smile. "Write to her
"Yes, I wanted to tell you," said he, answering her look as if she had
"Yes, I was a fool! I still believed in people, loved them, and
"Yes, I was brought up quite differently," remarked the handsome elder
"Yes, I was thinking"--for some reason Boris could not help
"Yes, I was," Pierre answered. "There will be another battle
"Yes, I will approach... and then suddenly... with pistol or dagger?
"Yes, I will."
"Yes, I will; Pelageya Danilovna, let me! I'll go," said Sonya.
"Yes, I'd send them on in front, but no fear, they're crowding up
"Yes, I'll come with you," replied Pierre, looking round for his groom.
"Yes, I'll go. I shall certainly go," said Natasha decisively. "Daniel,
"Yes, I'm tired too," said Rostov.
"Yes, I've got it," said Pierre. "The Emperor is to be here tomorrow...
"Yes, Mamma! Yes, these are very hard times!" said Berg.
"Yes, Mamma, I tell you sincerely that these are hard and sad times for
"Yes, Mamma, I will write," said she.
"Yes, Moscow will be surrendered! She will be our expiation!" shouted
"Yes, Princess," said Nicholas at last with a sad smile, "it doesn't
"Yes, a Cossack, your Honor."
"Yes, a new happiness was revealed to me of which man cannot be
"Yes, a regular volcano," said the count. "Takes after me! And what a
"Yes, alone, for the sake of all, I must do it or perish!" he thought.
"Yes, always first both on the grassland and here," answered Rostov,
"Yes, and I have some money and a letter to give you," he added.
"Yes, and even tomorrow," replied her brother.
"Yes, and for me nothing else is serious. All the time in Petersburg I
"Yes, and he is over sixty. I hear the count no longer recognizes
"Yes, and nothing more," said Natasha.
"Yes, and so you are once more an eligible bachelor," said Princess
"Yes, and some wine," answered the captain.
"Yes, and there, further on, are the French," said the officer. "There
"Yes, and this is not a time for discussing," he continued, "but for
"Yes, and to drink," assented Nicholas. "Hullo there! Another bottle!"
"Yes, and where do you put the others?" inquired Dolokhov.
"Yes, and yet he is quite different. They say men are friends when
"Yes, and you remember how Papa in his blue overcoat fired a gun in the
"Yes, bring some."
"Yes, but between ourselves," said the princess, "that is a pretext. The
"Yes, but he will dislike it extremely," said Bolkonski.
"Yes, but he's wonderful."
"Yes, but it is hard for us to imagine eternity," remarked Dimmler,
"Yes, but it is not as you imagine," Prince Andrew continued. "I did
"Yes, but it's a secret society and therefore a hostile and harmful one
"Yes, but what am I to do?... I try not to show..."
"Yes, but what luck for Lazarev! Twelve hundred francs' pension for
"Yes, but you are not the only one. There are your sisters..." replied
"Yes, capitally."
"Yes, do. You'll see everything from there and it's less dangerous, and
"Yes, everything is different nowadays, everything is changed. The lad's
"Yes, everything! He alone is now dearer to me than everything in the
"Yes, exactly; the left flank is now extremely strong."
"Yes, from Olmutz," he answered, with a sigh.
"Yes, gentlemen, I've been told there's a rumor going about Moscow that
"Yes, go and find out!" shouted the angry gentleman. "They've brought
"Yes, go back," said Marya Dmitrievna, "and wait there. If your
"Yes, he is a very, very kind man when he is not under the influence of
"Yes, he is an agreeable young man.... Why do you ask me that?" said
"Yes, he is very handsome," thought Pierre, "and I know him. It would be
"Yes, he meant to look in," answered Helene, and glanced attentively at
"Yes, he's a dear, but very absurd."
"Yes, he's a poor little fellow," said Denisov, who evidently saw
"Yes, here in this forest was that oak with which I agreed," thought
"Yes, if having obtained power, without availing himself of it to commit
"Yes, if it only were so!" said Prince Andrew. "However, it is time to
"Yes, if you put it like that it's quite a different matter," said
"Yes, immediately, immediately! Hey, who's there?" he called out in a
"Yes, in these days it would be hard to live without faith..." remarked
"Yes, indeed!"
"Yes, indeed, that's a true sage," thought Pierre. "He sees nothing
"Yes, indeed," replied the princess with a sigh. "So he may have
"Yes, is there a family free from sorrow now?" said Pierre, addressing
"Yes, it can't be helped if they won't take less. Ah, dear me! I was
"Yes, it has happened luckily for you," he said, raising the open
"Yes, it is all very horrid," interrupted Pierre, "very horrid."
"Yes, it is the same oak," thought Prince Andrew, and all at once he was
"Yes, it is true."
"Yes, it is very likely that I shall be killed tomorrow," he thought.
"Yes, it really is Bezukhov in a coachman's coat, with a queer-looking
"Yes, it seems he is ill. People are always disturbing him," answered
"Yes, it was death! I died--and woke up. Yes, death is an awakening!"
"Yes, it will," Natasha answered reluctantly.
"Yes, it's a nice purse. Yes, yes," he said, growing suddenly pale, and
"Yes, it's all very well for you. You are pleased, you've had a good
"Yes, it's all very well, but when a man's feet are frozen how can he
"Yes, it's from Julie," replied the princess with a timid glance and a
"Yes, just fancy..."
"Yes, just the same. Though I don't know what your opinion will be,"
"Yes, let them have it," replied Prince Andrew.
"Yes, let's go in and I will get myself a roll and some cheese," said
"Yes, like a man. Everything quite all right, and he began persuading
"Yes, most precious... a royal word," said Count Rostov, with a sob. He
"Yes, my Sonya could not have done otherwise!" thought Nicholas.
"Yes, my dear Monsieur Pierre, I owe you a fine votive candle for
"Yes, my dear friend," he began, "such is fortune's caprice. Who would
"Yes, my dear, this is a great loss for us all, not to speak of you. But
"Yes, now you may be glad!" said she; "this is what you have been
"Yes, of course that's true," said Pierre with a cheerful smile. "I
"Yes, of course!" replied Davout, but what this "yes" meant, Pierre did
"Yes, of course," returned Anatole, evidently not listening to Dolokhov
"Yes, one is afraid," continued the first speaker, he of the familiar
"Yes, one must harness, it is time to harness."
"Yes, please do," answered the general, and he repeated the order that
"Yes, please do," said Rostov.
"Yes, really I did," Natasha replied in a voice that pleaded to be left
"Yes, really..."
"Yes, she is right," thought the old princess, all her convictions
"Yes, she's fast enough," replied Nicholas, and thought: "If only a
"Yes, sir, and there's a light in your father's study."
"Yes, sir," said the man. "Please step into the portrait gallery."
"Yes, sir. He knows where to stand. He understands the matter so well
"Yes, sir."
"Yes, sir."
"Yes, sir."
"Yes, sire, and Moscow is now in ashes. I left it all in flames,"
"Yes, sire," and the aide-de-camp disappeared through the door of the
"Yes, sire," replied Rapp.
"Yes, sire."
"Yes, sit down!" said Dolokhov.
"Yes, so it is, so it is," said the general angrily, lowering the field
"Yes, stories!" repeated Rostov loudly, looking with eyes suddenly grown
"Yes, that all happened!" he said, and, smiling happily to himself like
"Yes, that is Herder's theory," said Prince Andrew, "but it is not that
"Yes, that is true, Prince. In our days," continued Vera--mentioning
"Yes, that must be so," thought Pierre, when after these words the
"Yes, that was fine," said Rostov, smiling.
"Yes, that was happiness," she then said in her quiet voice with its
"Yes, that's a difficulty, as education is not at all general, but..."
"Yes, that's it! That's just what I said to him," put in Nicholas, who
"Yes, that's it!" cried the count, opening his moist eyes and sniffing
"Yes, that's it, she means to elope with him, but what am I to do?"
"Yes, that's me!" she seemed to say, answering the rapt gaze with which
"Yes, the Austrian prince who built that castle was no fool. It's a
"Yes, the ham was just delicious..." answered another with a loud laugh.
"Yes, the oak is right, a thousand times right," thought Prince Andrew.
"Yes, these verses Nicholas wrote himself and I copied some others, and
"Yes, they are splendid, splendid youngsters," chimed in the count, who
"Yes, they have. Julie Drubetskaya told me so. I went to see them, but
"Yes, they say it's burned," he said. "It's a great pity," and he gazed
"Yes, they worked all day and didn't play!" remarked the tall,
"Yes, this is the one thing left me now," he said with a sigh.
"Yes, to them it must seem sad!" he thought. "But how simple it is.
"Yes, very much," replied Pierre.
"Yes, very often. And do you know the new way of courting?" said Pierre
"Yes, wait a bit," said Denisov, glancing round at the officers, and
"Yes, we are going," replied Nicholas reluctantly, for today, as he
"Yes, we are soldiers of the Apsheron regiment. I was dying of fever. We
"Yes, we have altered much, very much, since then," said Prince Andrew.
"Yes, we know that, but the harm I am conscious of in myself is
"Yes, we saw from the hill how you took to your heels through the
"Yes, we're philosophizing," said Natasha, glancing round for a moment
"Yes, yes! I love him!" thought Natasha, reading the letter for the
"Yes, yes! Who else should it be? I should never have believed it,
"Yes, yes!" Natasha murmured as if in vexation. Then she sighed loudly
"Yes, yes!" cried Natasha opening her eyes wide, and vaguely recalling
"Yes, yes!" some voices answered, laughing.
"Yes, yes, I am unhappy," assented Pierre. "But what am I to do?"
"Yes, yes, I do remember something too," Sonya answered timidly.
"Yes, yes, I know. Let us go in..." said Pierre and entered the house.
"Yes, yes, all right!" said the count hurriedly. "Only excuse me, my
"Yes, yes, and so...?" Pierre kept saying as he leaned toward her with
"Yes, yes, at thunderclaps!" was repeated approvingly in the back rows
"Yes, yes, call him. A poor little fellow," Denisov repeated.
"Yes, yes, do so."
"Yes, yes, do that," he replied to various proposals. "Yes, yes: go,
"Yes, yes, go and tell them to get it ready," she answered, returning
"Yes, yes, go on!" said Natasha. "Where is he?"
"Yes, yes, if you please! It is already late," said he, and nodding his
"Yes, yes, it really was pink!" cried Natasha, who now thought she
"Yes, yes, let us go," said Rostov hastily, and lowering his eyes and
"Yes, yes, of course!" Pierre chimed in, pleased at the arrival of this
"Yes, yes, of course," interrupted Prince Vasili impatiently, rubbing
"Yes, yes, of course," said Pierre, "isn't that what I'm saying?"
"Yes, yes, thank God! Well, and what news from the army?"
"Yes, yes, that is really true," Pierre hastily interrupted her.
"Yes, yes, that is so," said Pierre joyfully.
"Yes, yes, there will be something to see...."
"Yes, yes, yes!" cried Natasha, joyfully.
"Yes, yes," Pierre assented, looking at his friend with a touched and
"Yes, yes," answered Prince Andrew absently. "One thing I would do if
"Yes, yes," assented Pierre.
"Yes, yes," assented Pierre.
"Yes, yes," assented Pierre.
"Yes, yes," he muttered, "it will be difficult, I fear, difficult to
"Yes, yes," muttered Bagration as if considering something, and he rode
"Yes, yes," muttered Pierre, looking with shining eyes at Prince Andrew.
"Yes, yes," said she, "but you have no reason to regret the past, Count.
"Yes, yes," she said, answering something quite different. "I too should
"Yes, yes," the governor's wife said as if talking to herself. "But,
"Yes, yes. But where is Prince Bolkonski's regiment? Can you point it
"Yes, yes."
"Yes, yes."
"Yes, yes." And Nicholas, taking his little daughter in his strong hand,
"Yes, yes; just so! Bring it. Give it to the countess."
"Yes, you are a great friend of Bolkonski's, no doubt she wants to send
"Yes, you can well enjoy the evening now! He is gone and no one will
"Yes, you do not know Him, my dear sir," said the Mason. "You cannot
"Yes, you have seen him?" said Prince Andrew. "Well, what is Bonaparte
"Yes, you know between cousins intimacy often leads to love. Le
"Yes, you might, but I am afraid of getting the accounts mixed. So I
"Yes, you talk, but try it yourself!"
"Yes, you're quite right," continued the countess. "Till now I have
"Yes, you... you..." she said, uttering the word you
"Yes, your excellency," answered Daniel, quickly doffing his cap.
"Yes, your excellency," answered the Ukrainian gaily, tossing his head.
"Yes, your excellency," replied Gerasim. "Will you have something to
"Yes, your excellency," said Gerasim after thinking for a moment.
"Yes, your excellency. Forgive me for heaven's sake... It was only my
"Yes, your excellency. What are your orders about Vereshchagin? He is
"Yes, your honor," the soldier replied complacently, and rolling his
"Yes," Pierre replied, and went on with what was in his mind. "Nicholas
"Yes," answered Sonya softly.
"Yes," answered Vera, "I don't at all want that. We must live for
"Yes," he said, softly and distinctly. "Russia has perished. They've
"Yes," replied Pierre with the smile of mild irony now habitual to him.
"Yes," replied Prince Andrew, "but with this little difference, that
"Yes," replied Princess Mary. "He has greatly improved."
"Yes," replied a footman in a bold loud voice, as if anything were now
"Yes," replied the countess. She held out her hand to him, and with a
"Yes," returned Nicholas. "You're not cold?"
"Yes," returned Pierre with a smile, "and this young man now manages
"Yes," returned Prince Andrew hastily. "I said that a fallen woman
"Yes," said Natasha. "Do you know, Nicholas--don't be angry--but I know
"Yes," said Rostov as if it cost him a great deal to utter the word; and
"Yes," said the countess when the brightness these young people had
"Yes," she replied. "You have done splendidly."
"Yes," she said, looking at his altered face after he had kissed her
"Yes," whispered Natasha.
"Yes--love," he thought again quite clearly. "But not love which loves
"Yes--that is, how do you mean?" said Pierre. "Not being a military man
"Yes. Four days ago in this room, Wintzingerode and Stein were
"Yes. Savelich says I must!"
"Yes. Wait a bit... I... saw him," Sonya could not help saying, not yet
"Yes."
"Yes."
"Yes."
"Yes."
"Yes... I will tell him," answered Pierre; "but..."
"Yes... I... I... I wished for his death! Yes, I wanted it to end
"Yes... I... I... desire regeneration," Pierre uttered with difficulty.
"Yes... Yes..." Kutuzov repeated, his laughing eye narrowing more and
"Yes... yes, I believe in God," he said.
"Yes... yes... Well, Michael Ivanovich," he suddenly went on, raising
"Yes: ideas of robbery, murder, and regicide," again interjected an
"Yes? And how... did he speak?"
"Yet here she is lying at my feet, with her golden domes and crosses
"Yet you do not care to avail yourself of the privilege, Prince," said
"You absolutely must come and see me," she said in a tone that implied
"You always dance. I have a protegee, the young Rostova, here. Ask her,"
"You always find something to do, but I can't," said Natasha. "And
"You always have such strange fancies! I didn't even think of being
"You always manage to do things at the wrong time," continued Vera.
"You are Count Ilya Rostov's son? My wife was a great friend of your
"You are a Cossack?"
"You are a bwute!" said Denisov. "I wanted to question..."
"You are a colonel?" shouted the chief of staff with a German accent,
"You are a little slyboots," she said.
"You are always charming and melancholy, my dear Julie," she said to
"You are an angel: I am not worthy of you, but I am afraid of misleading
"You are cold. You are trembling all over. You'd better lie down," said
"You are friendly with Boris, aren't you?" asked Vera.
"You are going?" asked Natasha. "I knew you would! Sonya said you
"You are good in every way, Andrew, but you have a kind of intellectual
"You are in love with me?" Natasha broke in.
"You are joking," replied Pierre, growing more and more excited. "What
"You are letting yourself go, my dear fellow," he said.
"You are mistaken," said Boris deliberately, with a bold and slightly
"You are most welcome! I know, I know," said the count, kissing and
"You are not asleep?"
"You are not taking me unawares, you know," said he. "As a true friend,
"You are not what you say," returned Davout.
"You are not wounded?" he asked.
"You are off to the war, Prince?" said Anna Pavlovna.
"You are perfectly at liberty to treat me with respect or not,"
"You are proposing new military laws? There are many laws but no one to
"You are seeking for truth in order to follow its laws in your life,
"You are speaking of Buonaparte?" asked the general, smiling.
"You are speaking of the poor countess?" said Anna Pavlovna, coming
"You are still the same dreamer, I see," remarked Boris, shaking his
"You are the commander of the Emperor Alexander's regiment of Horse
"You are tired--try to sleep."
"You are unhappy, my dear sir," the stranger continued. "You are young
"You are very fiery, Belliard," said Napoleon, when he again came up to
"You are very kind," she said to him.
"You are well?"
"You are wounded?" he asked, hardly able to master the trembling of his
"You at least must tackle him properly, or else if he goes on like this
"You brute, you murderer!" screamed a thin, pale woman who, with a baby
"You call him Vaska? That's funny! And is he very nice?"
"You came rushing into the drawing room so that everyone felt ashamed of
"You can get to know something, you can ask for something. See how I
"You can give the message to His Majesty," said Dolgorukov, hurriedly
"You can see the woman in her already," she said in French, pointing to
"You can't come in! You can't!" said a terrified voice from within.
"You can't, Miss, we have tried to," said the butler's assistant.
"You cannot know me, General, I have never seen you..."
"You could at least take back your words. What? If you want me to do as
"You couldn't see a thing. How they shot at their own fellows! Nothing
"You did not get my letter?" he asked, and not waiting for a
"You don't at all understand," she said.
"You don't mind your honor?" he asked Tushin. "I've lost my company,
"You don't say so!" replied the countess.
"You don't seem to be used to riding, Count?" remarked the adjutant.
"You don't spare anyone," said Julie Drubetskaya as she collected
"You don't understand why I say this," he continued, "but it is the
"You don't understand?" shouted the prince, "but I do! French spy, slave
"You drop this nonsense and tell the people to get ready to leave their
"You fellows have no conscience," said he to the valet who was pouring
"You flirt with him too," said the countess, laughing.
"You forget yourself, Colonel. I am not considering my own pleasure and
"You give me your word of honor not to go?"
"You go ahead, Zakhar!" shouted Nicholas to his father's coachman,
"You go to sleep, but I can't," said the first voice, coming nearer to
"You had better take care!" said the countess.
"You have a try, Hercules," said he, turning to Pierre.
"You have been caught once already by a 'little girl,'" said Dolokhov
"You have been in Paris recently, I believe? I suppose it's very
"You have earned the St. George's standards and will be worthy of them."
"You have hurried here. I am very glad. Well, what is Paris saying?" he
"You have known Bezukhov a long time?" he asked. "Do you like him?"
"You have met him, Aunt?" said she in a calm voice, unable herself to
"You have no heart, you don't feel for your own child! Another man would
"You have no idea how unhappy, how lonely, I feel when you are like
"You have not yet seen my husband?"
"You have observed that?" said Princess Mary.
"You have only lately arrived?" the countess asked him.
"You have quite turned his head, and why? What do you want of him? You
"You have saved my life! You are French. You ask his pardon? I grant it
"You have saved my life. You are French," said he.
"You have seen? You have seen?..." Kutuzov shouted frowning, and rising
"You haven't read the letter?" asked Sonya.
"You heard probably of the heroic exploit of Raevski, embracing his two
"You just wait a moment, my dear fellow, and listen," interrupted the
"You know Him not, my dear sir, and so you are very unhappy. You do not
"You know I have asked Papa and Mamma about that Negro," said Natasha,
"You know N-- N-- received a snuffbox with the portrait last year?" said
"You know Sonya, my cousin? I love her, and promised to marry her, and
"You know her husband, of course?" said Anna Pavlovna, closing her eyes
"You know it is my greatest pleasure," said Natasha. "It's not fair; you
"You know my feelings for you!"
"You know they've come, Marie?" said the little princess, waddling in,
"You know, Catiche, that we--you three sisters, Mamontov, and my
"You know, Count, such knights as you are only found in Madame de
"You know, I adore little girls, they lose their heads at once," pursued
"You know, Mary, today Elias Mitrofanych" (this was his overseer) "came
"You know, Michael Ilarionovich, we are not on the Empress' Field where
"You know, Prince, I am not a Bonapartist!"
"You know, Sokolov, they are not all going away! They have a hospital
"You know, chere Marie," said Mademoiselle Bourienne, "that we are in
"You know, love, I wanted to tell you... Countess dear... an officer
"You know," said Natasha, "you have read the Gospels a great deal--there
"You know," said the princess in the same tone of voice and still in
"You know--under the paperweight on the little table."
"You like listening?" she said to Natasha, with a smile extremely like
"You live in the country and don't think the life terrible," he replied.
"You love him?"
"You may go," he said to Anatole.
"You may go. I don't need you to tell me what to do!" exclaimed
"You may punt," he said.
"You mean the left flank?" asked Kaysarov.
"You mean to imply that I have nothing to eat out of.... On the
"You might have taken some from the covering troops."
"You must do as you please," said Prince Bolkonski, bowing to his
"You must excuse me, dear Vicomte," said Prince Vasili to the Frenchman,
"You must walk, walk as much as possible, as much as possible," he said.
"You mustn't laugh, Miss," said Dunyasha.
"You mustn't think we'll be in anyone's way, Uncle," she said. "We'll go
"You need not have said that to me, Father," said the son with a smile.
"You ought not to have been here at all," he said.
"You owe forty-three thousand, Count," said Dolokhov, and stretching
"You picked it up?... I dare say! You're very smart!" one of them
"You promised Countess Rostova to marry her and were about to elope with
"You remember when I looked in the mirror for you... at Otradnoe at
"You remember," said Sonya with a solemn and frightened expression.
"You remember?" Sonya went on. "I saw it then and told everybody, you
"You saw him?" urged Natasha, seizing her hand.
"You say he is dying?"
"You say the demand now is that I am to withdraw beyond the Niemen
"You say you can't see a reign of goodness and truth on earth. Nor could
"You see I have known him a long time and am also fond of Mary, your
"You see he writes," said she, showing her son a letter of Prince
"You see! I have asked," whispered Natasha to her little brother and to
"You see! They are asking to attack and making plans of all kinds,
"You see, Aunt, Mamma has long wanted me to marry an heiress, but the
"You see, I took him first thing at dawn," Tikhon continued, spreading
"You see, brothers, I know it's hard for you, but it can't be helped!
"You see, brothers..." said he when the shouts had ceased... and all at
"You see, dear man, this is not a sewing shop, and I had no proper
"You see, he holds it up." (She meant the baby's head.) "But how he did
"You see, my dear fellow, I have been thinking about you," said Prince
"You see, my dear sir, I have read your project," interrupted Arakcheev,
"You see, my dear... What's that mess?" she said, pointing to his
"You see, my fwiend," he said, "we sleep when we don't love. We are
"You see," he suddenly said, "I am a kinsman of the count's and he has
"You see," said Berg to his comrade, whom he called "friend" only
"You see?... What a wogue--it's just as I thought," said Denisov to the
"You shameless good-for-nothing!" said she. "I won't hear a word."
"You shan't have it!" he said distinctly.
"You should go, go away at once, if you don't feel strong enough to
"You should take some rest, your Serene Highness," replied Schneider.
"You spare no one," continued Julie to the young man without heeding the
"You speak to the colonel about this nasty business before other
"You spoke to me of inflammable material," said he, "but you said
"You think I'm an old man and don't understand the present state of
"You think he went off just by chance?" said a comrade, who was on the
"You think so?" rejoined Anna Pavlovna in order to say something and
"You think so?... Ah, I also wanted to ask you where our position is
"You thought!" shouted the prince, his words coming more and more
"You told me to remind you of the officer Dolokhov, reduced to the ranks
"You treat me like an invalid or a child. I see it all! Did you behave
"You used to want to, and now you don't. Really I don't understand you,
"You value your own pride and don't wish to apologize," continued
"You wait a bit," he called after him. "I'm not joking, I'm talking
"You want a coffeepot, don't you?" he asked the esaul. "I bought a
"You want to make him"--little Nicholas--"into an old maid like
"You warm your back and your belly gets frozen. That's queer."
"You were angry that he had not entered those 700 rubles. But they were
"You were at the battle, we heard."
"You were meaning to go out, weren't you, Mamma? Do you want the
"You were saying, Mr. Staff Officer..." continued the colonel in an
"You will answer for it, Captain. It is mutiny--seizing the transport of
"You will be called in when you are wanted," he said.
"You will be treated as is fitting," said he and, putting the packet in
"You will change it, won't you?" said Lise. And as Princess Mary gave no
"You will go far," he said, and took him to Tilsit with him.
"You will see," said Anna Pavlovna, "that tomorrow, on the Emperor's
"You will soon be dressing your men in petticoats! What is this?"
"You will, of course, command it yourself?" said Julie, directing a sly,
"You won't ask," Natasha's little brother was saying; "I know you won't
"You won't be able to find either your baggage or anything else now,
"You won't bear me a grudge, Prokhor Ignatych?" said the regimental
"You won't deign to demean yourself by marrying me, you..." said Helene,
"You won't do it again, eh?" said one of the soldiers, winking and
"You wouldn't go, it takes courage..."
"You'd better wait till she's married...."
"You'll call round?"
"You'll make a fine thing of it, deploying in sight of the enemy! Very
"You'll never get well like that," she would say, forgetting her grief
"You're a clever fellow! From the cold indeed! Why, it was hot. If it
"You're a first-class liar, Kiselev, when I come to look at you!"
"You're a gentleman, aren't you?"
"You're a scoundrel and a blackguard, and I don't know what deprives
"You're also waiting for the commander in chief?" said he. "They say he
"You're always like that; you thwow a thing down anywhere and forget it.
"You're first!" cried Ilyin, flushed.
"You're making some mistake. I never ordered them to go away," said
"You're not asleep?" Natasha jumped up, snatched up her slippers, and
"You're not the same at all," he said.
"You're welcome, Yakov Alpatych. Folks are leaving the town, but you
"You've been in a hurry. That's bad!"
"You've crushed the young gentleman!" said the clerk. "What are you up
"You've grown older, Tikhon," he said in passing to the old man, who
"You've let the wolf go!... What sportsmen!" and as if scorning to
"You've only just missed him," said the orderly.
"You've seen a lot of trouble, sir, eh?" the little man suddenly said.
"You, Bolkonski, don't know," said Bilibin turning to Prince Andrew,
"You, my little countess, are a notorious spendthrift," said the count,
"You, you... will see," was all Natasha could say.
"You...! you... scoundrel! I challenge you!" he ejaculated, and, pushing
"You? What a surprise!" said he. "What brings you here? This is
"You?" he said. "How fortunate!"
"Your Emperor's orders are obeyed in your army, but here," said Davout,
"Your Majesty is too kind!" replied de Beausset to the invitation to
"Your Majesty," replied Balashev, "my master, the Emperor, does not
"Your Papa must be told, though," said Mavra Kuzminichna.
"Your Serene Highness!"
"Your cousin..." Dolokhov started to say, but Nicholas interrupted him.
"Your doctor tells you to go to bed earlier," said Prince Andrew. "You
"Your excellency! Eh, Prince!" said the trembling voice of Timokhin, who
"Your excellency! Let us attack them! I'll dwive them off."
"Your excellency! Your excellency! Your excellency!" he kept repeating
"Your excellency!" Prince Andrew broke the silence with his abrupt
"Your excellency!" he said. "Why, we were beginning to despair! How is
"Your excellency, I should like to be of use here. Allow me to remain
"Your excellency, here are two trophies," said Dolokhov, pointing to the
"Your excellency, it's the officer Dolokhov, who has been reduced to the
"Your excellency, should not Mary Bogdanovna be sent for?" said one
"Your excellency, the Director of the Registrar's Department has sent
"Your excellency, the superintendent of the lunatic asylum has come:
"Your excellency, there are some political prisoners, Meshkov,
"Your excellency, they say they have got ready, according to your
"Your excellency, you gave him leave yourself, on the march."
"Your excellency," said Rostov, "may I ask a favor?"
"Your excellency," said he in German, stepping forward and addressing
"Your excellency..."
"Your father, a man of the last century, evidently stands above our
"Your honor!" said he. "Be so good as to protect us! We won't grudge
"Your honor, I thought..."
"Your honor, the generals!" said the sergeant, riding up to Rostov.
"Your honor, there he is!" cried one of the hussars behind him. And
"Your honor, you're wanted by the general. He is in the hut here," said
"Your honor, your honor! A courier."
"Your honor..." replied the shopman in the frieze coat, "your honor, in
"Your information maybe better than mine," Anna Pavlovna suddenly and
"Your joke is too bad, it's witty but unjust," said Anna Pavlovna,
"Your name?" asked Davout.
"Your offer..." she began at last sedately. He remained silent, looking
"Your position is doubly terrible, dear princess," said Mademoiselle
"Your regiment fulfilled its duty honorably," said Napoleon.
"Your son," wrote Kutuzov, "fell before my eyes, a standard in his hand
"Your... your excellency," stammered Alpatych and broke into sobs. "Are
"Youth is no hindrance to courage," muttered Sukhtelen in a failing
"Zakhar is shouting that I should turn to the left, but why to the
"Zat, my dear sir, is vy..." he concluded, drinking a tumbler of wine
"Zum Henker diese Russen!" * muttered a German.
"about..."
"all we relatives have been in such anxiety. This young man is the
"and I am sure that all due respect would be shown you."
"and about your freed plowmen."
"and so I wish to arrange just a small party for my own and my wife's
"and tell Mademoiselle Bourienne not to come to me," she added, hearing
"and tell our brave men and all my good subjects wherever you go that
"and they say there was no Negro at all. But you see, you remember!"
"and without holding on to anything. Is that right?"
"as you know, my dear prince, I never leave headquarters. I have
"better late than never" on his lips.
"but I can't coerce my feelings. If I love Sonya, that feeling is for me
"but believe me, I so adore your daughter and all your family that I
"but no, they will take it their own way, they won't understand!
"but the prince told me to 'go and tell the colonel that the hussars
"but you have used such words to me--'mean' and so on--which as a man of
"but you used to be different, and..."
"come nearer--nearer. What news have you brought me? Eh? That Napoleon
"definitely demanded that he should be called."
"diplomat," which was just then much in vogue among the children, in the
"do you care for me or not? Eh? Now, do me a service.... What horses
"for our sovereign appreciated him so highly before."
"give me your hand." She took her sister-in-law's hand and held it below
"he flared up dreadfully--and just think of the fellow's audacity,
"he's going to clear up the whole affair for you...."), "in destroying
"high-sounding words which have long been discredited. Who does not love
"how am I to stifle in my heart these temptations of the devil? How am I
"if I ventured to confide what I am feeling to someone. I should like
"if you have been lying I'll have you hanged like a dog; but if it's
"if you wish to refuse one who is not only a brilliant and advantageous
"in for a penny, in for a pound--who cares?" spirit, and the inevitable
"intended." The count sat between them and listened attentively. His
"interesting." "I wish to see the battle."
"is it true that the countess has fallen into the clutches of the holy
"it is, at least, something to do."
"justice." All the complex laws of man centered for her in one clear
"man of great merit." The latter was very attentive to Anna Pavlovna
"more-orderers" had really been at their village, but that Tikhon
"must not respond to her faithful, devoted love? Yet I should certainly
"not a spire at all, but only an old German ruin."
"our days" and that human characteristics change with the times--"in our
"our days" as people of limited intelligence are fond of doing,
"piti-piti-piti," and then "titi," and then again "piti-piti-piti," and
"refill my pipe for that one!" and then, scattering sparks from it, ran
"seriously, I have long been thinking of it.... Leading such a life I
"she never makes a mistake, never says anything stupid. She says little,
"she told him she loved another."
"shelter" was Unterkunft in German, and his face suddenly brightened.
"simpler." Terenty, when he had helped him undress and wished him good
"something absurd will come of it."... Prince Andrew did not catch
"still, I should not cry, but you can't... no one can understand... what
"that Sonya and Nicholas now say you to one another and meet like
"that all the atrocities of the French army (I nearly said of the
"that that senseless young man was spoiled by the depraved ideas of
"the Cossack, seized by amazement, did not utter another word, but rode
"the man of profound intellect." "Why shouldn't S-- S-- get the same
"the man who advised the Drissa camp--I see no alternative but the
"the matter was not then so definitely settled as it is now. My father
"this rabble they have roused by their folly! They want a victim,"
"ti-ti" once more. At the same time he felt that above his face, above
"to enter communal life completely, to be imbued by what makes them what
"to tell Prince Andrew what has happened or to hide it from him are
"watching over his interests" meant, but he decided that all these
"when our Fatherland is in danger."
"when the steward, a man I know, ran out and asked me whether I wouldn't
"who are you? Are you in command here? Eh? I am commander here, not
"you forever lose the chance of marrying the other, and you will
"you must do as you're told."
"you promised me!"
'Emperor,' it seemed to me it should be to 'General Bonaparte.'"
'Fool!' He was greatly depressed. From behind the door I heard how he
'From whom did you get the proclamation?' 'I wrote it myself.' Well, you
'Gentlemen,' says one of them, 'you know the Thabor Bridge is mined and
'I am wounded and cannot ride and consequently cannot command the army.
'Kuz-mi-ch,' tears, and 'From all sides' was smothered in sobs and he
'Michael,' he says, 'come here and bow down to his feet; and you, young
'There are a lot of us,' he says, 'but all poor stuff--only soldiers
'Uncle's' man."
'Usurper and Enemy of Mankind.'"
'We've lost, so let us run,' and we ran. If we had not said that till
'You are perishing because of me, Daddy,' he says. 'It's quite true,
'Your Majesty,' but who, to his chagrin, got no title from me! That's
'but what I am most sorry for is this old man. Don't let him suffer
'don't let me perish with my little children! Folks,' she says, 'are all
'lighten his toil.' But as I see it, physical labor is as essential to
'on the march' it meant in greatcoats?" said he reproachfully to
'that Your Majesty should be received and treated in my palace in a
'we tie our faces up with kerchiefs and turn our heads away as we drag
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
(1) However we may increase our knowledge of the conditions of space
(1) Power is the relation of a given person to other individuals,
(1) The relation to the external world of the man who commits the deeds.
(1) To whatever degree we may imagine a man to be exempt from the
(1) What is power?
(2) His relation to time.
(2) However much we approximate the time of judgment to the time of the
(2) However we may prolong the period of time between the action we are
(2) The movement of nations is caused not by power, nor by intellectual
(2) What force produces the movement of the nations?
(2) to vanquish lust by self-restraint and repulsion, (3) to withdraw
(3) His relation to the causes leading to the action.
(3) However accessible may be the chain of causation of any action, we
(3) However much the difficulty of understanding the causes may be
(3) The connection between cause and effect has no beginning and can
(Denisov's servant who had remained with him) and his comrades who
(Instructions from Barclay de Tolly to Baron Asch, the civil governor of
(Mademoiselle Bourienne had purloined it from Princess Mary and given
(Mademoiselle Bourienne) "thinks I could be jealous of her, and not
(Moscou, la ville sainte), the capital of a realm such as the Scythia
(Natasha knew all about such things as festering) and the doctor had
(Nicholas), her resolve weakened. She wept quietly, and felt that she
(Pierre was sixth), and were led to the post. Several drums suddenly
(Pierre's modesty made him correct himself) "to live for others, only
(Prince Andrew's voice trembled and he turned away), "and suddenly that
(Rostov felt himself quite tiny and weak compared to these gigantic men
(Strictly speaking, Daniel Cooper was one figure of the anglaise.)
(The captain of whom the corporal spoke often had long chats with Pierre
(The horseflesh was appetizing and nourishing, the saltpeter flavor of
(The most precious ones, with which some family tradition was connected,
(Thiers says), and he issued the order for departure which the whole
(This Frenchman and one of the German princes serving with the Russian
(a guard of honor) was standing, and they saw Kutuzov coming down the
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
(as he called the Drissa camp) in which we were situated.
(daughter of the first Milka), with a quite gray face and large black
(delivered by the French alone) was still to be heard from numerous
(for they were speaking French) at least with a Russian who would, he
(having occupied Borodino) were attacking in the first phase of the
(he had given them to the canteen keeper to dry), in only his stockings,
(he had probably soiled them when he, too, had knelt before the icon),
(his "bridge" in court relations), were silent. Pfuel only snorted
(if they do not express it, that is merely because traders and soldiers
(incommensurable with ordinary human capabilities), and then the words
(indicating Rostov) "has connections on the staff. You won't find a
(nicknamed in society, "the King of Prussia") ever since the Emperor
(none of them had eaten anything since morning), and yet more because he
(of whom the lad was also particularly fond), and especially Pierre's
(of whom there were but few) moved about among the soldiers quite
(one shattered gun and one unicorn were left behind), Prince Andrew rode
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
(or he would, it seemed, have held it till evening and have gone in to
(signed) Alexander.
(the liberal attempts at the beginning of his reign, his struggle with
(the one who had paraded his regiment before Kutuzov at Braunau) that
(the vice-king's), then Davout's, and then Ney's--ran, as it were, the
(though Pierre had not mentioned Bonaparte), "but Bonaparte when he
(though the Council of Fili, at which it was decided to abandon Moscow,
(though the Senate had only condemned Vereshchagin to hard labor), "he
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
(which he very likely would be), and found the commander in chief
(which may possibly even be of use to someone for something) the
(which she hoped to hide from them) might challenge Anatole to a duel,
(which would be very difficult), he would not be able to get back before
(who was beginning to come to the front), and others. At that time a
(whose movements were concealed from the French) advance if but one
(without knowing what he was jesting at) when he saw that the Massacre
* he answered gaily, raising nevertheless ironic smiles among the
*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WAR AND PEACE ***
*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WAR AND PEACE ***
*** START: FULL LICENSE ***
***** This file should be named 2600.txt or 2600.zip *****
*--as Alexander expressed it in the last letter he wrote him--he had
- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
... and the wish, which constitutes the Emperor's sole and absolute
1. Discretion, the keeping of the secrets of the Order. 2. Obedience to
1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:
1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
1.E.9.
1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
1.F.
1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
1789 and so forth, and at another plainly say that the campaign of 1812
1805, 1807, and 1809--precede the great westward movement; there is the
1807, came to see him. Willarski was married to a Russian heiress who
1809 he was a captain in the Guards, wore medals, and held some special
1812--the Barclays, Raevskis, Ermolovs, Platovs, and Miloradoviches.
1812.
1813 and the restoration of the Bourbons were due to other things beside
1813--salute according to all the rules of art, and, presenting the hilt
18th Brumaire; was not that an imposture? It was a swindle, and not at
22nd instant, and both armies with their united forces will defend our
24th November
27th November
30,000 went for the upkeep of the estate near Moscow, the town house,
3rd December
5. Courage. 6. Generosity. 7. The love of death.
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
666; that his part in the great affair of setting a limit to the
7th December
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
9th December
A B C of war or of politics, and that Bonaparte was an insignificant
A Cossack dismounted, lifted the boy down, and took him to Denisov.
A French colonel of hussars, who had evidently just left his bed, came
A French corporal, with coat unbuttoned in a homely way, a skullcap on
A French noncommissioned officer of hussars, in crimson uniform and a
A French official wearing a scarf came up to the right of the row of
A beatific smile of regret, repentance, and ecstasy beamed on M. de
A bed had been made on a bedstead for the countess only. Madame Schoss
A bee settling on a flower has stung a child. And the child is afraid
A broad staircase led straight up from the entry, and to the right he
A cannon ball struck the very end of the earth work by which he was
A church procession was coming up the hill from Borodino. First along
A circle soon formed round Speranski, and the old man who had talked
A comely, fresh-looking old man was conducting the service with that
A commander in chief's business, it would seem, is simply to choose one
A conference took place confined to the magnates sitting at the table.
A cornet, hearing the story, informed his commander.
A countermovement is then accomplished from east to west with a
A countless number of free forces (for nowhere is man freer than during
A courier who galloped to the castle in advance, in a troyka with three
A crowd gathered round the bloodstained smith.
A crowd had collected round the Uhlans. Nearest to Pierre stood the
A door of one of the inner rooms opened and one of the princesses, the
A dozen persons who had business with Pierre were awaiting him in the
A few days before his departure a special thanksgiving, at which
A few days before the battle of Borodino, Nicholas received the
A few days later at one of those enchanting fetes which Helene gave at
A few days previously Pierre had decided to go to Petersburg on the
A few instants after the echo of the reports resounding over the
A few intimate friends were dining with the Rostovs that day, as usual
A few minutes later Prince Andrew rang and Natasha went to him, but
A few minutes later an officer came hurriedly out of the front door,
A few minutes later the Governor received Alpatych and hurriedly said to
A few minutes later the footman returned with Dessalles, who brought
A fire was made up in the dilapidated brick stove. A board was found,
A footman came in to summon Boris--the princess was going. Pierre, in
A footman wanted to come in to clear away something in the room but she
A fortnight after the letter Prince Vasili's servants came one evening
A fresh wave of the flying mob caught him and bore him back with it.
A general with a brilliant suite galloped off at once to fetch the
A great crowd of generals gathered round him, and Count Rostopchin, who
A group of bareheaded peasants was approaching across the meadow toward
A handsome, slim, and pale-faced gypsy girl with glittering black eyes
A husband was given her and he gave her a family. And she not only saw
A joyful, unexpected frenzy, of which he had thought himself incapable,
A joyous feeling of freedom--that complete inalienable freedom natural
A king is history's slave.
A languor of motion and speech, resulting from weakness, gave her a
A largish piece of the biscuit the Emperor was holding in his hand broke
A little ahead of them walked a peasant guide, wet to the skin and
A little behind the hussars came Denisov, accompanied by two infantry
A little behind, on a poor, small, lean Kirghiz mount with an enormous
A little later when he went up to the large circle, Anna Pavlovna said
A little man in Russian civilian clothes rode out from the ranks, and
A locomotive is moving. Someone asks: "What moves it?" A peasant says
A lump of snow cannot be melted instantaneously. There is a certain
A man got up and came to see what this queer big fellow was laughing at
A man having no freedom cannot be conceived of except as deprived of
A man in motion always devises an aim for that motion. To be able to go
A man who would have been afraid ten years before of going every day
A man without convictions, without habits, without traditions, without
A member of the Hofkriegsrath from Vienna had come to Kutuzov the day
A middle-aged man, handsome and virile, in the uniform of a retired
A military organization may be quite correctly compared to a cone, of
A minute later Sonya came in with a frightened, guilty, and scared look.
A minute later the marshal's adjutant, de Castres, came in and conducted
A minute later the old man's large stout figure in full-dress uniform,
A modern branch of mathematics having achieved the art of dealing with
A murmur of approbation and satisfaction ran through the crowd. "He'll
A painstaking police officer, considering the presence of a corpse in
A personal, human feeling for a brief moment got the better of the
A pleasant feeling of excitement and an expectation of something
A return to the first is impossible, the belief has been destroyed; and
A rumor immediately spread in Petersburg, not that Helene wanted to
A sense of pity he had never before known overflowed Pierre's heart.
A series of experiments and arguments proves to every man that he, as
A shell tore up the earth two paces from Pierre and he looked around
A short stout man of about thirty, in white breeches and high boots and
A shrewd, kindly, yet subtly derisive expression lit up Kutuzov's podgy
A sinking man who clutches at another and drowns him; or a hungry mother
A slur on my name? A misfortune for life? Oh, that's nonsense," he
A smile of joy and satisfaction lit up her eager face.
A smile of pleasure never left Natasha's face. She felt happy and as if
A soldier on the march is hemmed in and borne along by his regiment as
A solemn meeting of the lodge of the second degree was convened, at
A space like a street was left between each two lines of troops. The
A spiritual wound produced by a rending of the spiritual body is like
A stout major was pacing up and down the line, and regardless of the
A strange feeling of exasperation and yet of respect for this man's
A system of some sort was killing him--Pierre--depriving him of life, of
A tall, bald-headed old man with a red nose, wearing a dressing gown and
A tall, beautiful woman with a mass of plaited hair and much exposed
A tall, stout, and proud-looking woman, with a round-faced smiling
A thaw had set in, it was muddy and cold, the ice on the river broke,
A third class of historians--the so-called historians of
A third of the visitors had already arrived, but the Rostovs, who were
A truce was Kutuzov's sole chance of gaining time, giving Bagration's
A very pretty curly-headed boy with a look of the Christ in the Sistine
A volley was heard, and some bullets whistled past, while others plashed
A week before the French had had boot leather and linen issued to them,
A week later Pierre gave his wife full power to control all his estates
A week later Prince Andrew was a member of the Committee on Army
A week later, Pierre, having taken leave of his new friends, the Masons,
A whole sequence of new thoughts, hopeless but mournfully pleasant, rose
A young officer with a bewildered and pained expression on his face
A young round-faced officer, quite a boy still and evidently only just
About 80,000 went in payments on all the estates to the Land Bank, about
About midnight they heard the sound of steps in the snow of the forest,
About ten o'clock Rostov went to the English Hotel straight from the
About the middle of the Arbat Street, near the Church of the Miraculous
Above the Kolocha, in Borodino and on both sides of it, especially to
Above the heights was the dark clear sky, and to the right the vast orb
Absolute continuity of motion is not comprehensible to the human mind.
According to their accounts a reaction took place at that time in Russia
According to this view the power of historical personages, represented
Achilles could never catch up with a tortoise he was following, in spite
Across the paper was scrawled in pencil, without capital letters,
Adieu, dear and kind friend; may our divine Saviour and His most Holy
Adjutant General Wolzogen, the man who when riding past Prince Andrew
Admitting the view of Barclay and others that a defensive battle at
Adraksin shouted at Pierre:
After Anna Mikhaylovna had driven off with her son to visit Count Cyril
After Denisov's departure, Rostov spent another fortnight in Moscow,
After Kaysarov, others whom Pierre knew came up to him, and he had not
After Mass, when they had finished their coffee in the dining room
After Metivier's departure the old prince called his daughter in, and
After Nicholas had gone things in the Rostov household were more
After Ostermann had gone, a command rang out to the Uhlans.
After Petya had joined Obolenski's regiment of Cossacks and left for
After Pierre's departure that first evening, when Natasha had said to
After Prince Andrew's death Natasha and Princess Mary alike felt this.
After Prince Andrew's engagement to Natasha, Pierre without any apparent
After Prince Andrew, Boris came up to ask Natasha for a dance, and then
After Russian country dances and chorus dances, Pelageya Danilovna made
After Smolensk Napoleon sought a battle beyond Dorogobuzh at Vyazma, and
After a few minutes' bustle beside the high bedstead, those who had
After a few words about Princess Mary and her late father, whom
After a few words to Pierre about the awful roads from the Polish
After a moment's silence Natasha answered: "Yes, ill."
After a short silence he rose.
After a short silence the countess spoke again but this time no one
After a while "Uncle" came in, in a Cossack coat, blue trousers, and
After a while he re-entered it as if to snuff the candles, and, seeing
After a while the moving mass became agitated, someone rode past on a
After all that Napoleon had said to him--those bursts of anger and the
After arranging his clothes, he took the pistol and was about to go out.
After breakfast Napoleon in de Beausset's presence dictated his order of
After breakfast, which was her best time, Marya Dmitrievna sat down in
After dining and taking rather too much of the Hungarian wine,
After dinner Natasha went to her room and again took up Princess Mary's
After dinner Natasha, at Prince Andrew's request, went to the clavichord
After dinner Speranski's daughter and her governess rose. He patted the
After dinner the count settled himself comfortably in an easy chair and
After dinner the whole Rostov household set to work with enthusiastic
After dinner they went to drink coffee in Napoleon's study, which four
After dinner, he went to see his daughter-in-law. The little princess
After five o'clock it was only at the Augesd Dam that a hot cannonade
After four days of solitude, ennui, and consciousness of his impotence
After giving several recitations, Mademoiselle George left, and Countess
After giving the clerk orders about the work to be done, Alpatych, not
After giving these and other commands he returned to his tent, and the
After growing confused from pain while being carried into the hut he
After he had returned, voices were heard outside the shed. "Who's that?"
After hearing him, Kutuzov said in French:
After hearing the details of Anatole's marriage from Pierre, and giving
After hearing the matter, Kutuzov smacked his lips together and shook
After her father's funeral Princess Mary shut herself up in her room and
After her life in the country, and in her present serious mood, all this
After her visit to the Rostovs and her unexpectedly chilly reception by
After his illness he looked rather thinner that day than on the field of
After his interview with Pierre in Moscow, Prince Andrew went to
After his interview with his wife Pierre left for Petersburg. At the
After his journey and the campaign during which he had been deprived of
After his losses, he had determined to pay back his debt to his parents
After inspecting the carriage himself and seeing the trunks put in, he
After listening a few moments in silence, the count and his attendant
After living at the seat of the highest authority and power, after
After long hesitations, doubts, and prayers, Princess Mary gave the
After looking at him Napoleon smiled.
After meeting Princess Mary, though the course of his life went on
After nine o'clock two traps and three mounted men, who had been sent
After passing some Austrian troops he noticed that the next part of the
After reaching home Natasha did not sleep all night. She was tormented
After reaching home Nicholas was at first serious and even dull. He was
After reading about the dangers that threatened Russia, the hopes the
After reading the letter Natasha sat down at the writing table to answer
After receiving her visitors, the countess was so tired that she gave
After receiving this news late in the evening, when he was alone in his
After saying all he had been instructed to say, Balashev added that
After seven years of marriage Pierre had the joyous and firm
After she felt herself deserted by Princes Mary and alone in her grief,
After she had gone, a dressmaker from Madame Suppert-Roguet waited
After six rubbers the general got up, saying that it was no use playing
After some minutes, the gentleman-in-waiting who was on duty came into
After speaking to the senior French officer, who came out of the house
After staggering into Smolensk which seemed to them a promised land, the
After sunset the wind had dropped. The night was calm and fresh. Toward
After supper Nicholas, having undressed in his study and given
After supper Pierre with his partner followed the others into the
After supper, over their cherry brandy, Rostov and "Uncle" talked of
After taking a turn along the Podnovinski Boulevard, Balaga began to
After talking for some time with the esaul about next day's attack,
After tea Sonya noticed a housemaid at Natasha's door timidly waiting
After tea, Nicholas, Sonya, and Natasha went to the sitting room, to
After tea, the company went into the sitting room and Princess Mary was
After that Anna Pavlovna led up to the courage and firmness of the King
After that Petya remained silent for a long time, listening to the
After that Princess Mary did not see her father for a whole week. He was
After that a long-frocked abbe was brought to her. She confessed to
After that he avoided Dessalles and the countess who caressed him and
After that the generals began to disperse with the solemnity and
After that they took his right hand, placed it on something, and told
After that, when in discussions with his village elders or stewards the
After the Austerlitz campaign Prince Andrew had firmly resolved not
After the Emperor had left Moscow, life flowed on there in its usual
After the French victory at Borodino there was no general engagement nor
After the advance has begun in this manner, orders will be given in
After the battle of Borodino the abandonment and burning of Moscow was
After the burning of Smolensk a war began which did not follow any
After the condescending surprise, nonrecognition, and praise, from those
After the deaths of her son and husband in such rapid succession, she
After the definite refusal he had received, Petya went to his room
After the encounter at Vyazma, where Kutuzov had been unable to hold
After the execution Pierre was separated from the rest of the prisoners
After the fatigues and impressions of the journey, his reception, and
After the first feeling of perplexity aroused in the parents by Berg's
After the first monologue the whole company rose and surrounded
After the hussars had come to the village and Rostov had gone to see the
After the junction with the army of the brilliant admiral and Petersburg
After the last two days spent in solitude and unusual circumstances,
After the loss of the Shevardino Redoubt, we found ourselves on the
After the rapture of meeting, and after that odd feeling of unsatisfied
After the return of Alpatych from Smolensk the old prince suddenly
After the roast, champagne was served. The guests rose to congratulate
After the second day's march Pierre, having examined his feet by the
After the sufferings he had been enduring, Prince Andrew enjoyed a
After the twenty-eighth of October when the frosts began, the flight of
After these words, the Mason, as if tired by his long discourse, again
After this Prince Andrew was conducted to the door and the officer on
After this outburst the prince did not speak any more about the matter.
After those involuntary words--that if he were free he would have asked
After washing and dressing, Prince Andrew came into the diplomat's
Afterwards in the evening when I gave him his ticket, he again began
Afterwards when he had received a name and wealth he dared not think of
Afterwards when he recalled those thoughts Pierre was convinced that
Again Napoleon brought out his snuffbox, paced several times up and down
Again Natasha's body shook with sobs.
Again Pierre did not wish to look and again turned away; but again the
Again Pierre was overtaken by the depression he so dreaded. For three
Again Pierre's negative answer seemed to distress him, and he hastened
Again Princess Mary tried to catch someone's eye, but not a single eye
Again Rostov looked intently into Boris' eyes and sighed. Berg returned,
Again all was silent, but Prince Andrew knew she was still sitting
Again checking his horses, Nicholas looked around him. They were still
Again everything was shrouded in hard, dry perplexity, and again with a
Again he closed his eyes. His sobs ceased, he pointed to his eyes, and
Again he embraced and kissed Prince Andrew, but before the latter
Again he glanced at her, and that glance convinced her that she was not
Again he looked to the right and saw something running toward him across
Again he replied that he could not answer it.
Again on all the bright faces of the squadron the serious expression
Again real events mingled with dreams and again someone, he or another,
Again she paused. No one broke the silence.
Again the crowd of members of the suite and street gazers (among whom
Again the officer turned to Gerasim and asked him to show him the rooms
Again the princess glanced round at her companion with even more
Again, as at the church in Khamovniki, a wave of general curiosity
Agitated and flushed she paced the room, sending now for Michael
Ah! from suffering there is no other refuge.
Ah, here she is! Yes, she is still the most beautiful of them all, our
Akhrosimova, who had long been pressing her hospitality on them.
Alarmed at Denisov's condition, Rostov suggested that he should undress,
Alexander I was as necessary for the movement of the peoples from east
Alexander I, the man who stood at the head of the countermovement from
Alexander I--the pacifier of Europe, the man who from his early years
Alexander Prince Vasili had risen to high position and honors. And now,
Alexander and Bonaparte. It struck him as a surprise that Alexander
Alexander and Napoleon, with the long train of their suites, approached
Alexander and even his envoy to Napoleon, Balashev hastened to inform
Alexander and the King of Prussia in Berlin? If Prussia joins the
Alexander as though sure that the cross would adhere there. And it
Alexander did not receive these envoys and did not reply to their
Alexander hoch!" *(2) said he, quoting words often repeated by the
Alexander hurriedly to Kutuzov, glancing courteously at the same time at
Alexander refused negotiations because he felt himself to be personally
Alexander spent the evening at the entertainment given by his
Alexander unpleasantly, he rode up and saluted.
Alexander was clearly heard. He gave the words of greeting, and the
Alexander with all their antecedents.
Alexander's Guards," said the first one, indicating a Russian officer in
Alexander's eyes. Alexander listened attentively to what was said to him
Alexander's sisters was spoken of. But besides considerations of
Alexander's will--such as the activity of Stein, Metternich, Madame
Alexander's, a third that it was due to the power of some other person.
Alexander, and both Emperors dismounted and took each other's hands.
Alexander, helped by the advice of Stein and others, united Europe to
Alexander, while others regard it as blameworthy.
Alexanders--Bekleshev and Naryshkin--which was a significant allusion to
Alexandre, La nation russe and added up their numbers, but the sums
Alexeevich by the elbows back to the door.
Alexeevich came in from the drawing room. I seemed to know at once that
Alexeevich in the evening. I shall be there."
Alexeevich was and how just before their arrival that drunken imbecile
Alexeevich's advice Pierre had entered the service of the state and
Alexeevich's house and keeping his name secret. Then during the first
Alexeevich, brandishing the pistol. "Board them!"
Alexeevich, the news of which reached him almost at the same time.
Alexeevich. This is what he noted in his diary:
All Moscow repeated Prince Dolgorukov's saying: "If you go on modeling
All Moscow talks of nothing but war. One of my two brothers is already
All Pierre's daydreams now turned on the time when he would be free. Yet
All Rostov's cards were beaten and he had eight hundred rubles scored
All along the sides of the road fallen horses were to be seen, some
All around were loving eyes glistening with tears of joy, and all around
All began to run and bustle, and Rostov saw coming up the road behind
All cases without exception in which our conception of freedom and
All day she had lived only in hope of seeing him that night. But now
All dissensions are at an end! I am so glad, so delighted! At last
All eyes were fixed on him. He looked at the crowd, and rendered more
All eyes were gazing at her with one and the same expression. She
All four, like a flock of scared birds, got up and left the room.
All her invitations without exception, written in French, and delivered
All his painstaking and energetic activity (in how far it was useful
All his wishes were being fulfilled that morning: there was to be a
All historians agree that the external activity of states and nations
All human sciences have traveled along that path. Arriving at
All knowledge is merely a bringing of this essence of life under the
All night long troops were moving past the inn. Next morning Alpatych
All seriously thinking historians have involuntarily encountered this
All stood silent, and a soft, pleasant velvety voice began to sing. At
All that July the old prince was exceedingly active and even animated.
All that Pierre saw was so indefinite that neither the left nor the
All that day and the next his friends and comrades noticed that Rostov,
All that day the hounds remained at home. It was frosty and the air was
All that is accessible to man is the relation of the life of the bee to
All that may be so and mankind is ready to agree with it, but it is not
All that night Count Rostopchin issued orders, for which people came to
All that strange contradiction now difficult to understand between the
All that was done around her and to her at this time, all the attention
All that we know of the external world of nature is only a certain
All that we know of the life of man is merely a certain relation of free
All the Russians confined with Pierre were men of the lowest class and,
All the domestic circle, tutors, governesses, and guests, were already
All the evening Nicholas paid attention to a blue-eyed, plump and
All the faces bore the same expression of excitement and enthusiasm. A
All the guns, without waiting for orders, were being fired in the
All the horrors of the reign of terror were based only on solicitude for
All the interests of his life for more than thirty years had been
All the men of this party were fishing for rubles, decorations, and
All the old methods that had been unfailingly crowned with success: the
All the plans Pierre had attempted on his estates--and constantly
All the profound plans about cutting off and capturing Napoleon and his
All the rest of that day Pierre spent alone in his benefactor's study,
All the suite drew back and Rostov saw the general talking for some time
All the time Boris was going through the figures of the mazurka, he was
All the unmarried ladies and even the married ones except the very
All the way Petya had been preparing himself to behave with Denisov as
All these nobles, whom Pierre met every day at the Club or in their own
All these people and horses seemed driven forward by some invisible
All this must be done in good order (le tout se fera avec ordre et
All this time Natasha sat silent, glancing up at him from under her
All this was the fruit of Anisya Fedorovna's housekeeping, gathered and
All this, like the other parts of the disposition, was not and could
All turned their attention to the glow.
All were silent, and the only sound audible was the heavy breathing of
All were silent, only the pilgrim woman went on in measured tones,
All were silent.
All were silent. On this fact relating to the Emperor personally, it was
All were silent. The officers rose. Prince Andrew went out of the shed
All were silent. The old prince looked at Rostopchin with a smile and
All were silent. Tushin appeared at the threshold and made his way
All were then more confident of victory than the winning of two battles
All who could walk went together, and after the third stage Pierre had
Allies, Austria's hand will be forced and there will be war. If not
Almighty Hand, hitherto unseen, was becoming manifest in all that was
Almighty painted with a scepter in one hand and an orb in the other.
Almost every time a new carriage drove up a whisper ran through the
Almost smiling, he gazed straight into her eyes with such an enraptured
Along the broad country road, edged on both sides by trees, came a high,
Alpatych at a gliding trot, only just managing not to run, kept up with
Alpatych been to you? Has he spoken to you of going away?" she asked.
Alpatych clung to Prince Andrew's leg and burst into sobs. Gently
Alpatych collected his parcels, handed them to the coachman who had come
Alpatych did not insist further. He had managed people for a long time
Alpatych entered the innyard at a quicker pace than usual and went
Alpatych felt that this unreasonable action might produce good results.
Alpatych kept meeting and overtaking baggage trains and troops on the
Alpatych looked intently at Dron and frowned. Just as Dron was a model
Alpatych named others, but they too, according to Dron, had no horses
Alpatych replied that the Governor had not told him anything definite.
Alpatych swayed his head and went upstairs. In the waiting room were
Alpatych turned his face to Prince Andrew, looked at him, and suddenly
Alpatych turned to the peasants and ordered two of them by name to come
Alpatych was not satisfied with this reply.
Alpatych went back to the house, called the coachman, and told him to
Alpatych went out. The prince again went to his bureau, glanced into it,
Alpatych went up to a large crowd standing before a high barn which was
Alpatych's cart and that of the innkeeper's wife, which were slowly
Alpatych, arriving from the devastated Bald Hills estate, sent for his
Alpatych, conferred with Dessalles about her nephew, and gave orders and
Alpatych, his coachman, Ferapontov's wife and children and the house
Alpatych, understanding the question to refer to their departure for
Alpatych, who had reached Bogucharovo shortly before the old prince's
Alpatych, without answering or looking at his host, sorted his packages
Alpatych.
Alpatych.
Already, at the beginning of this chase, Daniel, hearing the ulyulyuing,
Although Iogel did not acknowledge this to be the real mazurka, everyone
Although Prince Vasili listened reluctantly and not very politely to
Although in female society Anatole usually assumed the role of a man
Although that patience did come out, Pierre did not join the army,
Although the hall porter saw someone's carriage standing at the
Am I not right, Denisov? It's not the same!"
Amalek, of Gideon over Midian, and of David over Goliath, and about
Amid the powder smoke, slowly dispersing over the whole space through
Amid the smoke, deafened by the incessant reports which always made him
Amid the turmoil of his activities and distractions, however, Pierre at
Among the Russian prisoners rescued by Denisov and Dolokhov was Pierre
Among the field guns on the brow of the hill the general in command of
Among the gentlemen of the suite, Rostov noticed Bolkonski, sitting
Among the gentry of the province Nicholas was respected but not liked.
Among the innumerable categories applicable to the phenomena of human
Among the many young men who frequented her house every day, Boris
Among the opinions and voices in this immense, restless, brilliant,
Among the young men introduced by Rostov one of the first was Dolokhov,
Among these letters was one from Nicholas Rostov to his father. Pierre
Among those who ventured to doubt the justifiability of the proposed
Among those whom Julie's guests happened to choose to gossip about were
An Anonymous Volunteer
An Anonymous Volunteer
An Austrian general complained of me. I congratulated him on Mack's
An Austrian officer in a white uniform with green plumes in his hat
An adjutant came now to inform him that the fire of two hundred guns
An adjutant came out and announced that everything was in readiness
An adjutant galloped up from the fleches with a pale and frightened face
An adjutant told Pierre of his Serene Highness' wish, and Pierre went
An attendant deferentially and quickly slipped before the ladies and
An awkward silence followed these words. Natasha was the first to speak,
An elderly sergeant who had approached the officer while he was giving
An hour and a half later most of the players were but little interested
An hour later Dunyasha came to tell the princess that Dron had come, and
An hour later, Tikhon came to call Princess Mary to the old prince;
An infantry regiment which had left Tarutino three thousand strong but
An interpreter rode up to the group.
An official ran out, said some words to a merchant, called a stout
An old gentleman wearing a star and another official, a German wearing a
An old powdered manservant who was sitting in the antechamber rose
An outsider is out of place here... No, don't distress yourself...
An undefined instinct told Pierre that these explanations, and repeated
Anatole Kuragin was staying in Moscow because his father had sent him
Anatole Kuragin whom he felt it necessary to encounter. On reaching
Anatole Kuragin with an arm thrown across the back of his chair, staring
Anatole Kuragin's father managed somehow to get his son's affair hushed
Anatole and Dolokhov liked Balaga too for his masterly driving and
Anatole and Pierre.
Anatole consented and went to Moscow, where he put up at Pierre's house.
Anatole embracing the Frenchwoman and whispering something to her. With
Anatole followed him with his usual jaunty step but his face betrayed
Anatole glanced at him and immediately thrust his hand into his pocket
Anatole glanced round at his sister and rose submissively, ready to
Anatole had a passport, an order for post horses, ten thousand rubles
Anatole had asked her to bring him and Natasha together, and she was
Anatole had lately moved to Dolokhov's. The plan for Natalie Rostova's
Anatole in the little sitting room. Helene had disappeared leaving them
Anatole kissed the old man, and looked at him with curiosity and perfect
Anatole lay on the sofa in the study leaning on his elbow and smiling
Anatole lived, Pierre entered the lighted porch, ascended the stairs,
Anatole met in the conservatory.
Anatole returned and looked at Dolokhov, trying to give him his
Anatole returned smiling to the ladies.
Anatole rose and went into the dining room. Balaga was a famous troyka
Anatole sat at a table frowning and biting his lips.
Anatole smiled. The expression of that base and cringing smile, which
Anatole stopped him.
Anatole turned to the Englishman and taking him by one of the buttons
Anatole was always content with his position, with himself, and with
Anatole was at the door, evidently on the lookout for the Rostovs.
Anatole was not upset or pained by what she had said.
Anatole was sincerely fond of Dolokhov for his cleverness and audacity.
Anatole was with the countess. The countess' drawing room was full of
Anatole went into the back room.
Anatole went out of the room and returned a few minutes later wearing
Anatole who had just come in.
Anatole with his swaggering air strode up to the window. He wanted to
Anatole, for whom Pierre was looking, dined that day with Dolokhov,
Anatole, having taken off his overcoat, sat with arms akimbo before a
Anatole, of which, without taking in a word, she understood only that
Anatole.
Anatole.
Anatole.
Anatole. "Ah, I know, I know," she said with a sly glance, "your brother
Anatole. "Well, comrades and friends..." he considered for a moment
And Anatole and Dolokhov, when they had money, would give him a thousand
And Berg related all that he remembered of the various tales he had
And Bilibin repeated the actual words of the diplomatic dispatch, which
And Bilibin unwrinkled his temple, feeling that the dilemma was
And Boris, having apparently relieved himself of an onerous duty and
And Denisov rode up to a group that had stopped near Rostov, composed of
And Denisov told the esaul that the dispatch just delivered was a
And Denisov went to the bed to get the purse from under the pillow.
And Dolokhov swore at him in coarse soldier's Russian and shouldering
And Dunyasha, with clenched teeth, without replying but with an
And I did not realize how happy I was! When did that end and when did
And I said it so awkwardly and stupidly! I did not say what I meant.
And Karataev, with a suddenly changed and saddened expression, took
And Kutuzov smiled in a way that seemed to say, "You are quite at
And Moscow engulfed the army ever deeper and deeper. When water is
And Napoleon went quickly to the door. Everyone in the reception room
And Natasha began rapidly taking out of the case dishes and plates
And Natasha kissed her brother and ran away.
And Natasha rose and went out of the room on tiptoe, like a ballet
And Natasha, embracing her, began kissing her face and hands, making
And Nicholas again kissed her hand.
And Petya gave the Cossack a detailed account not only of his ride but
And Pierre suddenly realized what a special, independent, complex, and
And Pierre's soul was dimly but joyfully filled not by the story itself
And Pierre, anxiously trying to remember whether he had done anything
And Pierre, his voice trembling continually, went on to tell of the last
And Platon Karataev told a long story of how he had gone into someone's
And Platon shifted his seat on the straw.
And Prince Andrew after giving directions about his departure went to
And Prince Andrew, with others fatally wounded, was left to the care of
And Prince Dolgorukov rapidly but indistinctly explained Weyrother's
And Prince Vasili repeated the words supposed to have been spoken by
And Princess Mary tried, but could not manage, to be cordial to her new
And Rostov got up and went wandering among the campfires, dreaming of
And Terenty would begin talking of the destruction of Moscow, and of
And a joyful yet pathetic expression which seemed to beg forgiveness for
And a minute or two later the Frenchman, a black-eyed fellow with a spot
And after chatting a while longer, the corporal went away. (The affair
And again all the faces in that crowd bore an identical expression,
And again in a futile struggle with reality her mother, refusing to
And again she began to sob, more bitterly than before. Natasha lifted
And all Nicholas did was fruitful--probably just because he refused to
And all at once it grew light in his soul and the veil that had till
And all made ready for that battle. The cries from the gates ceased. The
And as he waved his arms to impersonate the policeman, his portly form
And as if in order not to offend Sonya and to get rid of her, she turned
And as often happens with old people, Kutuzov began looking about
And as soon as the officer let go of the gate handle she turned and,
And as the undefinable essence of the force moving the heavenly bodies,
And as usual when speaking of Pierre, she began to tell anecdotes of his
And beginning with the French Revolution the old inadequately large
And besides, if she tells Mamma" (Sonya looked upon the countess as her
And besides, the fate of the Fatherland did not depend on whether
And bowing respectfully, as if to a lady of royal blood, he moved toward
And by means of that mysterious indefinable bond which maintains
And by old habit he asked himself the question: "Well, and what then?
And by some latent sequence of thought the descent of the Mozhaysk hill,
And clutching the spare gray locks on his temples the count left the
And collecting the presents they went first to the nursery and then to
And dear Vera has long wanted one. I wish to give her a surprise, you
And embracing her daughter, the countess began to weep for the first
And everything annoyed her--Denisov's shouting and laughter, Natasha's
And evidently suppressing his vexation with difficulty, he turned away
And flourishing his whip he rode off at a gallop for the first time
And for the first time she felt bitterness against those who had been
And from the different ranks some twenty men ran to the front. A
And having entered on the path of definition, of which he was fond,
And having got rid of this young man who did not know how to behave, she
And having kissed Denisov he ran out of the hut.
And having put him on his honor not to repeat anything she told him,
And having thus demolished the young man, Anna Pavlovna turned to
And he again turned to Pierre.
And he also passed on with the wagon. Then came some merry soldiers who
And he began clearly and concisely to explain his reasons for
And he began explaining why he could not put up with his daughter's
And he began to explain Freemasonry as he understood it to Prince
And he began to sob, and again tears flowed from his eyes. Princess Mary
And he caught the bear, took it in his arms, lifted it from the ground,
And he did his work, giving his whole strength to the task.
And he handed him his clasp knife. The officer admired it.
And he left the room, followed by the low but ringing laughter of the
And he left the room. The countess began to cry.
And he looked at Pierre with a mocking, challenging expression. He
And he looked on this visit to a churlish old man and a rich and ugly
And he looked round in the sleigh.
And he narrated his whole conversation with the French doctor and the
And he sat down again, paying no more attention to his daughter, who was
And he smiled approvingly, evidently pleased with the cadet. Rostov felt
And he went on to inquiries about the Grand Duke and the state of his
And his attention was suddenly carried into another world, a world of
And how frightened he was! He thought that I should kill him. Why should
And if anyone came into his room at such moments he was particularly
And immediately Tushin, with a short pipe in the corner of his mouth and
And in fact Toll, to whom he went to communicate the news, immediately
And in fact the head in the nightcap was lifted at once. On
And in fact two more peasants began binding Dron, who took off his own
And in order finally to touch the hearts of the Russians--and being like
And in order to realize vividly his love devotion to the sovereign,
And in proof of the conclusiveness of his opinion all the wrinkles
And in the fifth verse of the same chapter:
And indeed everybody in the room looked with a smile of pleasure at the
And it is of this period of the campaign--when the army lacked boots
And it is well for a people who do not--as the French did in
And it occurs to no one that to admit a greatness not commensurable with
And it was as if they had all only waited for this to realize the
And it was not Napoleon who directed the course of the battle, for none
And lastly, the final departure of the great Emperor from his heroic
And latterly, to her surprise and bewilderment, Princess Mary
And like a practical Petersburg lady who knows how to make the most of
And not for that day and hour alone were the mind and conscience
And not letting them interrupt her she went on to tell what she had
And on learning that tomorrow they were to attack the enemy, and hearing
And one of the soldiers, his face all at once distorted with fury,
And patting Berg on the shoulder he got up, wishing to end the
And probably still more perturbed by the fact that he had uttered this
And rapidly opening the door he went resolutely out onto the balcony.
And really another French soldier, trailing his musket, ran up to
And really he only ran a few steps alone. One soldier moved and then
And receiving the reply that there were more than two hundred churches,
And several of the men went over to the Fifth Company.
And she began to cry again because he had such a noble soul.
And she burst into sobs with the despairing vehemence with which people
And she set off at a run along the passage.
And she smiled her ecstatic smile.
And she was right," said Countess Mary with a happy smile.
And she would go to the nursery to nurse Petya, her only boy. No one
And sighing disdainfully, he again changed his position.
And so I pray God to have you, my friend, in His holy and powerful
And so for history, the insoluble mystery presented by the
And so it was, for when evening came no carts had been provided. In the
And so it was: in Sonya's place sat Natasha who had just come in
And so the anecdote ended. Though it was unintelligible why he had told
And so thinks Timokhin and the whole army. They should be executed!
And so to imagine the action of a man entirely subject to the law of
And so without particularly analyzing all the contiguous sections of
And some years pass during which he plays a pitiful comedy to himself
And strange to say Nicholas felt that he could not help taking up a
And strange to say, the Governor of Moscow, the proud Count Rostopchin,
And suddenly he saw vividly before him a long-forgotten, kindly old man
And suddenly the sequence of these thoughts broke off, and Prince Andrew
And suddenly, at this thought of death, a whole series of most distant,
And tell me, please--I've been meaning to ask--how is he behaving
And that is how power is understood by the science of jurisprudence,
And that is what we shall see."
And that it will not be too dull, here is the dear count who will not
And the Emperor paused, with a frown.
And the adjutant galloped through the forest after Grekov. When Grekov
And the birches with their light and shade, the curly clouds, the
And the cavalry, with spurs and sabers urging on horses that could
And the commander, turning to look at the adjutant, directed his jerky
And the conversation again turned on the war, on Bonaparte, and the
And the corporal leaned against the door and offered Pierre his pipe,
And the count gave a similar order to the major-domo and the servants.
And the count stepped as briskly back into the room and slammed the door
And the count turned to the cook, who, with a shrewd and respectful
And the countess bent over her reticule to hide her agitated face. Sonya
And the deeper she penetrated, not with her mind only but with her whole
And the farther we go back in examining events the less arbitrary do
And the feeling of energy with which the troops had started began to
And the hussars, passing along the line of troops on the left flank of
And the latter--unconscious that he was being reflected in the hussar
And the more we perceive of these influences the more our conception of
And the officer gave them details of the Saltanov battle, which he had
And the old cavalry captain, Kirsten, shouted enthusiastically and no
And the old servant got down from the box and went up to the cart.
And the only such conception known to historians is that of power.
And the owner of the manly voice, evidently an infantry officer,
And the prince began explaining all the blunders which, according to
And the quiet little Dokhturov rode thither, and Borodino became the
And the risk to which he would expose his life by carrying out his
And the same mischievous smile lingered for a long time on her face as
And the sergeant, taking one of the men by the shoulders, gave him a
And the soldier, pushing away a little dog that was jumping up at
And the staff captain rose and turned away from Rostov.
And the talkative Dolgorukov, turning now to Boris, now to Prince
And the two friends told each other of their doings, the one of his
And there in fact was Sonya lying face downward on Nurse's dirty feather
And there in the coffin was the same face, though with closed eyes. "Ah,
And there was given unto him a mouth speaking great things and
And there was so much kindliness and simplicity in his singsong voice
And there were as many advisers there as here..." he went on, returning
And there! Bezukhov got off scotfree, while Fedya had to bear the whole
And these are the three ways in which the historians do explain the
And these simple words, her look, and the expression on her face which
And they disappeared into the darkness with their load.
And they themselves sit there nearly naked, like the signboards at our
And they, too, passed on, so that Nesvitski did not learn who had been
And this "Well!" sounded coldly ironic, as if he were saying,: "Now go
And this courtier, as he is described to us, who lies to Arakcheev
And this simple reflection suddenly destroyed all the interest Prince
And this was not the result of logical reasoning but was a direct and
And though it was too dark for Pierre to see, he felt that a suppressed
And to all Denisov's persuasions, Petya replied that he too was
And truly though the enemy was twice stronger than we, we were
And try as Kutuzov might to restrain the troops, our men attacked,
And turning to his men he directed a party to go on to the halting place
And twisting the ramrod he looked gloomily at Pierre, who turned
And we were sitting so quietly. Ha, ha, ha!... The hussar, the hussar!
And what a strange fate sent me here! What gentleness and nobility there
And what is justice? The princess never thought of that proud word
And when Belova replied: "Oh yes, they've come," she would mutter
And when did it begin? Such a little while ago I came to this table with
And while he was doing M. de Beausset the honor of breakfasting with
And why do they all speak of a 'military genius'? Is a man a genius who
And why? To kill me? Me whom everyone is so fond of?" He remembered
And with a Frenchman's easy and naive frankness the captain told Pierre
And with a furtive glance at his son's face, the count went out of the
And with a sad and rather stern look she told Natasha all that Pierre
And with an eager face Nicholas began to speak of the possibility of
And with the decision and tenderness that often come at the moment
And with the familiarity and easy grace peculiar to him, he raised the
And without a word to his wife he went to the little sitting room and
And without waiting for an answer from the sentinel, who had stepped
And yet it is difficult to imagine an historical character whose
And yet the former history continues to be studied side by side with the
And yet there need only be a discussion and she has no words of her
And you may argue about that as you like!"
And, as if to make the Russian general still more conscious of his
And, having glanced round the room, Prince Andrew turned to Rostov,
And, in fact, the last letter he had received from Mack's army informed
And, worst of all, I am growing old--that's the thing! There won't then
Andreevich" and the words, "Uncle will give it to us hot," in reference
Andrew a reliable correspondent to whom he could pour out the bile he
Andrew accentuated his gloom by the contrast between his own position
Andrew as he waited among a number of important and unimportant people
Andrew as one of themselves, an honor they did not extend to many. From
Andrew at the same time as of the rest, and of how he would have liked
Andrew blushed, as he often did now--Natasha particularly liked it in
Andrew came up, stroked her hair, and asked if she felt rested after
Andrew can love me still. But why 'still?' O God, why isn't he here?"
Andrew considered possible contingencies and formed new projects such as
Andrew continued after a short silence, again quoting Napoleon's words.
Andrew could finish, an aide-de-camp came in to summon Dolgorukov to the
Andrew could not refuse to stay to dinner. "Yes," he thought, "they
Andrew did not see that, he saw her shining eyes which were beautiful.
Andrew did not speak; he was both pleased and displeased that his father
Andrew did not tell his father that he would no doubt live a long time
Andrew entered the passage. Kutuzov himself, he was told, was in the
Andrew entered, marking the place with a knife. Prince Andrew saw by the
Andrew evidently felt ill at ease, but to the two women it seemed quite
Andrew felt a pleasant sense of repose among luxurious surroundings such
Andrew had already heard from his wife in the presence of others some
Andrew had casually mentioned that no one nursed the sick so well as old
Andrew had felt in the impending reforms. He was going to dine that
Andrew had gone and made the sign of the cross in his direction. From
Andrew had heard, was the mainspring of the whole affair. Prince Andrew
Andrew in his boyhood, helped Pierre out of his carriage, said that the
Andrew in the house, Nicholas never imagined him in human form.) "My
Andrew interrupted her by answering her intended question, obviously in
Andrew involuntarily watched as one does watch the hands of those who
Andrew looked silently at Pierre with an ironic smile.
Andrew made his way up to the battery from which the staff officer had
Andrew mirthless and tiresome. Speranski's high-pitched voice struck
Andrew noticed how her thin arms rose quickly as if to embrace her
Andrew opened his eyes, the doctor bent over, kissed him silently on the
Andrew out to him, and he told them to carry him into the tent.
Andrew read the same mild reproach he had read on the face of his dead
Andrew remained silent, and his expression was so forbidding that Pierre
Andrew returned to Petersburg.
Andrew riding up to the officer.
Andrew scanned his unfamiliar face, "as to that person, sire..."
Andrew shouted, "Brothers! All's lost!" And at this as if at a command,
Andrew struck the high road along which the Russian army was moving with
Andrew the feeling he had experienced toward him at their first meeting.
Andrew to knit his brows with discomfort: he was about to rise, but Vera
Andrew was galloping along in a post chaise enjoying the feelings of a
Andrew was natural and pleasant. Others, the majority, disliked him and
Andrew watched the commander in chief's face attentively, and the only
Andrew went to one and took out a small casket, from which he drew a
Andrew when they had gone into the large room where the clavichord was.
Andrew with a characteristic desire to foment his own grief decided that
Andrew with cool intensity, walking straight toward him and evidently
Andrew! What a treasure of a wife you have," said she, sitting down on
Andrew's attentions to Natasha, decided that at a party, a real evening
Andrew's calm manner of treating everybody, his extraordinary memory,
Andrew's ears long after he had left the house.
Andrew's fiancee. A bright questioning light shone in her eyes, and on
Andrew's head with the confident, accustomed look with which one looks
Andrew's life. Though outwardly he continued to live in the same old
Andrew's mind when the dresser with sleeves rolled up began hastily to
Andrew's presence. He was ashamed to express his new Masonic views,
Andrew's story the condition Russia was in. "But give me time, give me
Andrew's, with that latent grudge a mother always has in regard to
Andrew, "and at Anna Pavlovna's they listen to me. And that stupid set
Andrew, "it will give you time to be sure of yourself. I ask you to
Andrew, "one believes in him because he's Russian, despite the novel
Andrew, and in a determined, ringing, and unpleasant tone he continued:
Andrew, as he was to see any new visitor, and insisted on his staying
Andrew, beginning to understand that his news of the battle before Krems
Andrew, especially as he had not yet seen Speranski in his domestic
Andrew, greatly changed and plainly in better health, but with a fresh
Andrew, his face distorted with fury, rode up to him and raised his
Andrew, informing him of his arrival and asking him to come to see him.
Andrew, inquired whether his Serene Highness was putting up there and
Andrew, paying no more heed to the general who ran after him imploring
Andrew, recalling his father's letter. "Yes, we have gained a victory
Andrew, still looking into her eyes.
Andrew, though he saw him now for the first time. There was about
Andrew, told how Bonaparte wishing to test Markov, our ambassador,
Andrew, trying to extenuate his action so as not to irritate the old man
Andrew, who remained in the porch and listened to the general's report.
Andrew, with a smile.
Andrew, with the purest regrets and memories, but probably she will
Andrew--promised to do as she wished. Having briefly and exactly
Andrew--spoke of this: the unsettled question of life and death, which
Andrew.
Andrew.
Andrew.
Andrew.
Andrew.
Andrew.
Andrew.
Andrew.
Andrew.
Andrew.
Andrew.
Andrew. "Look here, my dear fellow, get from Kozlovski all the reports
Andrew. "Well, and what do you think of Kutuzov's appointment?" he
Andrew. He said that Freemasonry is the teaching of Christianity freed
Andrew. Prince Andrew seemed, and really was, quite a different, quite
Andrew. This was Speranski's cold, mirrorlike look, which did not allow
Andrew... is Father's way of treating religious subjects. I don't
Andrew? Don't forget that she has grown up and been educated in
Andrusha!..." said she, putting her hand in her reticule but not yet
Andrusha--the slender mischievous boy who had been her playfellow in
Andwew Bolkonski?" He swayed his head. "Vewy pleased, Pwince, to make
Anger again showed in Natasha's face.
Animated by that address Anna Pavlovna's guests talked for a long time
Anisya Fedorovna, struck a single chord, pure and sonorous, and then
Anisya Fedorovna, with her light step, willingly went to fulfill her
Anisya and in Anisya's father and mother and aunt, and in every Russian
Anna Mikhaylovna (who found it necessary to accompany him) was driving
Anna Mikhaylovna also had of late visited them less frequently, seemed
Anna Mikhaylovna and I don't like Boris, but they were our friends and
Anna Mikhaylovna came out last. She approached Pierre with slow, quiet
Anna Mikhaylovna instantly guessed her intention and stooped to be ready
Anna Mikhaylovna looked at Vera and paused. The countess pressed her
Anna Mikhaylovna nodded approvingly. Again Pierre fell into the naively
Anna Mikhaylovna nor the footman nor the coachman, who could not help
Anna Mikhaylovna opened the door. Her face wore the proud expression of
Anna Mikhaylovna paused and waited for him to come up.
Anna Mikhaylovna sat down beside him, with her own handkerchief wiped
Anna Mikhaylovna shook her head.
Anna Mikhaylovna sighed deeply.
Anna Mikhaylovna told me, under the seal of strict secrecy, of a plan of
Anna Mikhaylovna took off her gloves and, occupying the position she had
Anna Mikhaylovna turned up her eyes, and profound sadness was depicted
Anna Mikhaylovna was already embracing her and weeping. The countess
Anna Mikhaylovna's face expressed a consciousness that the decisive
Anna Mikhaylovna's was the most distinct.
Anna Mikhaylovna, in a few words, told her the contents of the letter,
Anna Mikhaylovna, though her circumstances had improved, was still
Anna Mikhaylovna, who always knew everything that passed in the house,
Anna Mikhaylovna, who often visited the Karagins, while playing cards
Anna Mikhaylovna? That's two. She's here with her son. The son is
Anna Pavlovna almost closed her eyes to indicate that neither she nor
Anna Pavlovna continued to give on free evenings the same kind of
Anna Pavlovna frowned. Mortemart, Hippolyte's friend, addressed him
Anna Pavlovna gave him her shriveled hand to kiss and introduced him to
Anna Pavlovna had already managed to speak to Lise about the match she
Anna Pavlovna remarked with a melancholy smile that Kutuzov had done
Anna Pavlovna smiled and promised to take Pierre in hand. She knew his
Anna Pavlovna" as well as his daughter's "diplomatic salon," and often
Anna Pavlovna's "At Home" was like the former one, only the novelty she
Anna Pavlovna's alarm was justified, for Pierre turned away from the
Anna Pavlovna's circle on the contrary was enraptured by this enthusiasm
Anna Pavlovna's drawing room was gradually filling. The highest
Anna Pavlovna's presentiment was in fact fulfilled. Next day during the
Anna Pavlovna's presentiment was justified, and all that morning a
Anna Pavlovna's reception Anna Mikhaylovna returned to Moscow and went
Anna Pavlovna's reception was in full swing. The spindles hummed
Anna Pavlovna, and Anna Pavlovna, with the same sad smile with which she
Anna Pavlovna.
Annette and I were speaking of how to arrange it. What do you think?"
Another beekeeper who has studied the life of the hive more closely
Another company, a lucky one for not all the companies had vodka,
Another five days passed, and then the young Prince Nicholas Andreevich
Another hussar also rushed toward the horse, but Bondarenko had already
Another pretext would be her snuff, which would seem too dry or too damp
Another prodded his horse with the butt end of a musket, and Pierre,
Another shook his head.
Another smith tried to enter the doorway, pressing against the publican
Another still stronger wave flowed through the crowd and reaching the
Another time he interrupted, saying:
Another time when she called Dunyasha her voice trembled, so she called
Another voice, from a man of medium height with clear blue eyes,
Another voice, that of a nobleman of medium height and about forty years
Another, a thin little officer, was speaking to everyone, conjecturing
Another, a younger voice, interrupted him: "Afraid or not, you can't
Antichrist--I really believe he is Antichrist--I will have nothing more
Antonov."
Anyone looking at the disorganized rear of the Russian army would have
Apart from consciousness of self no observation or application of reason
Apart from the advantage he derived from Anatole, the very process
Apart from these two concepts which in their union mutually define one
Apparently she had forgotten her age and by force of habit employed
April, May. Speak, Mamma, why don't you say anything? Speak!" said she,
Arakcheev looked at the Emperor from under his brow and, sniffing with
Arakcheev on the military. Soon after his arrival Prince Andrew, as a
Arakcheev's excited face when the sovereign went out with Balashev.
Arakcheev's eyes turned toward him.
Arakcheev, coming to him from the Emperor, said that Ermolov ought to
Arakcheev, or Prince Volkonski, or was given this or that advice and did
Arbat Street.
Archduke Karl does nothing, the Archduke Ferdinand disgraces himself.
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
Are we despicable Germans?"
Aren't there plenty of troops on the march? Let him in, indeed! That's
Armed with these arguments, which appeared to her unanswerable, she
Armfeldt addressed Pfuel in German. Toll explained to Volkonski in
Armfeldt disputes, Bennigsen considers, and Barclay, called on to act,
Armfeldt, Adjutant General Wolzogen, Wintzingerode (whom Napoleon had
Armfeldt, a rake and an intriguer; Wintzingerode, a fugitive French
Around Murat gathered a group of those who had remained in Moscow. They
Around him in the darkness men were standing and evidently something
Arriving at this conclusion we can reply directly and positively to
As Alpatych was driving out of the gate he saw some ten soldiers in
As I do not intend to be at your house again for reasons you know
As I understand your present life, I think you will always recall it
As Pierre approached that street the smoke became denser and denser--he
As Pierre passed through the fence gate, he was enveloped by hot air and
As Pierre was entering the reception room a courier from the army came
As Shinshin had remarked, from the time of his arrival Anatole had
As a criminal who is being led to execution knows that he must die
As a result of the hostility between Kutuzov and Bennigsen, his Chief of
As always happens when traveling, Princess Mary thought only of the
As always happens when women lead lonely lives for any length of time
As at Tilsit Rostov had not allowed himself to doubt that what everybody
As became known later, he had scarcely begun to address the merchants
As birds migrate to somewhere beyond the sea, so these men with their
As far as one can make out, not so much from this unintelligible
As generally happens, Pierre did not feel the full effects of the
As he approached, a ringing shot issued from it deafening him and his
As he drove through the streets past the houses that had been burned
As he fell asleep he had still been thinking of the subject that now
As he had done on their first meeting at Kochubey's, Speranski produced
As he looked at the matter in this way, he learned that he was being
As he passed through the forest Prince Andrew turned several times to
As he said this Prince Andrew was less than ever like that Bolkonski who
As he said this he rose, went to his sister, and, stooping, kissed
As he said this his eyes and face expressed more than coldness--they
As he was leaving the battery, firing was heard on the left also, and
As he went along he looked with pleasure at the year's splendid crop
As if measuring themselves and preparing for the coming movement, the
As if responding to them but with a different sort of merriment, the
As if this action had some mysterious and menacing significance, the
As if to celebrate a victory over everybody, a cricket chirped in a
As in every large household, there were at Bald Hills several perfectly
As in the question of astronomy then, so in the question of history
As is always the case at a departure, much had been forgotten or put in
As is usually the case with people meeting after a prolonged separation,
As long as this news remained unofficial it was possible to doubt it,
As much as I like and as I like!" said Petya to himself. He tried to
As often happens after long sleeplessness and long anxiety, he was
As often happens in early youth, especially to one who leads a lonely
As often happens when someone we have trusted is no longer before
As she became animated the prince looked at her more and more sternly,
As she entered the ballroom her father was hurriedly coming out of
As she named the Empress, Anna Pavlovna's face suddenly assumed an
As she read she glanced at the sleeping Natasha, trying to find in her
As she said this the countess looked round at her daughter. Natasha
As she was crossing the anteroom she saw through the window a carriage
As she was in mourning Princess Mary did not go out into society, and
As soon as I saw him I felt he was my master and I his slave, and that
As soon as Leppich is ready, get together a crew of reliable and
As soon as Natasha had finished she went up to him and asked how he
As soon as Natasha, sitting at the head of Prince Andrew's bed, heard
As soon as Nicholas entered in his hussar uniform, diffusing around him
As soon as Nicholas entered, he was enfolded in that poetic atmosphere
As soon as Prince Andrew had given up his daily occupations, and
As soon as he learned that the Russian army was in such a hopeless
As soon as he reached Moscow, Prince Andrew had received from his
As soon as he said this both Prince Vasili and Anna Pavlovna turned away
As soon as historians of different nationalities and tendencies begin
As soon as it rose everyone in the boxes and stalls became silent, and
As soon as she began to speak of that, her lips trembled and her tears
As soon as she saw Pierre, the woman almost threw herself at his feet.
As soon as the King began to speak loud and fast his royal dignity
As soon as the Uhlans descended the hill, the hussars were ordered up
As soon as the aide-de-camp had said this, the old mustached officer,
As soon as the prior withdrew, Natasha took her friend by the hand and
As soon as the singing was over, another and another toast was proposed
As soon as the sun appeared in a clear strip of sky beneath the clouds,
As the Tsar rode up to one flank of the battalions, which presented
As the bearers, among whom was Anna Mikhaylovna, passed the young man
As the flames of the fire hidden within come more and more vividly and
As the mazurka began, Boris saw that Adjutant General Balashev, one of
As the sun and each atom of ether is a sphere complete in itself, and
As the war had caught him in the service, Nicholas Rostov took a close
As they approached the watchhouse Denisov stopped, peering into the
As they passed near a church in the Khamovniki (one of the few unburned
As they were going round the Sukharev water tower Natasha, who was
As this Apsheron battalion marched by, the red-faced Miloradovich,
As to the theaters for the entertainment of the people and the troops,
As when a window is opened a whiff of fresh air from the fields enters
As with astronomy the difficulty of recognizing the motion of the earth
Ashamed as she was of acknowledging to herself that she had fallen in
Ask Denisov whether it is not out of the question for a cadet to demand
Assuming quite the pose of a society woman (heaven knows when and where
At Anna Pavlovna's on the twenty-sixth of August, the very day of the
At Bald Hills, Prince Nicholas Andreevich Bolkonski's estate, the
At Dorogobuzh while the soldiers of the convoy, after locking the
At Krasnoe they took twenty-six thousand prisoners, several hundred
At Smolensk the armies at last reunited, much as Bagration disliked it.
At a moment when all was quiet before the commencement of a song, a door
At a quarter past ten they at last got into their carriages and started.
At balls he danced if a partner was needed. Young ladies, married and
At breakfast Pierre told the princess, his cousin, that he had been to
At dawn on the sixteenth of November, Denisov's squadron, in which
At dawn the two new batteries established during the night on the
At daybreak on the seventeenth, a French officer who had come with
At dinner Anna Mikhaylovna talked the whole time about the war news and
At dinner Petya having returned home told them the news he had heard.
At dinner that day, on Dessalles' mentioning that the French were said
At dinner the conversation did not cease for a moment and seemed to
At dinner the talk turned on the latest political news: Napoleon's
At dinner the talk turned on the war, the approach of which was becoming
At dinner, at which champagne was drunk to the health of the new
At dinner, conversation turned on Pierre's marriage.
At dinner, having placed Balashev beside him, Napoleon not only treated
At eight o'clock Kutuzov rode to Pratzen at the head of the fourth
At eleven o'clock they brought him news that the fleches captured by the
At first Prince Andrew read with his eyes only, but after a while,
At first he heard the sound of indifferent voices, then Anna
At first he spoke with the amused and mild irony now customary with
At first she heard only Metivier's voice, then her father's, then both
At first sight, Pfuel, in his ill-made uniform of a Russian general,
At first the noise of the falling bombs and shells only aroused
At first while they were still moving along the Kaluga road, Napoleon's
At five in the morning it was still quite dark. The troops of the
At half-past five Napoleon rode to the village of Shevardino.
At home, they had not yet gone to bed. The young people, after returning
At last he saw him: the rosy boy had tossed about till he lay across the
At last seizing a soldier by his collar he forced him to answer.
At last the Emperor left the army, and as the most convenient and indeed
At last the Emperor stopped beside his last partner (he had danced
At last the Emperor, tired of futile expectation, his actor's instinct
At length Dron, the village Elder, entered the room and with a deep bow
At midday on the twenty-second of October Pierre was going uphill along
At midnight dancing was still going on. Helene, not having a suitable
At nine in the morning, he heard firing in front and shouts of hurrah,
At nine o'clock the countess woke up, and Matrena Timofeevna, who had
At one of the post stations he overtook a convoy of Russian wounded.
At other times she praised Julie to him and advised him to go to Moscow
At seven in the morning a French convoy in marching trim, wearing shakos
At six in the evening, Kutuzov went to the Emperor's headquarters and
At such moments Princess Mary would think how intellectual work dries
At such moments something like a pride of sacrifice gathered in her
At ten in the morning of the second of September this weather still
At ten o'clock the infantry that had been among the bushes in front of
At that ball Pierre for the first time felt humiliated by the position
At that instant the sun began to hide behind the clouds, and other
At that moment Anna Pavlovna came up and, looking severely at Pierre,
At that moment Berg drew out his handkerchief as if to blow his nose
At that moment Boris clearly realized what he had before surmised, that
At that moment Count Rostopchin with his protruding chin and alert eyes,
At that moment Nicholas and Countess Mary came in. Pierre with the baby
At that moment Nicholas noticed the presence of his nephew. His face
At that moment Pierre involuntarily betrayed to her, to Princess Mary,
At that moment Zhilinski's voice was heard calling Boris.
At that moment a maid sent by the countess, who had noticed her
At that moment of emotional tenderness young Nicholas' face, which
At that moment the door opened.
At that moment the first smith got up and, scratching his bruised
At that moment the flames flared up and showed his young master's pale
At that moment the pitiful wailing of women was heard from different
At that moment they heard the sound of the door pulley and footsteps in
At that moment this all seemed quite easy, simple, and clear to Natasha.
At that moment this news had only one significance for both of them.
At that moment, as the Horse Guards, having passed him, disappeared in
At that moment, on the road from the town on which signalers had been
At that moment, on the road leading from the big house, two women and a
At that moment, with noiseless footsteps and with the businesslike,
At that moment, with soft steps, the countess came in shyly, in her cap
At that time in the Rostovs' house there prevailed an amorous atmosphere
At that time, as always happens, the highest society that met at court
At that very time Prince Andrew was sitting with Pierre and telling him
At that very time, at ten in the morning of the second of September,
At that very time, in circumstances even more important than retreating
At the Olmutz review he had seemed more majestic; here he seemed
At the Troitsa monastery the Rostovs first broke their journey for a
At the Troitsa monastery they had spoken of the past, and he had told
At the appointed hour the prince, powdered and shaven, entered the
At the appointed hour, however, he entered the modest house Speranski
At the basis of the works of all the modern historians from Gibbon to
At the battle of Borodino Napoleon shot at no one and killed no one.
At the beginning of July more and more disquieting reports about the war
At the beginning of March, old Count Ilya Rostov was very busy arranging
At the beginning of winter Prince Nicholas Bolkonski and his daughter
At the beginning of winter Princess Mary came to Moscow. From reports
At the bridge they all halted, waiting for those in front to get across.
At the corner of the Moroseyka, opposite a large house with closed
At the council at Fili the prevailing thought in the minds of the
At the end of August the Rostovs received another letter from Nicholas.
At the end of January Pierre went to Moscow and stayed in an annex of
At the end of January Princess Mary left for Moscow, and the count
At the end of January old Count Rostov went to Moscow with Natasha and
At the end of the letter she informed him that in a few days she would
At the end of the meeting the Grand Master with irony and ill-will
At the end of the week the prince reappeared and resumed his former way
At the entrance to Princess Mary's house Pierre felt doubtful whether
At the entrance to the Arbat Square an immense expanse of dark starry
At the first glance, when Davout had only raised his head from the
At the first sound of trampling hoofs and shouting, Petya lashed his
At the fleches Bennigsen stopped and began looking at the Shevardino
At the foot of the hill lay wasteland over which a few groups of our
At the foot of the hill, a pale hussar cadet, supporting one hand with
At the front an altercation occurred between an Austrian guide and a
At the levee Prince Andrew stood among the Austrian officers as he had
At the men's end of the table the talk grew more and more animated. The
At the moment the door opened and the stranger came in, Pierre felt a
At the moment when Rostov and Ilyin were galloping along the road,
At the moment when Vereshchagin fell and the crowd closed in with savage
At the review next day the Emperor asked Prince Andrew where he would
At the same time he felt that the deeper the ground sank under him the
At the same time his mother-in-law, Prince Vasili's wife, sent to
At the same time the commander of the artillery of the 1st Corps,
At the sight of the letter red patches showed themselves on the
At the sight of the tortured Frenchman and the crowd surrounding the
At the summit of the hill they stopped with the icon; the men who had
At the very beginning of the war our armies were divided, and our sole
At the very instant he did this and uttered those words, Pierre felt
At their yesterday's halting place, feeling chilly by a dying campfire,
At these sounds, long unheard, Rostov's spirits rose, as at the strains
At these words Alpatych nodded as if in approval, and not wishing to
At this a sudden change evidently took place in the princess' ideas; her
At this moment that terrible door, which Pierre had watched so long
At this moment, Petya, to whom nobody was paying any attention, came up
At two in the morning of the fourteenth of June, the Emperor, having
At two o'clock the six chosen guests assembled for dinner.
Attempted drives from east to west--similar to the contrary movements of
Auersperg was defending, and the bridge was not blown up: so Murat is
Auersperg; these gentlemen embrace the officers, crack jokes, sit on the
Augesd.
Augezd dam, rallying the regiments, saving what was possible when all
August had still been green islands amid black fields and stubble, had
August the Emperor was thrown from his caleche, injured his leg, and
August took place.
August. All was destroyed, except something intangible yet powerful and
Austerlitz and held a perfectly unnecessary sword in his left. He
Austerlitz to the year 1813. At Austerlitz he remained last at the
Austerlitz, Boris was unable to see either Prince Andrew or Dolgorukov
Austerlitz, Friedland, Vitebsk, and Smolensk. Let our remotest posterity
Austerlitz, Wagram, and so on. But now something strange was happening
Austerlitz, and Tilsit, and Erfurt.
Austerlitz--takes place as those who planned it anticipated. That is an
Austria a Russian corps crossed the frontier to co-operate with our
Austria's capital. "How is it Vienna was taken? What of the bridge and
Austria," said Mortemart. "The Emperor of Austria can never have thought
Austria?" said he, rising from his chair and pacing up and down the room
Austrian Council of War at which Suvorov crowed like a cock in reply to
Austrian adjutant, Bilibin, and last night's conversation. Having
Austrian and Russian troops, both those freshly arrived from Russia
Austrian army of Ulm. They are the same battalions you broke at
Austrian army should maneuver the previous year on the very fields where
Austrian army, hero of the Turkish wars Hostilities are ended, we can
Austrian campaign and the reasons why he had declined them. Though the
Austrian general occupying the advanced posts, believed Murat's emissary
Austrian general, continuing to read, frowned angrily and jerked his
Austrian troops, under the direction of so skillful a leader as General
Austrians, and all at once discovered from the cannon balls discharged
Author: Leo Tolstoy
Awoke late, read the Scriptures but was apathetic. Afterwards went and
Axes and choppers were plied all around. Everything was done without any
B., and only remembered that I ought not to have done so when everybody
BOOK EIGHT: 1811 - 12
BOOK ELEVEN: 1812
BOOK FIFTEEN: 1812 - 13
BOOK FIVE: 1806 - 07
BOOK FOUR: 1806
BOOK FOURTEEN: 1812
BOOK NINE: 1812
BOOK ONE: 1805
BOOK SEVEN: 1810 - 11
BOOK SIX: 1808 - 10
BOOK TEN: 1812
BOOK THIRTEEN: 1812
BOOK THREE: 1805
BOOK TWELVE: 1812
BOOK TWO: 1805
Bagration alone is a military man. He's stupid, but he has experience,
Bagration and racing one another they rushed in an irregular but joyous
Bagration appeared in the doorway of the anteroom without hat or sword,
Bagration as he shouted, with an expression that seemed to say: "We know
Bagration called to him, and Tushin, raising three fingers to his cap
Bagration cast his large, expressionless, sleepy eyes round his suite,
Bagration did not ask about the guns on the left flank; he knew that all
Bagration drove up in a carriage to the house occupied by Barclay.
Bagration looked round and shouted, "Hurrah!"
Bagration over each other's shoulders, as if he were some rare animal.
Bagration rode round the ranks that had marched past him and dismounted.
Bagration stopped and, before replying, tried to see Rostov's face in
Bagration to begin the council. At last Bagration's orderly came with
Bagration's detachment was reunited to Kutuzov's army.
Bagration's hard brown face with its half-closed, dull, sleepy eyes.
Bagration's weak detachment on the Znaim road he supposed it to be
Bagration, a gaunt middle-aged man of medium height with a firm,
Bagration, distinguished by his Schon Grabern affair and by the retreat
Bagration. His idea was, first, to concentrate all the artillery in the
Balaga was a fair-haired, short, and snub-nosed peasant of about
Balaga was about to leave the room.
Balaga! You'll get there in time? Eh?"
Balashev and with a slight smile, as confidently, quickly, and simply
Balashev bowed his head affirmatively.
Balashev bowed his head with an air indicating that he would like to
Balashev found Davout seated on a barrel in the shed of a peasant's hut,
Balashev had seen at the court of the Emperor of Russia--were waiting.
Balashev knew how to reply to each of Napoleon's remarks, and would
Balashev looked around him, awaiting the arrival of an officer from the
Balashev made no reply and bowed his head in silence.
Balashev recovered himself and began to speak. He said that the
Balashev replied that he had been ordered to hand it personally to the
Balashev replied that there was "nothing offensive in the demand,
Balashev respectfully ventured to disagree with the French Emperor.
Balashev rode on, supposing from Murat's words that he would very soon
Balashev to the quarters assigned him.
Balashev told him why he considered Napoleon to be the originator of the
Balashev too was his friend and worshiper. Napoleon turned to him with a
Balashev took out the packet containing the Emperor's letter and laid it
Balashev was brought in. He became still more absorbed in his task when
Balashev was only two horses' length from the equestrian with the
Balashev went into a small reception room, one door of which led into a
Balashev's face, which was animated by the beauty of the morning and
Balashev's uniform and sword.
Balashev, feeling it incumbent on him to reply, said that from the
Balashev, he raised his hand to the forty-year-old Russian general's
Balashev, the Emperor repeated to him the words that he would not make
Balashev.
Bald Hills and was sitting indoors reading the Lives of the Saints. On
Bald Hills was exposed. Dessalles wrote this letter to the Governor
Bald Hills with sixteen horses and dozens of servants and stayed for
Bald Hills, Prince Nicholas Bolkonski's estate, lay forty miles east
Bald Hills, while he himself needed no one and nothing. He used to
Bald Hills. Prince Andrew, glancing at Pierre, broke the silence now and
Bald Hills. That's all the same to him! That's what I was saying to
Barclay de Tolly to report on the progress of affairs on the left flank.
Barclay de Tolly was an unpopular foreigner disliked by Bagration (who
Barclay donned his sash and came out to meet and report to his senior
Barclay stood for caution. The Tsarevich hinted at treachery and
Barclay). For God's sake send me somewhere else if only in command of
Barclay, who had gone away in dudgeon, had to be filled. Very serious
Bartenstein, as the Pavlograds were at the outposts far beyond that
Basov; the tipsy officers tossed, embraced, and dropped Rostov; the
Bavarians, Wurttembergers, Mecklenburgers, Spaniards, Italians, and
Bazdeev's books and papers appeared to him the most necessary.
Bazdeev's widow had called to ask Pierre to take charge of her husband's
Bear up; it won't be for long now! We'll see our visitors off and then
Beauche; I'll keep the best palace in Moscow for you! Au revoir. Good
Beaumarchais, and others?
Beausset's face and he glided away to the other generals.
Because it happened so! "Chance created the situation; genius utilized
Because they could not understand him all these people assumed that
Bedouin twice and successfully put him to the showy trot in which the
Bedouin, was in debt all round, to his comrades and the sutlers. On
Before Anna Pavlovna and the others had time to smile their appreciation
Before Belliard was out of sight, a messenger from another part of the
Before Pierre left the room Princess Mary told him: "This is the first
Before Rostov had decided what to do with him, the officer cried, "I
Before Rostov had had time to consider and determine the distance of
Before Shinshin had time to utter the joke he was ready to make on the
Before dinner, Princess Mary and Mademoiselle Bourienne, who knew
Before five in the evening the battle had been lost at all points. More
Before he had reached the embankments that were being thrown up, he saw,
Before he had solved that point he glanced again at her face filled with
Before he reached him, Rostov, who was a splendid horseman, spurred
Before he was thoroughly awake next morning everybody had already left
Before her words were out, Pierre had sprung up and with a frightened
Before him, on the right, Rostov saw the front lines of his hussars and
Before joining the Western Army which was then, in May, encamped at
Before long Boris, Berg's old comrade, arrived. There was a shade of
Before partisan warfare had been officially recognized by the
Before returning to Bilibin's Prince Andrew had gone to a bookshop to
Before sunrise he was awakened by shouts and loud and rapid firing.
Before supper, Prince Andrew, coming back to his father's study, found
Before the battle of Borodino our strength in proportion to the French
Before the beginning of the campaign, Rostov had received a letter from
Before the countess could answer, Prince Andrew entered the room with
Before the end of the fast of St. Peter, Agrafena Ivanovna Belova, a
Before the officer had finished speaking the orderly made the same
Before they reached the room from which the sounds of the clavichord
Before two o'clock in the afternoon the Rostovs' four carriages, packed
Beginning with the battle of Borodino, from which time his disagreement
Behind him stood the aide-de-camp, the doctors, and the menservants;
Behind him, where Karataev had been sitting, the dog began to howl.
Behind the guns were their limbers and still farther back picket ropes
Behind the priest and a chanter stood the notabilities on a spot
Behind them along the narrow, sodden, cutup forest road came hussars in
Behind them sat Anna Mikhaylovna wearing a green headdress and with a
Belaya Tserkov where that regiment was forming, the countess was seized
Bells rang, the stewards rushed forward, and--like rye shaken together
Belova admired the presents and was delighted with her dress material.
Below the village the road crossed the river by a bridge and, winding
Below, where the fight was beginning, there was still thick fog; on the
Bending forward in his armchair he said: "Le Roi de Prusse!" and having
Beneath his smile Rostov saw in him the mood he had shown at the Club
Benefit performances, poor pictures, statues, benevolent societies,
Bennigsen and Barclay advised? What would have happened had the French
Bennigsen and the Tsarevich.
Bennigsen managed everything. Now the decisive moment of battle had come
Bennigsen nor the Emperor was there, but Chernyshev, the Emperor's
Bennigsen opened the council with the question: "Are we to abandon
Bennigsen spoke to a general who approached him, and began explaining
Bennigsen was a landlord in the Vilna province who appeared to be doing
Bennigsen's note and the Cossack's information that the left flank
Bennigsen's words in an angry voice and thereby drawing attention to the
Bennigsen, but only the one most essential thing--as much advantage
Bennigsen, hoping to receive from Petersburg the post of commander in
Bennigsen, who had chosen the position, warmly displayed his Russian
Bennigsen. In any case many great rewards would have to be given for
Berg always spoke quietly, politely, and with great precision. His
Berg and the countess looked at her, perplexed and frightened. The count
Berg blushed and smiled.
Berg drove up to his father-in-law's house in his spruce little trap
Berg explained so clearly why he wanted to collect at his house a small
Berg had already been engaged a month, and only a week remained before
Berg held a smoking pipe between his knees. Boris, in the accurate way
Berg put on the cleanest of coats, without a spot or speck of dust,
Berg rose and embraced his wife carefully, so as not to crush her lace
Berg smiled again.
Berg smiled joyously. The count, by his guests, went into the drawing
Berg smiled with a sense of his superiority over a weak woman, and
Berg took the opportunity to ask, with great politeness, whether, as was
Berg was satisfied and happy. The smile of pleasure never left his face.
Berg was sitting beside the countess consoling her with the respectful
Berg's chief characteristic was such a naive and good natured egotism
Berg's proposal was at first received with a perplexity that was not
Berg, having decided that masculine conversation was required,
Berg, having generously offered to disturb the symmetry of an armchair
Berg, the Rostovs' son-in-law, was already a colonel wearing the orders
Berg. "The army is burning with a spirit of heroism and the leaders, so
Bergs beneath her, could be cruel enough to refuse such an invitation.
Bergs' house, not at ten but at fifteen minutes to eight.
Bergs--have been knights!"
Berlin, Vienna, and other towns, simply because its inhabitants
Beside Denisov rode an esaul, * Denisov's fellow worker, also in felt
Beside him in a stooping position sat a small man of whose presence he
Beside him rode an hussar, with a boy in a tattered French uniform and
Beside him was Simon Chekmar, his personal attendant, an old horseman
Beside himself with terror Pierre jumped up and ran back to the battery,
Besides a feeling of aloofness from everybody Natasha was feeling
Besides being occupied with his estates and reading a great variety of
Besides that, he sent greetings to Monsieur Schelling, Madame Schoss,
Besides the Bezukhov family, Nicholas' old friend the retired General
Besides the plunderers, very various people, some drawn by curiosity,
Besides these Russians and foreigners who propounded new and unexpected
Besides this, historians of that kind contradict each other even
Besides this, the whole staff of the Russian army was now reorganized.
Besides, I don't love her--not as I should. O, God! release me from
Besides, suppose you did gain a brilliant victory, if even the Archduke
Bessieres, Caulaincourt, and Berthier were present at that dinner.
Between the hollows the villages of Bezubova and Zakharino showed in the
Between three and four o'clock in the afternoon Prince Andrew, who had
Beyond Shamshevo, Dolokhov was to observe the road in the same way, to
Beyond Vyazma the French army instead of moving in three columns huddled
Bezukhov he did not let go his hold of the lad. He had the air of a
Bezukhov! Yes, I pity him from my heart, and shall try to give him what
Bezukhov's household, despite all the search they made, saw Pierre again
Bezukhov) "and now she's in love with that singer" (he meant Natasha's
Bezukhov, and about his illegitimate son Pierre, the one who had behaved
Bezukhov, and showed them her own box. Princess Helene asked to see the
Bezukhov.
Bezukhov.
Bezukhova and asked her to dance. She smilingly raised her hand and laid
Bezukhova asked her visitors into the ballroom.
Bezukhova's presence. To be received in the Countess Bezukhova's salon
Bezukhova's reputation as a lovely and clever woman became so firmly
Bezukhova's visit and the invitation for that evening, Marya Dmitrievna
Bezukhova. But you will understand that I have no desire for the post. A
Bilibin and the rest of "ours" burst out laughing in Hippolyte's face,
Bilibin as he came out to meet Prince Andrew. "Franz, put the prince's
Bilibin attentively examined his nails, and many of those present
Bilibin came out to meet him. His usually calm face showed excitement.
Bilibin liked conversation as he liked work, only when it could be made
Bilibin puckered his skin in preparation for something witty.
Bilibin shrugged his shoulders, as much as to say that not even he could
Bilibin smiled and the wrinkles on his face disappeared.
Bilibin was a man of thirty-five, a bachelor, and of the same circle as
Bilibin was now at army headquarters in a diplomatic capacity, and
Bilibin wrinkled up the skin over his eyebrows and pondered, with a
Bilibin's man, was dragging a portmanteau with some difficulty out of
Bilibin's services were valued not only for what he wrote, but also for
Bilibin's sleeve. "But I love them, you know, and don't want to distress
Bilibin's words.
Bilibin), what he had read began to interest him more and more. When he
Bilibin, who had not lost his reputation of an exceedingly clever man,
Bilibin--he's a very clever fellow. He suggested addressing him as
Bilibin. "It's not treachery nor rascality nor stupidity: it is just
Biographical historians and historians of separate nations understand
Blood was flowing from his head; he struggled but could not rise. Rostov
Blood was gushing from its leg as from a spring. Among the limbers lay
Bogdanich was a brick: he told you you were saying what was not true.
Bogdanich would come up to him as he lay wounded and would magnanimously
Bogdanich. That affair was the same thing as this soldier with the harsh
Bogucharovo and did not wish to leave it--coming toward her with a
Bogucharovo for him. I should be given a small room as a favor, the
Bogucharovo house. The peasants were briskly carrying out the
Bogucharovo lay in a flat uninteresting part of the country among fields
Bogucharovo, a homestead had been looted by French marauders.
Bogucharovo, a princely estate with a dwelling house and farm where
Bogucharovo, and had since filled that post irreproachably for
Bogucharovo, his occupations in the country, his journey to Ryazan;
Bogucharovo, replied that they had left on the seventh and again went
Bohemia, and you and your army would have spent a bad quarter of an hour
Bolkhovitinov gave a detailed account from the beginning of all he had
Bolkhovitinov told him everything and was then silent, awaiting
Bolkhovitinov, entering the open door which he had found by feeling in
Bolkonskaya."
Bolkonski and Denisov moved to the gate, at which a knot of soldiers
Bolkonski belonged to a distant, romantic past, when after supper and
Bolkonski in order to arrange a match for him with the daughter of that
Bolkonski noticed the hussar's state of mind, and it amused him. With a
Bolkonski recognized Prince Repnin whom he had met in Petersburg
Bolkonski shrugged his shoulders.
Bolkonski stiffly and coldly and told him in his foreign accent that he
Bolkonski that the Emperor desired to give him an audience. The Emperor
Bolkonski took the opportunity to go in to get some details of the
Bolkonski was invited everywhere, and had to spend the whole morning
Bolkonski's activity which seemed to reproach his own idleness, very
Bolkonski's wife, this very evening, and perhaps the thing can be
Bolkonski, and that the wedding would be in a year's time because
Bolkonski, nothing was said, and only those who knew him intimately
Bolkonski, opposite which hung another such frame with a badly painted
Bolkonski, the little princess' husband. He was a very handsome young
Bolkonski, turning still paler, pushed him away with an angry look and
Bolkonski, very modestly without once mentioning himself, described the
Bolkonski, who might arrive at any moment, if they knew of this affair
Bolkonski, who seemed to her to have grown much younger, happier, and
Bolkonski," she went on with special emphasis, implying that she knew of
Bolkonski--an adjutant of Kutuzov's, who's a friend of mine. I did not
Bolkonski.
Bolkonski. In the midst of his explanation shouts were heard from the
Bolkonski. Speranski smiled more markedly.
Bolkonski. Well, I had a talk with him.... He took it into his head to
Bonaparte himself! I remember his limited, self-satisfied face on the
Bonaparte meanwhile began taking the glove off his small white hand,
Bonaparte now), needs most deeply devised plans and profound scientific
Bonaparte smiled. "The young Cossack made his mighty interlocutor
Bonaparte was anathematized and in Moscow nothing but the coming war
Bonaparte's adjutant rode full gallop with this menacing letter to
Bonaparte's side."
Bonaparte's.
Bonaparte, and to cause me, and us in general, annoyance and
Bonaparte, having come up at a gallop, stopped his horse.
Bonaparte, there is a difference," remarked Bolkonski.
Bonaparte. He alone of all the Russians has disgraced the Russian name,
Bonaparte. The fact that Speranski was the son of a village priest, and
Bondarchuk, an hussar he knew, jolted against him and looked angrily at
Boris Drubetskoy, having left his wife in Moscow and being for the
Boris Drubetskoy, who had just arrived as a special messenger from the
Boris and Boris was to forward them to Nicholas. The letters were
Boris blushed.
Boris bowed again politely.
Boris bowed politely. Prince Vasili without acknowledging the bow turned
Boris came a lady with the colonel, then the general himself, then the
Boris came to the Rostovs' box, received their congratulations very
Boris did not finish, for at that moment Kaysarov, Kutuzov's adjutant,
Boris evidently said this to Pierre in order to be overheard by his
Boris felt that Pierre did not recognize him but did not consider it
Boris felt that henceforth his position was fully assured. He had not
Boris followed her, smiling.
Boris had not succeeded in making a wealthy match in Petersburg, so with
Boris had overheard it.
Boris had realized this the week before when the commander in chief
Boris happened to be mentioned, she spoke quite freely of that
Boris inquired what news there might be on the staff, and what, without
Boris kissed Natasha's hand and said that he was astonished at the
Boris knew nothing about the Boulogne expedition; he did not read the
Boris listened attentively to each of the speakers, awaiting his turn,
Boris lodged with another adjutant, the Polish Count Zhilinski.
Boris looked at his general inquiringly and immediately saw that he was
Boris looked attentively and kindly at her eager face, but did not
Boris made a grimace.
Boris paused in the middle of the room, looked round, brushed a little
Boris promised to fulfill her wish and was about to begin a conversation
Boris quietly left the room and went in search of Natasha. The plump
Boris remembered Natasha in a short dress, with dark eyes shining from
Boris rose to meet Rostov, but in doing so did not omit to steady and
Boris said a few words to his general, and Count Bennigsen turned to
Boris said no more, but looked inquiringly at his mother without taking
Boris smiled almost imperceptibly while listening to his mother. He
Boris smiled circumspectly, so that it might be taken as ironical or
Boris smiled, as if he understood what Prince Andrew was alluding to
Boris smiled.
Boris to tell them about his journey to Glogau and in what state he
Boris understood that this was meant for him and, closing his eyes,
Boris was among the few present at the Niemen on the day the two
Boris was excited by the thought of being so close to the higher powers
Boris was mentioned.
Boris was shown into a large hall probably formerly used for dancing,
Boris was thus the first to learn the news that the French army had
Boris with a smile.
Boris' uniform, spurs, tie, and the way his hair was brushed were all
Boris, betraying neither annoyance at the prince's brusque manner nor
Boris, grown more manly and looking fresh, rosy and self-possessed,
Boris, too, with his friend Zhilinski, came to see the Preobrazhensk
Boris, who had come to Moscow on leave a few days before, had been
Boris. He is his godson," she added, her tone suggesting that this fact
Boris. I don't remember him a bit."
Boris."
Boris." She took out her handkerchief and began to cry. "I need five
Borodino and thence turned to the left, passing an enormous number of
Borodino for more than a month had recently died in the Rostovs' house
Borodino had been a victory, he alone--who as commander in chief might
Borodino had been occupied and the bridge over the Kolocha was in the
Borodino to the left of, and at a right angle to, the highroad (that
Borodino--a plain no more advantageous as a position than any other
Borodino.
Borodino. They were accompanied by a doctor, Prince Andrew's valet, his
Borovsk said he had seen an immense army entering the town. Some
Bosse. Have him fetched."
Both Marya Dmitrievna and Sonya were amazed when they saw how Natasha
Both avoided any allusion to the future. To admit the possibility of
Both fell silent, peering out through the darkness at the sound of
Both laughed.
Both letters were written from Troitsa. The other, from the countess,
Both the countess and Sonya understood that, naturally, neither Moscow
Both were silent.
Both were silent. There were two Germans and a Russian officer in the
Boulogne expedition.
Bourbons. Experience shows us that whatever event occurs it is always
Bourienne after a pause. "I understand that you could not, and cannot,
Bourienne also shared them and even Princess Mary felt herself
Bourienne and could not bear to see her, thereby showing how unjust were
Bourienne aroused her. She raised her eyes, and two steps away saw
Bourienne at once began crying again and kissed that hand, speaking of
Bourienne had long been waiting for a Russian prince who, able to
Bourienne rapidly, in her pleasant mellow tones and with guttural r's.
Bourienne says he has been asking about you...."
Bourienne was often touched to tears as in imagination she told this
Bourienne were already awaiting him together with his architect, who
Bourienne who had not yet seen her.
Bourienne with a radiant face that said: "I know nothing, I am the same
Bourienne's hand and, drawing her to him, embraced her affectionately.
Bourienne's head at the very time she was talking to Anatole about
Bourienne, how I shall arrange it," she added, smiling with a foretaste
Bourienne, unfolding her white napkin with her rosy fingers. "His
Bourienne, whom she had of late kept at a distance, but who yet was
Bourienne--I shall have to get rid of her. And how is it she has not
Bourienne.
Bourienne. "Because, you will agree, chere Marie, to fall into the hands
Bourienne. I embrace you as I love you.
Bourienne. Princess Mary felt his look with a painfully joyous emotion.
Bourienne. Though in the new reign he was free to return to the
Bourienne. When she entered with her heavy step, treading on her heels,
Braunau had halted half a mile from the town, waiting to be inspected
Breathless with joy, Pierre ran to the little girl and was going to take
Brotherhood of Freemasons under my sponsorship?"
Brothers and to the Grand Master. Great Architect of Nature, help me to
Bucharest--where Kutuzov had been living for two months, passing his
Buckle, despite their seeming disagreements and the apparent novelty of
Buonaparte has turned all their heads; they all think of how he rose
Buonaparte sitting on a throne and granting the petitions of the
Buonaparte was a great tactician? Here, he says the same thing."
Buonaparte, who only at Bald Hills in the whole world, it seems, is not
Buonaparte. He is said to be fleeing in great disorder. Mind you gallop
Buonapartes. But I warn you, if you don't tell me that this means war,
Burning lips were pressed to hers, and at the same instant she felt
But Anna Mikhaylovna did not obey him.
But Anna Mikhaylovna went forward a step or two to keep her hold on the
But Boris again interrupted him.
But Boris noticed that he was preparing to make fun of Berg, and
But Boris spoke distinctly, clearly, and dryly, looking straight into
But Dolokhov did not go away; he untied the handkerchief around his
But Dolokhov restarted the conversation which had dropped and began
But Mavra Kuzminichna stood at the closed gate for some time with moist
But Miloradovich was at that moment evidently thinking of anything
But Napoleon did not let him speak. He evidently wanted to do all the
But Napoleon nodded to the traveler, and de Beausset had to mount. When
But Napoleon with his long experience of war well knew the meaning of
But Natasha looked at her as if not understanding what was said to her
But Natasha was not asleep; with pale face and fixed wide-open eyes she
But Natasha would not give in. She turned everything out and began
But Natasha, guessing her doubts, interrupted her in alarm.
But Natasha, knowing all her husband's ways and ideas, saw that he had
But Paris, Paris..."
But Pierre continued his speech without heeding her.
But Pierre thought it necessary to ask: "How is..." and hesitated, not
But Pierre was not listening to the woman. He had for some seconds been
But Rostov bowed himself away from the doctor and asked the assistant to
But Rostov did not listen to him.
But Rostov did not reply.
But Rostov pulled away his arm and, with as much anger as though Denisov
But Sonya, who had gone to look for the papers in the anteroom, had
But Sonya? And his plighted word? That was why Rostov grew angry when he
But a few days before they left Moscow, moved and excited by all that
But a fortnight after his departure, to the surprise of those around
But after Bennigsen's departure, the Grand Duke Tsarevich Constantine
But after a while, just as a jury comes out of its room, the bigwigs
But after the exclamation of surprise that had escaped from Vereshchagin
But after the night in Mytishchi when, half delirious, he had seen her
But afterwards, when she saw her father and especially little Koko
But all that evening and next day reports came in one after another
But all the same that night Natasha, now agitated and now frightened,
But all these hints at what happened, both from the French side and the
But all was still quiet. A damp dull autumn morning was just dawning. On
But although Alpatych, frightened at his own temerity in avoiding the
But apparently the coachman's sympathy was not enough for Peter, and he
But as a youth in love trembles, is unnerved, and dares not utter the
But as if this angered him, he bent his head quite low and muttered:
But as it is in no way proved that the aim of humanity does consist in
But as she passed the sitting room she noticed two couples sitting,
But as soon as the man had left the room Pierre took up his hat which
But at noon the adjutant of the regiment came into Rostov's and
But at that instant a tall Austrian general in a greatcoat, with the
But at that moment Berg came to Pierre and began insisting that he
But at that moment Denisov, no more intimidated by his superiors than by
But at that moment Princess Mary said, "Natasha!" And with difficulty,
But at that moment an adjutant entered and reported something to Davout.
But at the instant he died, Prince Andrew remembered that he was asleep,
But at the moment when he imagined himself calmed by such reflections,
But at the same moment an expression of warm gratitude on the officer's
But before Pierre could decide what answer he would send, the countess
But before Prince Vasili had finished his playful speech, Pierre,
But before he had finished reading, a stentorian major-domo announced
But before he had finished speaking, Prince Andrew, feeling tears of
But before he reached them Pierre stopped beside a very handsome, dark
But before the whip could reply, the hare, scenting the frost coming
But before the words were well out of his mouth, his cap flew off and a
But behind the veil of smoke the sun was still high, and in front and
But besides the fact that cutting off Napoleon with his army would have
But besides this, even if, admitting the remaining minimum of freedom to
But besides this, since the exhaustion and enormous diminution of the
But by the time this letter, which proved that the real relation of
But dazed by the force of the movement, it was long before people
But despite this, thanks to his regiment, Prince Andrew had something to
But either from fatigue or want of sleep he was ill-disposed for work
But enough of gossip. I am at the end of my second sheet of paper,
But even admitting as correct all the cunningly devised arguments with
But even as he spoke he began to doubt whether this was the corporal
But even if we assume that fifty years ago Alexander I was mistaken in
But even if--imagining a man quite exempt from all influences, examining
But for all that Willarski found it pleasanter now than it had been
But hard as they all worked till quite late that night, they could not
But hardly had the princess looked at Natasha's face before she realized
But haste was becoming imperative. Cannon and musketry, mingling
But having caught himself saying too much about the flints, he was now
But he died!" thought Pierre. "Yes, he died, and I did not know he was
But he had not time to realize that the colonel had been killed, that
But he immediately recalled his promise to Prince Andrew not to go
But he saw nothing. Above him there was now nothing but the sky--the
But he scowled at her angrily though also with suffering in his eyes,
But he sent an adjutant to take the news round the army.
But her voice was drowned by the voices of the crowd.
But how did that old man, alone, in opposition to the general opinion,
But however indubitable that conclusion and the officer's conviction
But if the count, getting more and more into the swing of it, charmed
But if you want to ride round the position, come along with us. We are
But in January Savelich came from Moscow and gave him an account of the
But in spite of that she seemed to be disillusioned about everything and
But in that case the question arises whether all the activity of the
But in that case, if the force that moves nations lies not in the
But instead of all that--here he was, the wealthy husband of an
But it then occurred to him for the first time that he certainly could
But just as the force of gravitation, incomprehensible in itself but
But just as the subject of every science is the manifestation of this
But learning just as certainly that his will is subject to laws, he does
But let us assume that what is called science can harmonize all
But mind you come to dinner or I shall be offended, ma chere! On
But modern history cannot give that reply. Science does not admit the
But much as all the rest laughed, talked, and joked, much as they
But never had she felt so grieved for him or so much afraid of losing
But next day no news arrived from the army and the public mood grew
But no, he could not imagine that. He felt awed, and no clear picture
But not only was it impossible to make out what was happening from where
But not to speak of the fact that nothing prevented him from advancing
But not to speak of the intrinsic quality of histories of this kind
But noticing the grieved expression on Princess Mary's face she guessed
But on Tuesday evening, having come to Helene's splendid salon, Boris
But on glancing at Rostov's face Ilyin stopped short. He saw that his
But pure and complete sorrow is as impossible as pure and complete joy.
But putting national vanity entirely aside one feels that such a
But repressed vexation at his son's poor-spirited behavior found
But scarcely had Pierre uttered these words before he was attacked from
But she could not pacify herself with these reflections; a feeling akin
But she remembered too how he had changed of late toward Mademoiselle
But she still hoped, and asked, in words she herself did not trust:
But strange to say, all these measures, efforts, and plans--which were
But such undercurrents still existed among the people and gathered new
But suddenly Helene, who was getting bored, said with one of her
But that is all the same! 'It is not I but the hand of Providence that
But that man, so heedless of his words, did not once during the whole
But that's nonsense, the chief thing is not to forget the important
But the Emperor and Balashev passed out into the illuminated garden
But the Governor did not finish: a dusty perspiring officer ran into the
But the adjutant turned his horse about and rode on.
But the attention of the crowd--officials, burghers, shopkeepers,
But the baggage trains stretched out so that the last of Beauharnais'
But the coachman could not stop, for from the Meshchanski Street came
But the convoyman took no notice of the word "general" and shouted at
But the count had already recovered from his excitement.
But the countess did not want the question put like that: she did not
But the countess pushed her daughter away and went up to her husband.
But the countess would not agree to his going; he had had a bad leg all
But the doctor interrupted him and moved toward his gig.
But the farther he went and the more his attention was diverted by the
But the first plunderers were followed by a second and a third
But the guns remained loaded, the loopholes in blockhouses and
But the happy day came, and on that memorable Sunday, when, dressed in
But the men in the battery seemed not to notice this, and merry voices
But the mind of man not only refuses to believe this explanation, but
But the moment the door opened one feeling alone appeared on all
But the most amazing example of the ineffectiveness of the orders given
But the point is that the count was much annoyed. 'How could you have
But the princess did not listen to him.
But the princess, if she did not again thank him in words, thanked
But the rams need only cease to suppose that all that happens to them
But the roll of the drums did not make the looting soldiers run in the
But the smile did not enhance Vera's beauty as smiles generally do;
But the smooth sea again suddenly becomes disturbed. The diplomatists
But the staff officer did not finish what he wanted to say. A cannon
But the swords were drawn back from him and he was at once blindfolded
But the talk in every group was chiefly about the Emperor Alexander. His
But the word always seemed to her to imply: "Yes, I am angry but I won't
But their eyes met and said thou, and exchanged tender kisses. Her looks
But then, in 1812, the French gain a victory near Moscow. Moscow is
But there was nothing to come. There was no joy in life, yet life was
But these words came like a piteous, despairing cry and an entreaty for
But they did not cut off or overthrow anybody and the French army,
But they had still to call at the Taurida Gardens.
But they had to avoid carrying the man upstairs, and so they took him
But this happiness on one side of her spiritual nature did not prevent
But this lasted only a moment. He suddenly frowned, as if blaming
But this sort of thing is the very devil, with them shooting at you like
But those glances expressed something more: they said that she had
But those tears were pleasant to them both.
But though Napoleon knew that de Beausset had to say something of this
But though he firmly believed himself to be King of Naples and pitied
But though they all realized that it was necessary to get away, there
But though toward the end of the battle the men felt all the horror of
But to his surprise Willarski soon noticed that Pierre had lagged much
But to the generals, especially the foreign ones in the Russian army,
But we need only penetrate to the essence of any historic event--which
But we'll speak of that later on," she added, glancing at Sonya with a
But what is chance? What is genius?
But what is the matter with you, Mary?" he suddenly asked.
But when Katie brought the required dress, Princess Mary remained
But when Volkonski said, with a frown, that it was in the Emperor's name
But when events assumed their true historical character, when expressing
But when he came across a man of position his instinct immediately told
But when he mentioned the Rostovs, Princess Mary's face expressed still
But when on Sunday after church the footman announced in the drawing
But when the guard was relieved next morning, Pierre felt that for the
But when they had convinced themselves that this man in the white hat
But while Nicholas was considering these questions and still could reach
But while himself remaining, he gave instructions for the departure of
But why did they not execute those maneuvers? And why if they were
But without finishing what she was saying, Princess Mary burst into
But, Nataly, you know my love for my son: I would do anything for his
But, as he had to say something, he began by asking her whether she was
But, just because the assistant evidently did not want him to go in,
Buxhowden is commander in chief by seniority, but General Bennigsen does
By "what was due from the Ryazan estate" Prince Vasili meant several
By Agrafena Ivanovna's advice Natasha prepared herself not in their
By Leo Tolstoy/Tolstoi
By a strange coincidence, this task, which turned out to be a most
By adopting smaller and smaller elements of motion we only approach a
By association of ideas, Pierre was at once carried back to the day
By discarding a claim to knowledge of the ultimate purpose, we shall
By his age he should have belonged to the younger men, but by his wealth
By intrigues, violence, exile, and executions, French society--I mean
By refuting these new laws the former view of history might have been
By ten o'clock in the morning of the second of September, only the rear
By ten o'clock some twenty men had already been carried away from the
By the beginning of August Helene's affairs were clearly defined and
By the dim light, to which Pierre had already become accustomed, he
By the light of the sparks Bolkhovitinov saw Shcherbinin's youthful face
By the side of the path, on the dusty dry grass, all sorts of household
By the time the soldiers had dragged the wattle fence to its place
By the time they got near Mozhaysk and began ascending the steep hill
By the time they reached Bogucharovo, Dessalles and the little prince
By the wall of China-Town a smaller group of people were gathered round
By this time they were all approaching Tushin's battery, and a ball
CHAPTER I
CHAPTER I
CHAPTER I
CHAPTER I
CHAPTER I
CHAPTER I
CHAPTER I
CHAPTER I
CHAPTER I
CHAPTER I
CHAPTER I
CHAPTER I
CHAPTER I
CHAPTER I
CHAPTER I
CHAPTER I
CHAPTER I
CHAPTER II
CHAPTER II
CHAPTER II
CHAPTER II
CHAPTER II
CHAPTER II
CHAPTER II
CHAPTER II
CHAPTER II
CHAPTER II
CHAPTER II
CHAPTER II
CHAPTER II
CHAPTER II
CHAPTER II
CHAPTER II
CHAPTER II
CHAPTER III
CHAPTER III
CHAPTER III
CHAPTER III
CHAPTER III
CHAPTER III
CHAPTER III
CHAPTER III
CHAPTER III
CHAPTER III
CHAPTER III
CHAPTER III
CHAPTER III
CHAPTER III
CHAPTER III
CHAPTER III
CHAPTER III
CHAPTER IV
CHAPTER IV
CHAPTER IV
CHAPTER IV
CHAPTER IV
CHAPTER IV
CHAPTER IV
CHAPTER IV
CHAPTER IV
CHAPTER IV
CHAPTER IV
CHAPTER IV
CHAPTER IV
CHAPTER IV
CHAPTER IV
CHAPTER IV
CHAPTER IV
CHAPTER IX
CHAPTER IX
CHAPTER IX
CHAPTER IX
CHAPTER IX
CHAPTER IX
CHAPTER IX
CHAPTER IX
CHAPTER IX
CHAPTER IX
CHAPTER IX
CHAPTER IX
CHAPTER IX
CHAPTER IX
CHAPTER IX
CHAPTER IX
CHAPTER IX
CHAPTER V
CHAPTER V
CHAPTER V
CHAPTER V
CHAPTER V
CHAPTER V
CHAPTER V
CHAPTER V
CHAPTER V
CHAPTER V
CHAPTER V
CHAPTER V
CHAPTER V
CHAPTER V
CHAPTER V
CHAPTER V
CHAPTER V
CHAPTER VI
CHAPTER VI
CHAPTER VI
CHAPTER VI
CHAPTER VI
CHAPTER VI
CHAPTER VI
CHAPTER VI
CHAPTER VI
CHAPTER VI
CHAPTER VI
CHAPTER VI
CHAPTER VI
CHAPTER VI
CHAPTER VI
CHAPTER VI
CHAPTER VI
CHAPTER VII
CHAPTER VII
CHAPTER VII
CHAPTER VII
CHAPTER VII
CHAPTER VII
CHAPTER VII
CHAPTER VII
CHAPTER VII
CHAPTER VII
CHAPTER VII
CHAPTER VII
CHAPTER VII
CHAPTER VII
CHAPTER VII
CHAPTER VII
CHAPTER VII
CHAPTER VIII
CHAPTER VIII
CHAPTER VIII
CHAPTER VIII
CHAPTER VIII
CHAPTER VIII
CHAPTER VIII
CHAPTER VIII
CHAPTER VIII
CHAPTER VIII
CHAPTER VIII
CHAPTER VIII
CHAPTER VIII
CHAPTER VIII
CHAPTER VIII
CHAPTER VIII
CHAPTER VIII
CHAPTER X
CHAPTER X
CHAPTER X
CHAPTER X
CHAPTER X
CHAPTER X
CHAPTER X
CHAPTER X
CHAPTER X
CHAPTER X
CHAPTER X
CHAPTER X
CHAPTER X
CHAPTER X
CHAPTER X
CHAPTER X
CHAPTER X
CHAPTER XI
CHAPTER XI
CHAPTER XI
CHAPTER XI
CHAPTER XI
CHAPTER XI
CHAPTER XI
CHAPTER XI
CHAPTER XI
CHAPTER XI
CHAPTER XI
CHAPTER XI
CHAPTER XI
CHAPTER XI
CHAPTER XI
CHAPTER XI
CHAPTER XI
CHAPTER XII
CHAPTER XII
CHAPTER XII
CHAPTER XII
CHAPTER XII
CHAPTER XII
CHAPTER XII
CHAPTER XII
CHAPTER XII
CHAPTER XII
CHAPTER XII
CHAPTER XII
CHAPTER XII
CHAPTER XII
CHAPTER XII
CHAPTER XII
CHAPTER XII
CHAPTER XIII
CHAPTER XIII
CHAPTER XIII
CHAPTER XIII
CHAPTER XIII
CHAPTER XIII
CHAPTER XIII
CHAPTER XIII
CHAPTER XIII
CHAPTER XIII
CHAPTER XIII
CHAPTER XIII
CHAPTER XIII
CHAPTER XIII
CHAPTER XIII
CHAPTER XIII
CHAPTER XIV
CHAPTER XIV
CHAPTER XIV
CHAPTER XIV
CHAPTER XIV
CHAPTER XIV
CHAPTER XIV
CHAPTER XIV
CHAPTER XIV
CHAPTER XIV
CHAPTER XIV
CHAPTER XIV
CHAPTER XIV
CHAPTER XIV
CHAPTER XIV
CHAPTER XIX
CHAPTER XIX
CHAPTER XIX
CHAPTER XIX
CHAPTER XIX
CHAPTER XIX
CHAPTER XIX
CHAPTER XIX
CHAPTER XIX
CHAPTER XIX
CHAPTER XIX
CHAPTER XIX
CHAPTER XV
CHAPTER XV
CHAPTER XV
CHAPTER XV
CHAPTER XV
CHAPTER XV
CHAPTER XV
CHAPTER XV
CHAPTER XV
CHAPTER XV
CHAPTER XV
CHAPTER XV
CHAPTER XV
CHAPTER XV
CHAPTER XV
CHAPTER XVI
CHAPTER XVI
CHAPTER XVI
CHAPTER XVI
CHAPTER XVI
CHAPTER XVI
CHAPTER XVI
CHAPTER XVI
CHAPTER XVI
CHAPTER XVI
CHAPTER XVI
CHAPTER XVI
CHAPTER XVI
CHAPTER XVI
CHAPTER XVI
CHAPTER XVII
CHAPTER XVII
CHAPTER XVII
CHAPTER XVII
CHAPTER XVII
CHAPTER XVII
CHAPTER XVII
CHAPTER XVII
CHAPTER XVII
CHAPTER XVII
CHAPTER XVII
CHAPTER XVII
CHAPTER XVIII
CHAPTER XVIII
CHAPTER XVIII
CHAPTER XVIII
CHAPTER XVIII
CHAPTER XVIII
CHAPTER XVIII
CHAPTER XVIII
CHAPTER XVIII
CHAPTER XVIII
CHAPTER XVIII
CHAPTER XVIII
CHAPTER XX
CHAPTER XX
CHAPTER XX
CHAPTER XX
CHAPTER XX
CHAPTER XX
CHAPTER XX
CHAPTER XX
CHAPTER XX
CHAPTER XXI
CHAPTER XXI
CHAPTER XXI
CHAPTER XXI
CHAPTER XXI
CHAPTER XXI
CHAPTER XXI
CHAPTER XXI
CHAPTER XXII
CHAPTER XXII
CHAPTER XXII
CHAPTER XXII
CHAPTER XXII
CHAPTER XXII
CHAPTER XXII
CHAPTER XXIII
CHAPTER XXIII
CHAPTER XXIII
CHAPTER XXIII
CHAPTER XXIII
CHAPTER XXIV
CHAPTER XXIV
CHAPTER XXIV
CHAPTER XXIV
CHAPTER XXIX
CHAPTER XXIX
CHAPTER XXV
CHAPTER XXV
CHAPTER XXV
CHAPTER XXV
CHAPTER XXVI
CHAPTER XXVI
CHAPTER XXVI
CHAPTER XXVI
CHAPTER XXVII
CHAPTER XXVII
CHAPTER XXVII
CHAPTER XXVIII
CHAPTER XXVIII
CHAPTER XXVIII
CHAPTER XXX
CHAPTER XXX
CHAPTER XXXI
CHAPTER XXXI
CHAPTER XXXII
CHAPTER XXXII
CHAPTER XXXIII
CHAPTER XXXIII
CHAPTER XXXIV
CHAPTER XXXIV
CHAPTER XXXIX
CHAPTER XXXV
CHAPTER XXXVI
CHAPTER XXXVII
CHAPTER XXXVIII
Caesars, Alexanders, Luthers, or Voltaires, and not the histories
Call the quahtehmasteh," he shouted to Lavrushka.
Campan's and Dessaix's, advanced from the French right, while Murat's
Campo Formio are to be drawn up."
Can it be true? Can it be true that there can be no more playing with
Can you fancy the figure he cut?..."
Captain von Toll chanced to ride to the same spot, and seeing the
Cards and supper were over, but the visitors had not yet dispersed.
Carelessly holding in his stallion that was neighing and pawing the
Carriages kept driving away and fresh ones arriving, with red-liveried
Carts piled high with household utensils, chairs, and cupboards kept
Catherine Petrovna did actually play valses and the ecossaise, and
Catherine the Great. The same people were still sitting here in almost
Catherine's day, turning contemptuously toward Bolkonski.
Catherine's time, was sauntering with a pleasant smile among the crowd,
Catholic clergy, offer praise because on that same fourteenth of June
Catholics and had the Pope's indulgence for doing woolwork on Sundays.
Catiche," * muttered the prince, seating himself wearily on the chair
Cautiously withdrawing her breast, Natasha rocked him a little, handed
Certain destruction lay behind the French but in front there was hope.
Certains droits et privileges de la noblesse me paraissent etre des
Challenged by this question Pierre raised his head and felt a need to
Chance contrives that though he directs all his efforts to prepare an
Chance, millions of chances, give him power, and all men as if by
Channel. I think the expedition is quite feasible. If only Villeneuve
Chasseurs whom they had just passed. Prince Andrew was struck by
Chasseurs. Though he did not want to remind the Rostovs of Bolkonski,
Chasseurs.... They won't let us pass, we are left behind and have lost
Chateaubriand, and the rest--but the sum of the components, that is,
Chernyshev and Prince Andrew went out into the porch, where the Emperor,
Chernyshev was sitting at a window in the first room with a French novel
Chichagov, one of the most zealous "cutters-off" and "breakers-up," who
Chigirin talks. Pierre pondered over these broadsheets. Evidently the
Christ be with you in your great endeavor!"
Christ, holy Saint Nicholas, Frola and Lavra! Lord Jesus Christ, have
Christ, the Holy Spirit, Him!...
Christian..."
Christmas came and except for the ceremonial Mass, the solemn and
Christmas? Do you remember what I saw?"
Chubby little Dokhturov was listening attentively with eyebrows
Church property that had been stolen. Government clerks set up their
Circassian was Sonya with burnt-cork mustache and eyebrows.
Circassian. Really, how becoming it is to dear Sonya. And who is that?
Claparede and sending Friant now, the order was carried out exactly.
Claparede's, and even in obvious inconvenience and delay in stopping
Closing his eyes, he bowed a la francaise, without taking leave, and
Clouds gathered and drops of rain began to fall on the dead and wounded,
Club is closed and the police are leaving."
Club or to pay calls?" All men seemed so pitiful, so poor, in comparison
Club were also sons of the Fatherland ready to sacrifice everything
Cold shivers ran down his spine and his whole body pulsed rhythmically.
Column will march" and so on, the infantry of the belated columns,
Come, how are you?" asked Rostov.
Come."
Coming abreast of the caleche he ran beside it.
Coming out of Kutuzov's room into the waiting room with the papers in
Coming out of the hut into the damp, dark night Konovnitsyn
Coming out onto a field under the enemy's fire, this brave general went
Coming out onto the highroad the French fled with surprising energy
Coming out onto the road Dolokhov did not ride back across the open
Commentaries), and resting on his elbow, began reading it in the middle.
Commission for the Revision of the Code of Laws, Speranski told him
Compared to what preoccupied him, was it not a matter of indifference
Confessor, she insisted on an answer to the question, in how far was she
Confused and ever-increasing crowds were running back to where five
Conjectures as to Napoleon's awareness of the danger of extending his
Consciousness says: (1) I alone am, and all that exists is but me,
Consequently, it would only have been necessary for Metternich,
Consider that on our retreat we have lost by fatigue and left in the
Continually turning round to look at the rows of loaded carts that were
Continued abstention from speech, and constant avoidance of everything
Contrary to Bilibin's forecast the news he had brought was joyfully
Contrary to his habit of being late, Pierre on that day arrived at the
Contrary to the Emperor's wish Kutuzov detained the greater part of the
Contributions.
Convention, to the Directory, to Napoleon, to Alexander, to Louis XVIII,
Conversation of this kind, interesting to no one yet unavoidable,
Copenhagen--a profound intellect," and simply, "Mr. Shitov--a man of
Cossack passed by at a sharp trot.
Cossack scouts were moving. Suddenly on the road at the top of the high
Cossack with sleeves rolled up was chopping some mutton. In the room
Cossacks and hussars who had rigged up rough shelters in the glade and
Cossacks budge when once they had got booty and prisoners. None of them
Cossacks did not capture Napoleon then, what saved him was the very
Cossacks fell. Here as at Tarutino they went after plunder, leaving the
Cossacks of Denisov's party had seized and carried off into the forest
Cossacks of Dokhturov's detachment reported having sighted the French
Cossacks were crowding about a hut, busy with something. From the midst
Cossacks were galloping along the road in front of him. On the bridge
Cossacks"--he pointed to a spot in the forest beyond the village--"and I
Cossacks' shanties and of horses tethered together could be seen. Behind
Cossacks, and all who were in the camp, undressed and only just waking
Cossacks, while others ran down the hill toward the pond. Petya was
Cossacks--those rascals--see how they run! Vive l'Empereur! There he
Cossacks."
Council, at which Sergey Kuzmich Vyazmitinov, the new military governor
Councilor of State, and insisted on the young man accompanying him to
Councilor--and not merely these but a whole state constitution,
Count Arakcheev, if his nerves were not too weak."
Count Bennigsen entered hurriedly, and nodding to Bolkonski, but not
Count Bezukhov's death. She said the count had died as she would herself
Count Bezukhov's distress some fifteen times.
Count Golukhovski, who was bargaining for the horses Rostov had betted
Count Ilya Rostov had resigned the position of Marshal of the Nobility
Count Ilya Rostov smiled blandly and nodded approval.
Count Ilya Rostov, hurried and preoccupied, went about in his soft boots
Count Ilya Rostov, laughing and repeating the words, "Make way, dear
Count Kochubey did not finish. He rose, took Prince Andrew by the arm,
Count Markov? Count Markov was the only man who knew how to handle him.
Count Ostermann-Tolstoy met the returning hussars, sent for Rostov,
Count Rostopchin had only that morning returned to town from his summer
Count Rostopchin suddenly grew pale as he had done when the crowd closed
Count Rostopchin was unable to reply and, turning obediently, went in
Count Rostopchin, Valuev, and Naryshkin. Rostopchin was describing how
Count Rostopchin, who now taunted those who left Moscow and now had the
Count Rostov approved of this suggestion, appreciating its
Count Rostov at the back of the crowd was expressing approval; several
Count Rostov resumed his seat.
Count Rostov took the girls to Countess Bezukhova's. There were a good
Count Rostov's mouth watered with pleasure and he nudged Pierre, but
Count Tolstoy, who stood before him holding a silver salver on which lay
Count Wittgenstein had defeated the French, but that as many of the
Count? For I consider that..."
Countess Apraksina. Now and then they glanced at one another, hardly
Countess Bezukhova quite deserved her reputation of being a fascinating
Countess Bezukhova was present among other Russian ladies who had
Countess Mary blushed. She was afraid that what she was writing would
Countess Mary listened till he had finished, made some remark, and in
Countess Mary listened to her husband and understood all that he told
Countess Mary looked round, saw little Andrew following her, felt that
Countess Mary raised her head and tried to speak, but hastily looked
Countess Mary remained in the sitting room.
Countess Mary sat at the other end of the table. When her husband took
Countess Mary wanted to tell him that man does not live by bread alone
Countess Mary was jealous of this passion of her husband's and regretted
Countess Mary well knew that mood of his, and when she herself was in
Countess Mary, "but he forgets that we have other duties nearer to us,
Countess Mary. She knew how Nicholas disliked being waked. Then through
Countess Rostova, with her daughters and a large number of guests, was
Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
Crimean bridge and some were already debouching into the Kaluga road.
Cross to the bravest of the French Guards. It has to be done. He must
Cross.... I can't make it out at all."
Crosses he had in his pocket into the battery for the first soldiers to
Crossing a road they descended a steep incline and saw several men
Cursing his temerity, his heart sinking at the thought of finding
Curving her arms, Natasha held out her skirts as dancers do, ran back
Cyril Vladimirovich is your godfather after all, your future depends on
DAMAGE.
Daniel Terentich made no reply, and again for a long time they were all
Daniel did not answer, but winked instead.
Daniel galloped up silently, holding a naked dagger in his left hand and
Daniel whispered, "Don't! We'll gag her!" and, changing his position,
Daniel, who was standing near.
Daniel.
Danube covered with pine forests, with a mystic background of green
Dark hairs were already showing on his upper lip, and his whole face
Darling, sweetheart, come here! There, you see? I feel like sitting down
Davout brightened up at the news the adjutant brought, and began
Davout did not know that he was adjutant general to the Emperor
Davout glanced at him silently and plainly derived pleasure from the
Davout looked up and gazed intently at him. For some seconds they looked
Davout raised his head, pushed his spectacles back on his forehead,
Davout turned away. With an unexpected reverberation in his voice Pierre
Davout was not merely a French general, but a man notorious for his
Davout was to Napoleon what Arakcheev was to Alexander--though not a
Davout would have realized that he was doing wrong, but just then
Davout's troops, in whose charge were the prisoners, were crossing the
Davout, spectacles on nose, sat bent over a table at the further end of
Davout, who had looked at him in so human a way. In another moment
Davout.
De Beausset bowed gratefully at this regard for his taste for travel (of
De Beausset bowed low, with that courtly French bow which only the
De Beausset closed his eyes, bowed his head, and sighed deeply, to
De Beausset's hands meanwhile were busily engaged arranging the present
Dear Count Alexis Andreevich--(He was writing to Arakcheev but knew that
Dear and precious Friend, How terrible and frightful a thing is
Dear and precious Friend, Your letter of the 13th has given me great
December 4. Today when Andrusha (her eldest boy) woke up he did not
December, nothing was said about the war and the last battle, as
December.
Deity--the Supreme Power if you prefer the term--is manifest? If I see,
Deity.
Denisov also came back and stayed with them. The first half of the
Denisov and Petya rode up to him. From the spot where the peasant was
Denisov at once cheered up and, calling Petya to him, said: "Well, tell
Denisov began to laugh.
Denisov bent over her hand and she heard strange sounds she did not
Denisov came out of the watchman's hut and, having called Petya, gave
Denisov considered it dangerous to make a second attack for fear of
Denisov did not reply; he rode up to Petya, dismounted, and with
Denisov first went to the barrier and announced: "As the adve'sawies
Denisov followed her.
Denisov frowned and was about to shout some reply but stopped.
Denisov gave no answer.
Denisov glanced at Rostov.
Denisov himself intended going with the esaul and Petya to the edge of
Denisov in a bloodthirsty tone.
Denisov in a felt cloak and a sheepskin cap from which the rain ran down
Denisov in a loud and resolute voice. "I agwee that evewything here is
Denisov joined Nesvitski.
Denisov lay asleep on his bed with his head under the blanket, though it
Denisov patted him on the shoulder and began rapidly pacing the room
Denisov raised his head, coughed, and made no answer.
Denisov remained silent and did not move, but occasionally looked with
Denisov rose and began gesticulating as he explained his plan to
Denisov sat gloomily biting his mustache and listening to the
Denisov screwed up his face and pointing over his shoulder with his
Denisov seemed to have forgotten Petya's very existence. He turned to
Denisov smiled, took out of his sabretache a handkerchief that diffused
Denisov spoke contemptuously of the whole matter, but Rostov knew him
Denisov started these and Pierre was particularly agreeable and amusing
Denisov threw both pillows on the floor. The purse was not there.
Denisov touched his horse and rode down the hill. Slipping onto their
Denisov was bandaged up again and put to bed. Next day he woke calm and
Denisov was nothing compared to Dolokhov--"you must understand what a
Denisov was out of sorts both because of the rain and also from hunger
Denisov was shown to the room prepared for him, and the Rostovs all
Denisov wore a Cossack coat, had a beard, had an icon of Nicholas the
Denisov!"
Denisov's affairs, Rostov rode to Tilsit with the letter to the Emperor.
Denisov's behalf and get Denisov's petition handed in. When he and Boris
Denisov's behalf. He could not himself go to the general in attendance
Denisov's case, when hasty steps and the jingling of spurs were heard
Denisov's dugout with a grave and serious face and regretfully showed
Denisov's eyes.
Denisov's face puckered still more.
Denisov's horse swerved aside to avoid a pool in the track and bumped
Denisov's short stature not noticeable and he looked the fine fellow he
Denisov's words. "We only fooled about with the lads for fun, you know!
Denisov, Natasha, her three children, their governess, and old Michael
Denisov, Petya, and the esaul, accompanied by some Cossacks and the
Denisov, and now Moscow memories--and he again hurriedly opened his eyes
Denisov, and others like them (in his dream the category to which these
Denisov, bareheaded and with a gloomy face, walked behind some Cossacks
Denisov, frowning, took the envelope and opened it.
Denisov, gleeful and yet angry, his white teeth showing under his black
Denisov, now a general on the retired list and much dissatisfied with
Denisov, suddenly, turning purple and rushing at the man with a
Denisov, to Rostov's surprise, appeared in the drawing room with pomaded
Denisov, who had come out of the study into the dancing room with his
Denisov, who was living luxuriously because the soldiers of his squadron
Denisov.
Denisov.
Denisov.
Denisov. When they prayed for all traveling by land and sea, she
Despite Count Bezukhov's enormous wealth, since he had come into an
Despite his seniority in rank Bagration, in this contest of magnanimity,
Despite news of the capture of the fleches, Napoleon saw that this was
Despite the doctor's orders that she should not go out early in the
Despite the indifference to the affairs of the world he had expressed
Despite the uneasy glances thrown at her by Princess Mary--who wished to
Despite the weakness of age, which had become particularly noticeable
Despite this destitution, the soldiers and officers went on living just
Dessalles dropped his eyes.
Dessalles looked in amazement at the prince, who was talking of the
Dessalles with whom she constantly conversed was passionately interested
Dessalles' voice was heard outside the door asking whether little
Dessalles, having asked to see Princess Mary, told her that, as the
Dessalles; the rest of the day she spent over her books, with her old
Did you know?"
Dimmler began to play; Natasha went on tiptoe noiselessly to the table,
Dimmler struck a chord and, turning to Natasha, Nicholas, and Sonya,
Dimmler, his wife, and Petya, into the old count's, and the rest of the
Dimmler, who had seated himself beside the countess, listened with
Directly Rostov entered the door he was enveloped by a smell of
Discussions and questions of that kind, which are like the question of
District, and my only way of avoiding active service is to serve under
Dmitri! Gallop off to our Moscow estate," he said to the factotum who
Dmitri, a man of good family who had been brought up in the count's
Dmitri, and several acquaintances, and the countess reread the letter
Dmitrievna asking him to come and see her on a matter of great
Dmitrievna met him and told him that Natasha had been very unwell the
Dmitrievna told him in secret, poisoned herself the night after she had
Dmitrievna was to speak again but Natasha cried out:
Dmitrievna. "My advice to you is finish your business and go back home
Dnieper at night by stealth at a wooded spot.
Do as you please! It's the government's business to look after the
Do not break your ranks on the plea of removing the wounded! Let every
Do not the very actions for which the historians praise Alexander I
Do palace revolutions--in which sometimes only two or three people take
Dolgorukov ceased to listen to him and gazed absent-mindedly not at the
Dolgorukov laughed merrily.
Dolgorukov politely and firmly pressing his hand said nothing to Boris
Dolgorukov ride past with their adjutants. All the fear before action
Dolgorukov was still insisting that the French had retreated and had
Dolgorukov, one of the warmest advocates of an attack, had just returned
Dolgorukov, the victor at Wischau, was sent with Savary to negotiate
Dolgorukov; I have to go there anyhow and I have already spoken to him
Dolokhov and his eyes dropped, the something terrible and monstrous that
Dolokhov and was about to ride away, but Petya seized hold of him.
Dolokhov banged down the lid of his desk and turned to Anatole with an
Dolokhov began laughing.
Dolokhov began to deal seriously. Oh, how Rostov detested at that moment
Dolokhov climbed carefully and slowly through the window and lowered his
Dolokhov cut him short, as if to remind him that it was not for him to
Dolokhov did not answer the captain; he had been drawn into a hot
Dolokhov had composed for Anatole, and as she read it she found in it an
Dolokhov himself during his convalescence spoke to Rostov in a way no
Dolokhov lived with him and had placed himself on such a footing that
Dolokhov looked at Pierre with clear, mirthful, cruel eyes, and that
Dolokhov looked round but did not say anything, nor did the mocking
Dolokhov looked sorrowfully at him. Denisov, Rostov, and Nesvitski
Dolokhov made no reply.
Dolokhov might have as many more, but the disparity of numbers did not
Dolokhov often dined at the Rostovs', never missed a performance at
Dolokhov or answering him. The footman, who was distributing leaflets
Dolokhov paused.
Dolokhov put away the money, called a footman whom he ordered to bring
Dolokhov reined in his horse and advanced at a walk.
Dolokhov remarked that the Cossacks were a danger only to stragglers
Dolokhov replied that they were not hungry and must push on farther that
Dolokhov said that he and his companion were trying to overtake their
Dolokhov sitting in the snow with a forced smile and perhaps dying,
Dolokhov slowly straightened his bent knee, looking straight with his
Dolokhov smiled contemptuously and condescendingly when Anatole had gone
Dolokhov smiled. "Don't trouble. If I want anything, I won't beg--I'll
Dolokhov stayed by the gate. Anatole followed the maid into the
Dolokhov stood at the gate of the ruined house, letting a crowd
Dolokhov stood frowning and did not speak. Pierre jumped upon the window
Dolokhov turned round and, again holding on with both hands, arranged
Dolokhov was holding the Englishman's hand and clearly and distinctly
Dolokhov was of medium height, with curly hair and light-blue eyes. He
Dolokhov whistled. The whistle was answered, and a maidservant ran out.
Dolokhov who gently switched his boots with his whip and watched them
Dolokhov who was in the midst of the crowd forced his way to the edge of
Dolokhov with a cold smile and a gleam in his handsome insolent eyes
Dolokhov's and Petya's steps as they advanced to the fire leading their
Dolokhov's angry cry.
Dolokhov's appearance amazed Petya by its simplicity.
Dolokhov's clear, cold glance met Rostov as soon as he entered the door,
Dolokhov's help.
Dolokhov's home: on the third day he received a note from him:
Dolokhov's horse, touched it with his hand, and explained simply and in
Dolokhov's hurried steps, and his figure came in view through the smoke.
Dolokhov's living at their house, and how cynically Dolokhov had praised
Dolokhov's offer," he said, articulating his friend's name with
Dolokhov's proposal and Iogel's ball, seemed to have grown thicker
Dolokhov's reply.
Dolokhov's words into English. A thin young lad, an hussar of the Life
Dolokhov, "and as for him, I won't let him go on any account."
Dolokhov, Denisov, and Rostov were now sitting opposite Pierre and
Dolokhov, after Anatole entered, had remained at the wicket gate and was
Dolokhov, and words of honor?... All nonsense! One might kill and rob
Dolokhov, the bottle of rum still in his hand, jumped onto the window
Dolokhov, who had already changed into a soldier's gray greatcoat, did
Dolokhov, who had reappeared that year in Moscow after his exile and
Dolokhov, who needed Anatole Kuragin's name, position, and connections
Dolokhov, whose acquaintance he had lately made and highly valued. The
Dolokhov, without answering, took the cloak, threw it over Matrena, and
Dolokhov--now an officer--wounded in the arm, and on foot, with the
Dolokhov.
Dolokhov.
Dolokhov.
Dolokhov. If he can, so can I!"
Dolokhov. Suddenly a cannon ball hissed so low above the crowd that
Don't I feel in my soul that I am part of this vast harmonious whole?
Don't I feel that I form one link, one step, between the lower and
Don't I know that at the rate we are living our means won't last long?
Don't judge by me: sleeves nowadays are this size! The other day young
Don't let me set eyes on you; beg her pardon!"
Don. *
Donning his court uniform, M. de Beausset ordered a box he had
Dorokhov's detachment, the two small guerrilla detachments of Figner and
Dorokhov's suggestion. Kutuzov did not consider any offensive necessary.
Drawn on by the movement of his troops Napoleon rode with them as far as
Dreadful as the countess imagined it would be should Prince Andrew
Drissa fortifications with the Emperor and had pointed out to him that
Drissa, Prince Andrew visited Bald Hills which was directly on his way,
Dron came and confirmed Dunyasha's words; the peasants had come by the
Dron got up and was about to say something, but Alpatych interrupted
Dron looked intently at the princess while she was speaking.
Dron made no answer but sighed deeply.
Dron on the contrary retired to the rear and the crowd drew closer
Dron on the day of the prince's funeral and told him to have twelve
Dron only sighed in reply.
Dron paused. He looked askance at Princess Mary and said: "There are no
Dron replied that the horses of these peasants were away carting.
Dron suddenly fell on his knees.
Dron was disconcerted, glanced furtively at Alpatych and again lowered
Dron was one of those physically and mentally vigorous peasants who grow
Dron, whom the old prince called by the diminutive "Dronushka."
Dron--"and so they took my Vanka to be shaved for a soldier! But we all
Dron.
Dron.) Princess Mary raised herself on the sofa on which she had been
Drooping in spirit and closing their eyes before the menacing cloud of
Drubetskaya, who as a member of the household was also seated in the
Drubetskaya. Rostov, the father, is Ilya, and his son is Nicholas. I
Drubetskoy, is also very attentive to her. They say she has millions. Oh
Drubetskoy, who had already achieved great success in the service, was
Drubetskoy. Au revoir!" exclaimed Prince Andrew, and with a bow to them
Duchenois, Potier, the Sorbonne, the boulevards," and noticing that
Duke Constantine Pavlovich, who commanded the Guards. The Rostovs
Duke was wronged, thousands of men from the other side of Europe killed
Duke's orders the men had marched all the way in step (a practice on
Dunyasha had left the room had already passed into yet another happier
Dunyasha had prepared beforehand.
Dunyasha noticed her smiling as she looked out of the carriage window.
Dunyasha's words about Peter Ilynich and a misfortune, but did not grasp
Dunyasha, the nurse, and Michael Ivanovich following her.
Dunyasha...."
During Rostov's short stay in Moscow, before rejoining the army, he did
During all these discussions Pfuel and his interpreter, Wolzogen
During balls given at the house Pierre, who did not know how to dance,
During his service, chiefly as an adjutant, Prince Andrew had seen the
During his stay at Bald Hills all the family dined together, but they
During one of these moments of awkward silence when Anatole's prominent
During one of these pauses Kutuzov heaved a deep sigh as if preparing to
During that fortnight of anxiety Natasha resorted to the baby for
During that stay in Petersburg, Boris became an intimate in the
During that twenty-year period an immense number of fields were left
During that year after his son's departure, Prince Nicholas Bolkonski's
During the cannonade Prince Poniatowski is to advance through the wood
During the dull day, in the course of which he was entertained by his
During the entr'acte a whiff of cold air came into Helene's box, the
During the first half of the journey--from Kremenchug to Kiev--all
During the first period of their acquaintance Bolkonski felt a
During the first weeks of his stay in Petersburg Prince Andrew felt the
During the hours of solitude, suffering, and partial delirium he
During the last days of Pierre's stay in Orel his old Masonic
During the month that the French troops were pillaging in Moscow and
During the movement of the Russian army from Tarutino to Krasnoe it
During the national war he was inactive because he was not needed. But
During the third night the countess kept very quiet for a few minutes,
During the three days preceding the occupation of Moscow the whole
During the two days that elapsed before Rostov called, Princess Mary
During the whole of that entr'acte Kuragin stood with Dolokhov in front
During the whole of that period Napoleon, who seems to us to have been
During the whole of their march from Moscow no fresh orders had been
During the whole time of his convalescence in Orel Pierre had
During the whole week she spent in this way, that feeling grew every
During the winter Prince Andrew had come to Bald Hills and had been gay,
During their long conversation on Wednesday evening, Speranski more than
During this act every time Natasha looked toward the stalls she saw
During this difficult journey Mademoiselle Bourienne, Dessalles, and
During this halt the escort treated the prisoners even worse than they
During this transfer he felt a little stronger and was able to look
Duroc said that Napoleon would receive the Russian general before going
Dusk had fallen, and the roar of guns died away. Pierre lay leaning on
Each dog knew its master and its call. Each man in the hunt knew his
Each historian, according to his view of what constitutes a nation's
Each instrument--now resembling a violin and now a horn, but better
Each man lives for himself, using his freedom to attain his personal
Each of them desired nothing more than to give himself up as a prisoner
Each visitor performed the ceremony of greeting this old aunt whom not
Eager, frightened, helpless glances were turned on Alpatych when he came
Early in the morning of the sixth of October Pierre went out of the
Early in the morning of the twelfth of June he came out of his tent,
Early in the year 1806 Nicholas Rostov returned home on leave. Denisov
Efim, the old coachman, who was the only one the countess trusted to
Egypt, his insane self-adulation, his boldness in crime and frankness in
Eh! Call the next one! Who else is there?" he shouted, bowing to Prince
Eh? Afraid of the 'minister' as that idiot Alpatych called him this
Eh?"
Eighth Company as a shelter from the north, propped up by musket rests,
Either this look meant nothing but that as long as one has eyes they
Either to assume (1) that the will of the people is always
Ekonomov had stopped beside a bridge, letting the retreating companies
Ekonomov.
Elder?" he cried furiously.
Emperor (we know how far commanding officers allow themselves to diverge
Emperor Alexander did not consider Kurakin's demand for his passports a
Emperor Alexander had ascended the throne, and which he had tried to put
Emperor Francis occupied his thoughts.
Emperor about him; so that in the case of his death--and he is so
Emperor and his companion at Erfurt, where he had more than once met and
Emperor and the whole army, especially while the smoke hung over
Emperor at once rode up to him, offered his services, and assisted him
Emperor begging him to recognize Pierre as legitimate, it follows that
Emperor could not answer such a question. The troops are moved
Emperor from Petersburg. Before the news of the abandonment of Moscow
Emperor growing more and more animated; "but should it ever be ordained
Emperor had only just fallen asleep and so Savary had to wait. At midday
Emperor himself rode round his bivouacs. The soldiers, on seeing him,
Emperor himself, thus cutting the ground from under the commander in
Emperor joined the army to encourage it to defend every inch of Russian
Emperor not everyone could understand, and with his whole soul he shared
Emperor noticed her and honored her with a dance.
Emperor placed on Moscow and especially on its illustrious nobility,
Emperor quickly, his face suddenly flushing.
Emperor said that he was receiving from all sides declarations of
Emperor sees with regret that the picked soldiers appointed to guard his
Emperor turned from him, took a couple of steps, stopped, came back, and
Emperor was invited to act as hostess. Count Bennigsen, being a
Emperor was with the first army, but not as commander in chief. In the
Emperor without any definite appointments: Arakcheev, the ex-Minister
Emperor would give another division.
Emperor's arrival, lay several killed and wounded soldiers whom there
Emperor's being expected to arrive next day--all aroused with fresh
Emperor's commands on the field of Austerlitz seven years before settled
Emperor's eyes met Rostov's and rested on them for not more than two
Emperor's feet on his entering the ballroom, the Emperor made a wry face
Emperor's horse, and the faint creak of a footstep Rostov knew at once
Emperor's house.
Emperor's letter indicated to him the very position he had already
Emperor's severity regarding duels at that time, neither the principals
Emperor's suite. One officer told Rostov that he had seen someone from
Emperor's voice.
Emperor, about the remarks he had heard at court concerning the Krems
Emperor, and lastly and chiefly Pfuel was there because he had drawn up
Emperor, angrily twitching his brows and raising his hoarse voice, and
Emperor, but to apply to the commander of the corps.... But in general,
Emperor, kings, and dukes--whose capture would have been in the highest
Emperor, liked and respected by Alexander. Then why those severed
Emperor, though he met him twice, did not favor him with a single word.
Emperor, would stubbornly insist on the correctness or falsity of some
Emperor," said Rostov, and was about to spur his horse.
Emperor,' as they say at official dinners," said he, "but the health of
Emperor--and but one fear--to fail to please him. The result of
Emperor.
Emperor.
Emperor.
Emperor. The Emperor Francis, a rosy, long faced young man, sat very
Emperor?"
Emperor?) Natasha... take my sabretache..."--"Keep to the right, your
Emperors met. He saw the raft, decorated with monograms, saw Napoleon
Emperors were staying. In a square he saw tables being set up and
Emperors were to be present at that banquet.
Emperors with a salute. His whole appearance and manner were suddenly
Emperors' presence were eager for action. The strategic position where
Emperors' suite were the picked young orderly officers of the Guard and
Emperors. Upon them the undivided, tensely passionate attention of that
Empewah? Ah we to take Smolensk as our patte'n? If the noble awistocwacy
Empire; my dictatorship would have been finished, and his constitutional
Empress Marya Fedorovna. Pierre felt flattered by this. Anna Pavlovna
Empress' Field, not understanding the significance of the firing, nor
Empress' chamberlain invited him to see Her Majesty. The archduchess
Empress. In Helene's circle the war in general was regarded as a series
End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of War and Peace, by Leo Tolstoy
England, Switzerland and Italy. "I must use my freedom while I feel so
England, and so on. History shows us that these justifications of the
English Club, sprees with Denisov, and visits to a certain house--that
Englishman always knows what he should do and knows that all he does as
Entering the house, Prince Andrew saw Nesvitski and another adjutant
Ermolov came forward with a frown on his face and, hearing what the
Ermolov had weason to ask to be pwomoted to be a German! Now p'waps
Ermolov received fresh appointments. Everyone spoke loudly of the field
Ermolov screwed up his eyes and smiled faintly on hearing these words.
Ermolov's quarters.
Ermolov, Miloradovich, Platov, and others in proximity to the French
Ermolov.
Ermolov. "It was a trick. It was done on purpose to get Konovnitsyn into
Esaul Lovayski the Third was a tall man as straight as an arrow,
Eternal and Unfathomable, whose presence above the dying man was now so
Europe to allow to be destroyed. Yes, that is what will happen to you.
Europe would in this way soon have been, in fact, but one people, and
Europe, led them to the goal.
Europe, or a certain kind of European culture called "progress" appear
Europe.
Europe. The strength of the justification of the man who stands at the
European sovereigns a malicious conspiracy, the sole object of which was
Even before he gave that order the thing he did not desire, and for
Even if Pierre were not a Frenchman, having once received that loftiest
Even in the best, most friendly and simplest relations of life, praise
Even people who had formerly been spiteful toward him and evidently
Even philanthropy did not have the desired effect. The genuine as
Even those, fond of intellectual talk and of expressing their feelings,
Even to Natasha herself it was pleasant to see that so many sacrifices
Evening passed, night came, and the feeling of suspense and softening of
Ever since that leave of absence had expired, more than a fortnight
Every Russian looking at Moscow feels her to be a mother; every
Every Russian might have predicted it, not by reasoning but by the
Every act of theirs, which appears to them an act of their own will, is
Every army is composed of lower grades of the service--the rank and
Every detail of the interview was communicated to the Russian monarch,
Every house in Mozhaysk had soldiers quartered in it, and at the hostel
Every muscle of Telyanin's pale, terrified face began to quiver, his
Every ten seconds a cannon ball flew compressing the air around, or
Every violent reform deserves censure, for it quite fails to remedy
Everybody followed his example and they looked at one another in
Everybody laughed a great deal. At the head of the table, where the
Everybody laughed, and Hippolyte louder than anyone. He was evidently
Everyone again looked toward the door, which creaked as the second
Everyone in the house realized for whose sake Prince Andrew came, and
Everyone moved back, and the Emperor came smiling out of the drawing
Everyone understands that this illogical reply is an irrefutable
Everyone waited, so emphatically and eagerly did he demand their
Everyone was pleased to see Pierre, everyone wished to meet him, and
Everything essential had already been done; feet, hands, necks, and
Everything from the table napkins to the silver, china, and glass bore
Everything had been admirably thought out as is usual in dispositions,
Everything had been eaten up and the inhabitants had all fled--if any
Everything in haste, but more haste, less speed. Kamenski would have
Everything not connected with the execution of the prince's orders did
Everything seemed so futile and insignificant in comparison with the
Everything was assumed to be possible for Napoleon, they expected him
Everything was similar: the ladies' subtle talk, the cards, the general
Everything within and around him seemed confused, senseless, and
Everything: a carriage passing rapidly in the street, a summons to
Everything: her face, walk, look, and voice, was suddenly altered.
Everywhere Kutuzov retreated, but the enemy without waiting for his
Everywhere in Mozhaysk and beyond it, troops were stationed or on the
Everywhere on the bank, on the dam, and in the pond, there was healthy,
Everywhere preparations were made not for ceremonious welcomes (which
Evidently Natasha needed to tell that painful yet joyful tale.
Evidently Speranski liked to rest after his labors and find amusement
Evidently he had wanted to talk. "And why didn't he call me? Why didn't
Evidently it has to be so," said he to himself, and hastily undressing
Evidently only what took place within his own mind interested him.
Evidently the explanations furnished by these historians being mutually
Evidently the prince understood her, and also understood, as he had
Examining only those expressions of the will of historical persons
Excellency Prince Vasili Kuragin and his son, I understand?" she said
Excited and irritated by these thoughts Prince Andrew went toward his
Excuse me, Vicomte--I must tell it in Russian or the point will be
Expecting the enemy from behind and not in front, the French separated
Exploding at the word intriguer, Nicholas, raising his voice, told
Eykhen, the officer of the general staff whom he had summoned, appeared,
FIRST EPILOGUE: 1813 - 20
Fabvier's account, as if he had not expected that matters could go
Fabvier, not entering the tent, remained at the entrance talking to some
Facing him lay a field of winter rye, there his own huntsman stood alone
Factories because he was comfortable there, that at Krasnoe he checked
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
Farther and farther he rode away, stopping at other regiments, till at
Faster still the two troykas flew side by side, and faster moved the
Father, Father! Yes, I will do something with which even he would be
Fatherland. But this shall be our last separation. Believe me, directly
Fedorovna herself: a savor of juiciness, cleanliness, whiteness, and
Feel in your pockets."
Ferapontov came out after her, but on seeing Alpatych adjusted his
Ferapontov's open shop, talking loudly and filling their bags and
Ferapontov's wife and children were also sitting in a cart waiting till
Ferapontov. "What has been decided?"
Field, to a large white house with an immense garden not far from the
Fili was impossible, but imbued with Russian patriotism and the love
Finally, the latest episode in Poland still fresh in the captain's
Finally, to the fourth category also a great many Brothers belonged,
Finding himself in the company of Napoleon, whose identity he had easily
Fires were lighted and the talk became more audible. Captain Tushin,
Firmly resolved, after putting his affairs in order in the regiment,
First Class.
First Degree, and a dinner had been arranged for the evening, given by
First he spun her round, holding her now with his left, now with his
First the man in the tight trousers sang alone, then she sang, then they
Five minutes later Daniel and Uvarka were standing in Nicholas' big
Five minutes later Ilyin, splashing through the mud, came running back
Five minutes later Princess Mary from her room heard something heavy
Five minutes later no one remained in the street. The cook, with her
Five minutes later, Denisov came into the hut, climbed with muddy boots
Fleeing from Moscow the soldiers took with them everything they had
Flourishing his arms in despair the count left the room without
Foka, the butler, was the most ill-tempered person in the house. Natasha
Following Rostopchin's example the others also rose.
Following the superintendent of police and talking loudly the crowd went
Following this letter one of the Masonic Brothers whom Pierre respected
For Boris, Julie played most doleful nocturnes on her harp. Boris read
For Moscow society Pierre was the nicest, kindest, most intellectual,
For Russian historians, strange and terrible to say, Napoleon--that most
For a Frenchman that deduction was indubitable. Only a Frenchman could
For a long time Natasha listened attentively to the sounds that reached
For a long time Pierre could not understand, but when he did, he jumped
For a long time he could not understand what was happening to him. All
For a long time he could not utter a word, so that the Rhetor had to
For a long time that night Princess Mary sat by the open window of her
For a moment he dozed, but in that short interval innumerable things
For a moment the crowd stood still, but then it made another rush
For a reply to these questions the common sense of mankind turns to the
For a while the crowd was less dense, but suddenly all heads were bared,
For about three minutes all were silent.
For additional contact information:
For an order to be certainly executed, it is necessary that a man should
For common action people always unite in certain combinations, in which
For him it was no new conviction that his presence in any part of
For history, lines exist of the movement of human wills, one end
For instance, Pierre's return was a joyful and important event and they
For military science to say this is like defining momentum in mechanics
For more than a week preparations were being made, rough drafts of
For people accustomed to think that plans of campaign and battles are
For reasons known or unknown to us the French began to drown and kill
For several seconds while the young man was taking his place on the step
For sole reply Daniel gave him a shy, childlike, meek, and amiable
For some days the weather had been calm and clear with slight frosts in
For some seconds they gazed with frightened eyes at one another's
For some thirty years Bogucharovo had been managed by the village Elder,
For some time he stood in silence considering whether he should follow
For that, only very simple and easy steps were necessary: not to allow
For the French retreating along the old Smolensk road, the final
For the ancients these questions were solved by a belief in the direct
For the first time for many days Natasha wept tears of gratitude and
For the last three days Bogucharovo had lain between the two hostile
For the last two days, ever since leaving home, Pierre had been living
For the peoples of the west to be able to make their warlike movement
For the solution of the question of free will or inevitability, history
For this purpose a capable officer, Bolkhovitinov, was chosen, who
For three weeks the old prince lay stricken by paralysis in the new
For two days after that Rostov did not see Dolokhov at his own or at
For us that movement of the peoples from west to east, without
For us with the standard of good and evil given us by Christ, no human
Forgetting his intention of concealing his knowledge of French, Pierre,
Formerly I very much wanted Nicholas to marry her, but I always had
Formerly he had feared the end. He had twice experienced that terribly
Formerly in Anna Pavlovna's presence, Pierre had always felt that what
Formerly, after he had given two or three orders and uttered a
Formerly, when going into action, Rostov had felt afraid; now he had
Foundation
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.
Four days before, sentinels of the Preobrazhensk regiment had stood in
Four weeks had passed since Pierre had been taken prisoner and though
Four years before, meeting a German comrade in the stalls of a Moscow
Fourthly and chiefly it was impossible, because never since the world
Fourthly, it would have been senseless to wish to take captive the
France he ordered everybody to obey him, and they all obeyed him. Having
France so dear to his heart, died a lingering death on that rock and
France.
Francis continued to look about him and did not listen.
Francis received him standing in the middle of the room. Before the
Franz a thaler, or let him go with his Liebchen to the Prater... True,
Freedom is the thing examined. Inevitability is what examines. Freedom
Freedom not limited by anything is the essence of life, in man's
Freemasonry and not as Prince B. or Ivan Vasilevich D., whom he knew in
Freemasonry is not a religious ceremonial sect, as I thought it was:
Freemasonry is the best expression of the best, the eternal, aspects of
Freemasonry presented itself to him.
Freemasons to which he was bound by oath and which preached perpetual
Freemasons. He felt like a man who after straining his eyes to see into
French Emperor's love and habit of war coinciding with his people's
French Guards in their bearskin caps on the left.
French Revolution they guillotined one another.
French and saw Tikhon and learned that there would certainly be an
French and so on and so on.
French and the Allies, began to reign. And Napoleon, shedding tears
French and, as Denisov had witnessed from above, had been detected by
French are, Monsieur Pierre, aren't they?"
French armies into Russia.
French army retires beyond the Niemen."
French army--and sometimes shook that tree itself. By October, when
French artillery fire was directed against it, the man sent there was
French as la grande redoute, la fatale redoute, la redoute du centre,
French but all Europe--except England which does not take part in the
French by Wittgenstein, "the hero of Petropol" as he was then called in
French cap.
French colonel who had been taken prisoner by our dragoons. Our officers
French colonel, whispered respectfully: "The King of Naples!" It was,
French colony in Moscow) to remain, but ordered the venerable old
French columns and stumbled instead on Napoleon himself with sixteen
French corps, and by way of reporting their intention to Kutuzov they
French did not harm them. Alpatych also knew that on the previous day
French drummer boy. "Have you had that youngster with you long?" he
French families. He is one of the genuine emigres, the good ones. And
French forestall him at Znaim meant the exposure of his whole army to a
French go to Mexico. The King of Prussia and Bismarck issue decrees and
French governess, imbibed from the Russian air she breathed that spirit
French grenadier.
French had been retaken, but that Prince Bagration was wounded. Kutuzov
French had been routed, while others on the contrary reported that the
French had captured the fleches and the village of Semenovsk, Kutuzov,
French had given battle at Borodino, did not achieve its purpose when it
French in Spain, was much appreciated when he related it at Alexander's
French in the same tone as those that had been addressed to her, and
French infantry were firing as they ran. The hussars galloped hastily
French on the fourteenth of June, and the French, also through the
French or Russian, could not be discovered from the Shevardino Redoubt.
French overcoat.
French prisoners captured that day (there were seven thousand of them)
French quartermasters who had been sent on in advance.
French salesman from one of the Moscow shops.
French since Suvorov met them. He feared that Bonaparte's genius might
French soldiers were running past him.
French sword and pouch. "I have taken an officer prisoner. I stopped the
French threw down their arms and ran out of the bushes to meet the
French to pass him, had made a bayonet charge with two battalions and
French to suppose that here--in the center--the main Russian forces were
French to throng to the place that had formerly been Moscow. But when
French troops who are being raised in France will join us, and the peace
French were putting out the fire which the wind was spreading, and thus
French were still regarded with mingled feelings of anger, contempt,
French when they left Moscow had inevitably to perish because they
French would be destroyed. But neither the French nor the Russians made
French would take was unknown, and so the closer our troops trod on
French, German, and Latin, blamed one another, and prescribed a great
French, German, or English people, or, in its highest abstraction, the
French, after crossing the bridge at Vienna, were advancing in immense
French, and that he had exposed himself to terrible and obvious danger
French, beginning: "My dear Mamma," and ending: "Your obedient son,"
French, collecting booty, cared only for gold. Not only was the
French, do not even feel animosity toward them."
French, searching for food, killed one another, sacked their own stores,
French, so from the moment he entered the hut Petya did not take his
French, so that birds of a feather may fight together. The German,
French, there would be great hope of saving the army; to let the
French, turning to a general, "my husband is deserting me? He is going
French, would settle in this house: M. le General Rameau would occupy
French, you fool.' And what do you think? 'No,' said he, 'I have not
French," thought Princess Mary. "I will offer them monthly rations and
French--through the very gate by which he had left it four days
French--who from being foes had suddenly become friends--that had taken
French.
French.
French. A group of Cossack scouts retired down the hill at a trot. All
French; then again, like a man weary but unflinching in the fulfillment
Frenchman Langeron, Kutuzov's incapacity, and (it was whispered) the
Frenchman again and smiled. He took out an assignation ruble note and
Frenchman also stopped and took aim. Rostov closed his eyes and stooped
Frenchman for the money and went on admiring his own work. The Frenchman
Frenchman had pushed away, was sitting near the fire patting something
Frenchman in the frieze gown who meanwhile, swaying slowly from side to
Frenchman laid his hands on her head and, as she herself afterward
Frenchman stab him? He will not get away before the Frenchman remembers
Frenchman turned pale and rushed to the door.
Frenchman without looking at him. "Oh dear!" muttered Karataev and went
Frenchman's smile, pressed the hand held out to him.
Frenchman), "L'Urope ne sera jamais notre alliee sincere." *
Frenchman, in a blue overcoat, capless, and with a frowning red face,
Frenchman, the tall marauder in the frieze gown was already tearing
Frenchman. "Good-by, Fatty. We must be human, we are all mortal you
Frenchmen as they ran past him, of the lowered and smoking gun, and of
Frenchmen begin to drown one another cannot be understood without an
Frenchmen in the Russian service--could do nothing for the prisoners.
Frenchmen running toward it. Higher up stood some Russian infantry,
Frenchmen were talking over his head. Pierre did not look round again
Frenchmen, cavalrymen, and members of the staff. There was only one hut
Frenchmen, in a variety of uniforms. To the right and left of the post
Frenchmen," he said. "What nasty brutes they are! I'd have killed so
Frenchmen. Their laughter and their mutually incomprehensible remarks in
Frenchwoman at a distance. Prince Andrew's second letter, written near
Frenchwoman blushed and went away without a word. When he reached his
Frenchwoman very readily and, looking at her with a smile, talked to her
Frenchwoman. She wrote to Prince Andrew about the reception of his
Friant's division disappeared as the others had done into the smoke
Friant's division."
Friday. When he awoke on the Thursday, Savelich came to ask him about
Friedland. They said that had we held out a little longer Napoleon would
Friends and relations advised Nicholas to decline the inheritance. But
From General Wintzingerode's reports, I see that an enemy corps of ten
From Gorki, Bennigsen descended the highroad to the bridge which, when
From Moscow to Vyazma the French army of seventy-three thousand men not
From Orsha they fled farther along the road to Vilna, still playing
From Prince Shcherbatov's house the prisoners were led straight down the
From Smolensk the troops continued to retreat, followed by the enemy.
From Vienna Kutuzov wrote to his old comrade, Prince Andrew's father.
From Vyazma onwards the French army, which had till then moved in three
From above on the left, bisecting that amphitheater, wound the Smolensk
From all sides were heard the footsteps and talk of the infantry, who
From among all these parties, just at the time Prince Andrew reached
From an unfinished house on the Varvarka, the ground floor of which was
From behind this came women's laughter and whispers. Natasha, Nicholas,
From behind, where Karataev had been sitting, came the sound of a shot.
From beyond the town firing had been heard since early morning. At eight
From broken remarks about Natasha and his father, from the emotion with
From early morning strenuous activities and efforts had begun and by ten
From early morning the smart clean troops were on the move, forming up
From her feminine point of view she could see only one solution, namely,
From one open shop came the sound of blows and vituperation, and just
From that day Prince Andrew began to frequent the Rostovs' as Natasha's
From that day a tender and passionate friendship such as exists only
From that day an awakening from life came to Prince Andrew together with
From that day the eldest princess quite changed toward Pierre and began
From that time till the end of the destruction of Moscow no one of
From that time, during all the rest of the Rostovs' journey, at every
From the Shevardino Redoubt where Napoleon was standing the fleches were
From the anteroom Berg ran with smooth though impatient steps into the
From the back porch came the sound of feet descending the steps, the
From the battlefield adjutants he had sent out, and orderlies from his
From the bottom of the slope, where the parleys had taken place, came
From the bridge they had a view of endless lines of moving baggage
From the close of the year 1811 intensified arming and concentrating of
From the commander of the militia he drove to the governor. The governor
From the day his wife arrived in Moscow Pierre had been intending to go
From the day when Pierre, after leaving the Rostovs' with Natasha's
From the deafening sounds of his own guns around him, the whistle and
From the direction of Olmutz in front of them, a group was seen
From the expression of his animated face the woman saw that this man
From the fleches they rode still farther to the left, along a road
From the governor of the prison... from the superintendent of the
From the habit of fifty years all this had a physically agitating effect
From the hall of the nobility the Emperor went to that of the merchants.
From the host's room came the sounds of a child crying, the despairing
From the left, over fields and bushes, those large balls of smoke were
From the moment Pierre had recognized the appearance of the mysterious
From the moment Pierre had witnessed those terrible murders committed by
From the moment she had been told that morning of Prince Andrew's wound
From the moment they were alone and Natasha came up to him with
From the officer down to the lowest soldier they showed what seemed like
From the other side a battalion commander rode up.
From the regimental commander's, Denisov rode straight to the staff with
From the right side of his abdomen, blood was welling out making a large
From the standpoint from which the science of history now regards its
From the time he received this news to the end of the campaign all
From the time of his marriage Sonya had lived in his house. Before
From the time that Pierre began life as a family man on a footing
From the time the first person said and proved that the number of births
From the time the law of Copernicus was discovered and proved, the mere
From the twenty-eighth till the thirty-first all Moscow was in a bustle
From the very day Pierre had experienced this feeling for the first time
From the way the regimental commander saluted the commander in chief and
From this fundamental difference between the view held by history and
From time to time he went out to ask: "Hasn't she come yet?" They were
Frowning with vexation at the effort necessary to divest himself of his
Gascons indeed, so bewildered him with fine words, and he is so
Gavril to pay a sleigh driver, his kissing Sonya on the sly--he now
Gazing at the high starry sky, at the moon, at the comet, and at the
General Buxhowden who by right of seniority should be our chief. So
General Campan will move through the wood to seize the first
General Ermolov, coming up to the crowd and learning that soldiers were
General Pernetti, with thirty cannon of Campan's division and all the
General Schmidt, who was killed in the action. His horse had been
General Sorbier must be ready at the first order to advance with all the
General," he added, and rode into the yard past Prince Andrew and
Gentleman of the Bedchamber, which at that time conferred the status of
Gentlemen, let us act! Time is most precious..."
George Dandin,' that's all we have to say about it!"
Gerasim and the porter let Makar Alexeevich go, and in the now silent
Gerasim and the porter, who had followed Makar Alexeevich, stopped him
Gerasim gazed at the officer with an alarmed and inquiring look.
Gerasim had procured for him and had disinfected by steam) was on his
Gerasim looked cautiously into the study several times and saw Pierre
Gerasim opened one of the shutters and left the room on tiptoe. Pierre
Gerasim roused him from his reverie the idea occurred to him of taking
Gerasim, being a servant who in his time had seen many strange things,
Gerasim, that sallow beardless old man Pierre had seen at Torzhok five
German landlord.
German woman he had married in Poland. The doctor, whether from lack
German's self-assurance is worst of all, stronger and more
German, "das soll mein Weib werden," * and from that moment had made up
German, from the Archduke Ferdinand's letter:
German, in a dressing jacket and nightcap, was sitting on a broad bench
German, you know. He"--he indicated Petya--"is serving under him."
Germans' muddling! What stupid devils!"
Germans, and everyone was convinced that a dangerous muddle had been
Germans.
Germans."
Germany, where "shelter" is called Unterkunft and where the husbands eat
Gervais gave a long account of an official revision, remarkable for the
Glinka, the editor of the Russian Messenger, who was recognized (cries
Glory, the good of society, love of a woman, the Fatherland itself--how
Glory, which was similar to those threads but rather thicker. He and
Gobelin tapestries and Persian carpets in the house. When Natasha set
God and hate your life. There is nothing strange in that, my dear sir!"
God had mercy on us. And what was it for? Who doesn't have intrigues
God has implanted in our souls."
God ruling us can bear a loss such as hers and... yours."
God will support you: you are young, and are now, I hope, in command of
God!"--voices among the officers were heard saying.
God's hands. You may die in your bed or God may spare you in a battle,"
God's will to prove thee in the duties of marriage, be ready to fulfill
God, in the creation of the firmament, and in the miracle of Joshua the
God, the three primordial elements--sulphur, mercury, and salt--or
God," and the priest and deacon chimed in: "For to Thee under God we all
God. Formerly he had sought Him in aims he set himself. That search for
Going along the corridor, the assistant led Rostov to the officers'
Going out into the yard she paused to consider where she should go
Goliath. Preserve his army, put a bow of brass in the hands of those who
Goliath..." she whispered.
Good man!" cried he, addressing Pierre.
Good-by!"
Good-by, Princess. I wish you happiness and consolation and hope to meet
Gorki!" said Prince Andrew suddenly.
Got up at eight, read the Scriptures, then went to my duties. (By Joseph
Governor of Moscow, who had been assiduous in sending aides-de-camp to
Grabern affair, just as those who have taken part in a battle generally
Gracious me, they did rattle past! It's time I knew the Imperial horses
Granted that were they competent they might be made use of," continued
Great Catherine! As you know, I am quite indifferent to politics, but
Great and talking eagerly. As soon as they saw Pierre and his companion
Great's wars, and all he came across in the history of more recent
Grossvater. Her father asked her to come home, but she begged to remain.
Guard who, breathless with delight, galloped ahead to clear a path for
Guards charged, followed the line of reserves, going far round the place
Guards in Moscow, is it possible that the enemy's forces confronting you
Guards is like talking of what would happen if autumn became spring. It
Guards marching along the road to Borovsk. From all these reports it was
Guards' jacket, shouting something to a pale, white uniformed Austrian
Guards, that they not only did not wish to, but simply could not, be
Guards, wearing a cocked hat with its peaks front and back, with his
Guards, who had been losing that evening, climbed on the window sill,
Guards. Prince Andrew came up to him and took his hand.
Guards?" asked Napoleon sternly.
Guards?" asked Napoleon.
Guerrilla war (always successful, as history shows) directly infringes
Guided by some gift of insight, on taking up the management of the
Gulf of Bothnia to the mouths of the Danube. Catherine the Great could
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.
Gutenberg-tm License.
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
Had Napoleon not ridden out on the evening of the twenty-fourth to the
Had Napoleon not taken offense at the demand that he should withdraw
Had Princess Mary been capable of reflection at that moment, she would
Had he not established schools and hospitals and liberated his serfs?
Had he repented of his unbelief? Was he now there? There in the realms
Had he screamed in agony, that scream would not have struck such horror
Had the Cossacks pursued the French, without heeding what was behind and
Had this man been endowed with the slightest capacity for perceiving the
Half an hour later Kutuzov left for Tatarinova, and Bennigsen and his
Half an hour later he was driving with his fast horses across the
Half an hour later the squadron was lined up on the road. The command
Half an hour later there appeared among the other mummers in the
Half an hour later, the Rhetor returned to inform the seeker of the
Halfway through supper Prince Andrew leaned his elbows on the table and,
Halfway up the stairs they were almost knocked over by some men who,
Happy as Petya was, he felt sad at having to go home knowing that all
Hard as it was for Sonya, she watched her friend and did not let her out
Hardly had Boris gone than Sonya, flushed, in tears, and muttering
Hardly had Prince Andrew started than he stopped him.
Hardly had Rostov handed him the letter and finished explaining
Hardly had he passed an angle of the wood before a stout gentleman in
Hardly had they reached the bottom of the hill before their pace
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Have just this moment received by special messenger very joyful news--if
Have people since the Revolution become happier? On the contrary. We
Having abandoned the conception of the ancients as to the divine
Having arranged matters thus, Denisov and Dolokhov intended, without
Having as it were reviewed her kingdom, tested her power, and made sure
Having baited the horses twice on the way, he arrived at the town toward
Having been taken prisoner and allowed his beard to grow, he seemed to
Having changed horses twice and galloped twenty miles in an hour and a
Having cleared the way Denisov stopped at the end of the bridge.
Having descended the hill at a trot, he no longer saw either our own or
Having descended the hill the general after whom Pierre was galloping
Having disentangled his leg, he rose. "Where, on which side, was now the
Having dismounted he went up to the Emperor with rapid strides and in
Having entered his study Pierre closed the door and addressed Anatole
Having entered the courtyard of a large house where the Lodge had its
Having finished his inquiries and extorted from Daniel an opinion that
Having finished his second glass of punch, Napoleon went to rest before
Having finished his tale about the enchanting Polish lady, the captain
Having found what she was looking for in the reticule she handed it to
Having galloped safely through the French, he reached a field behind
Having given several more orders, he was about to go to his "little
Having glanced through the dispatch he laid it on the table and looked
Having gone a couple of miles along the Mozhaysk road, Pierre sat down
Having gone nearly three miles he at last met an acquaintance and
Having inspected the country opposite the Shevardino Redoubt, Napoleon
Having interrupted one another they both stopped to let the other
Having jerked out these last words as soldiers do and waved his arms
Having learned from experiment and argument that a stone falls
Having led him about ten paces, Willarski stopped.
Having left Petersburg on the seventh of December with his suite--Count
Having left that soldier who was evidently drunk, Rostov stopped the
Having lifted her head and let her arms droop lifelessly, as ballet
Having listened to her mother's objections, Helene smiled blandly and
Having once more entered into the definite conditions of this regimental
Having ordered punch and summoned de Beausset, he began to talk to him
Having passed the Guards and traversed an empty space, Rostov, to avoid
Having prepared everything necessary for the party, the Bergs were ready
Having put on French greatcoats and shakos, Petya and Dolokhov rode to
Having put up at an inn they both went to sleep, and next morning his
Having reached his country house and begun to give orders about domestic
Having reached the Patriarch's Ponds Pierre found the Bazdeevs' house,
Having reached the knoll, Pierre sat down at one end of a trench
Having reached the left flank, instead of going to the front where the
Having read thus far, Princess Mary sighed and glanced into the mirror
Having received all his orders Alpatych, wearing a white beaver hat--a
Having received this order the general passed by Pierre on his way down
Having released Mavrushka, Natasha crossed the dancing hall and went
Having restored the condition of time under which all events occur,
Having returned to the regiment and told the commander the state of
Having returned to the watchman's hut, Petya found Denisov in the
Having ridden beyond the village, continually meeting and overtaking
Having ridden in the smoke past the Sixth Corps, behind the artillery
Having ridden round the whole line from right flank to left, Prince
Having ridden up the road, on both sides of which French talk could be
Having rolled like a ball in the direction of the impetus given by the
Having run through different yards and side streets, Pierre got back
Having said this she went up to the doctor.
Having said this, Napoleon rode on to meet Marshal Lannes, who, hat in
Having sat awhile with her visitors without understanding anything of
Having sat some time at table, Speranski corked a bottle of wine and,
Having sat still for a while he touched--himself not knowing why--the
Having set off in the small hours of the fourteenth, accompanied by a
Having similarly explained his views and his magnanimity to Tutolmin, he
Having started farming from necessity, he soon grew so devoted to it
Having talked for a little while in the general circle, Speranski rose
Having thanked Anna Pavlovna for her charming soiree, the guests began
Having tied a girdle over his coat and pulled his cap low on his head,
Having understood this Princess Mary sobbed still louder, and the doctor
Having unwound the string that tied the band on one leg, he carefully
Having uttered these words in an agitated voice the Emperor suddenly
Having written this and given the paper to Alpatych, he told him how
He again paused in indecision.
He alone could play on the clavichord that ecossaise (his only piece)
He alone--with his ideal of glory and grandeur developed in Italy and
He also acted badly by concerning himself with the active army and
He and the other prisoners were taken to the right side of the Virgin's
He ascended an incline, stopped, looked about him, and advanced to where
He asked, "Whose company?" but he really meant, "Are you frightened
He ate his supper of buckwheat soup with horseflesh and chatted with his
He began pacing the room. The screaming ceased, and a few more seconds
He began speaking louder, evidently to be heard by everyone.
He bent his head and was silent for some time.
He blushed hotly, raised his eyes to hers, and said:
He bowed his head and scraped first with one foot and then with the
He called the Cossack with his horse, told him to put away the knapsack
He called the most important generals to him.
He came at a gallop, wearing a small hat, a blue uniform open over a
He came quickly up to Pierre and embraced and kissed him. "Good-by, be
He came to the point at once, treating her ceremoniously.
He cast happy, sidelong glances at his son from under his thick, bushy
He cautiously released the shoulder she leaned on, looked into her face,
He checked himself in the middle of the sentence, lowered his eyes to
He checked himself, fearing to seem naive, yet he felt an irresistible
He closed his eyes and remained silent a long time. Then as if in
He closed his eyes, and immediately a sound of cannonading, of musketry
He closed his eyes, and, from all sides as if from a distance, sounds
He closed his eyes. One picture succeeded another in his imagination. On
He confessed, and received communion: everyone came to take leave of
He continually hurt Princess Mary's feelings and tormented her, but it
He continued to pace the room, looking gloomily at Denisov and the girls
He could hear shooting ahead of him. Cossacks, hussars, and ragged
He could not believe that her fate was sealed, especially as he had
He could not finish, and ran out of the room.
He could not live, because all man's efforts, all his impulses to life,
He could not look calmly at the standards of the passing battalions.
He could not reconcile the charming impression he had of Natasha, whom
He could not rejoin the army where he would have been made colonel at
He could not see an aim, for he now had faith--not faith in any kind
He could not tell them what we say now: "Why fight, why block the road,
He could see puffs of musketry smoke that seemed to chase one another
He descended the knoll and began walking up and down before it.
He did not allow himself either to be hard on or punish a man, or to
He did not ask if she was ready to listen to him. He did not care. A
He did not concern himself with the interests of his own class, and
He did not contradict Willarski and even seemed to agree with him--an
He did not drive into the town, but put up at an inn in the Dorogomilov
He did not find Prince Andrew in Olmutz that day, but the appearance of
He did not find the civil servant or his wife where he had left them. He
He did not finish his sentence, but his tone showed how highly he
He did not finish speaking. At one and the same moment came the sound of
He did not finish what he wished to say.
He did not finish, but gave a painfully unnatural smile.
He did not finish. Just then there was a whistle in the air; nearer and
He did not know Arakcheev personally, had never seen him, and all he had
He did not know what to say.
He did not like talking about his life as a soldier, though he did not
He did not regain consciousness till late in the day, when with other
He did not repeat to himself with a sickening feeling of shame the words
He did not reply.
He did not say another word to Petya but rode in silence all the way.
He did not see and did not hear how they shot the prisoners who lagged
He did not see, hear, or understand anything clearly. Only now and
He did not stay more than ten minutes, then rose and took his leave. The
He discussed estate affairs every day with his chief steward. But
He disliked having anything to do with the domestic serfs--the "drones"
He divided the Brothers he knew into four categories. In the first he
He drank reluctantly, tried to remain alone, and kept turning something
He dreamed that he was lying in the room he really was in, but that
He drew back and a real tear appeared in his eye.
He drew up his chair, and continued to explain.
He drove through the town seeking Anatole Kuragin, at the thought of
He drove to their house in some agitation. The memory of Natasha was his
He embraced Prince Andrew, pressing him to his fat breast, and for some
He embraced her. She screamed and fell unconscious on his shoulder.
He embraced his daughter, and then again Pierre, and kissed him with his
He entered briskly, with a jerk at every step and his head slightly
He entered the dining room. The whole company were standing between two
He entered the drawing room with his usual alert step, glancing rapidly
He entered through the gates with their stone pillars and drove up
He examined his hand carefully, vainly trying to find blood on it. "Ah,
He explained his wish to be present at the battle and to see the
He felt ashamed, and with one arm covered his legs from which his cloak
He felt himself nearer to it.
He felt that at a single word from that man all this vast mass (and he
He felt that he had to balance carefully (though it was difficult) so
He felt that he no longer looked presentable, and feared that if he were
He filled the girls' albums with verses and music, and having at last
He finished and, getting up, embraced and kissed Pierre, who, with tears
He flushed joyfully yet with painful distress. He tried to hide his
He found him reclining in an armchair, still in the same unbuttoned
He found some scoundrel of a painter..."
He gave her a cold, angry look and offered her his wrinkled,
He gave the reins to a Cossack, took off and handed over his felt coat,
He glanced at Prince Andrew's face and quickly turned away.
He glanced at her to make sure that he might go on. Her irritability had
He glanced at her with timid surprise.
He glanced at his cousin and the young lady visitor; and they were both
He got up and went to the window to open it. As soon as he opened the
He got up from his chair and went to the door.
He had Pierre at hand in Moscow and procured for him an appointment as
He had asked Pierre to find out whether he would be accepted in the
He had grown so stout this year that he would have been abnormal had he
He had heard that the Rostovs were at Kostroma but the thought of
He had in the highest degree a practical tenacity which Pierre lacked,
He had just remembered his recent encounter with the doctor's wife and
He had left home only to escape the intricate tangle of life's demands
He had long been thinking of entering the army and would have done so
He had long sought in different ways that tranquillity of mind, that
He had no plan, he was afraid of everything, but the parties snatched at
He had no thought of betraying us, he tried to do the best he could,
He had not decided what it should mean when he heard the voice of the
He had not finished the last verse before the young people began to
He had nothing to do in Moscow, but he had noticed that everyone in the
He had often before, during the last six weeks, remained alone with her,
He had received and given the orders for next day's battle and had
He had the letter taken from his pocket and the table--on which stood a
He half rose, meaning to go round, but the aunt handed him the snuffbox,
He handed the horses over to the soldier who was stirring the pot and
He has forwarded me a letter from Boris. Thank God, Boris is now on the
He heard the sound of a scuffle and Sonya's disapproving voice: "It's
He himself seemed aware that his demand was meaningless. So at least it
He hired the first cab he met and told the driver to go to the
He imagined himself as an enormously tall, powerful man who was throwing
He imagined men such as he had himself been a fortnight ago, and he
He imagined that the war with Russia came about by his will, and the
He implored Rostov to go on and prepare her.
He indicated a place beside him to his daughter-in-law. A footman moved
He is a wise and clever fellow."
He is needed for the place that awaits him, and so almost apart from
He is pushed into a meeting of the legislature. In alarm he wishes to
He jumped up at the sound of her light step.
He kept looking to either side of the road for familiar faces, but only
He kissed his sister, holding her hand in his as was their wont.
He knew he had something more to say to her. But when he said it he was
He knew his stubborn will and straightforward hasty temper.
He knew no one, and despite his smart Guardsman's uniform, all these
He knew this at that moment as surely as if he had been standing at the
He knew very well that this was Napoleon, but Napoleon's presence could
He laughed in his usual dry, cold, unpleasant way, with his lips only
He lay down on the sofa meaning to fall asleep and forget all that
He leaned his elbows on the table with his pen in his hand and,
He left in order not to obstruct the commander in chief's undivided
He left the room and went to the waiting room where Alpatych stood with
He lifted himself and sat up. A Frenchman who had just pushed a Russian
He listened and heard the sound of approaching horses, and voices
He looked about him absently. Thousands of eyes were looking at him from
He looked around, and in the direct, respectful, wondering gaze fixed
He looked at her and was struck by the serious impassioned expression of
He looked at her attentively.
He looked at her without moving and saw that she wanted to draw a
He looked at his watch. It was still only four o'clock. He did not feel
He looked at the row of birches shining in the sunshine, with their
He looked compassionately at Balashev, and as soon as the latter tried
He looked intently and inquiringly into his friend's eyes, evidently
He looked straight at Prince Andrew and suddenly unwrinkled his
He looked up at the sky. And the sky was a fairy realm like the earth.
He looked up: Dolokhov was standing on the window sill, with a pale but
He looked with disdain at the endless confused mass of detachments,
He made a mumbling sound in confirmation of this, took her hand, and
He mentioned what he had written to an old field marshal, a friend of
He might... not only might but should, have gone up to the sovereign. It
He mounted and rode toward Semenovsk.
He moved as if to rise. The generals bowed and retired. It was past
He moved his hand over her hair.
He nodded in answer to Balashav's low and respectful bow, and coming up
He not merely did nothing of the kind, but on the contrary he used his
He noticed this hesitation in Dron's look and therefore frowned and
He now often remembered his conversation with Prince Andrew and quite
He opened his eyes and looked up. The black canopy of night hung less
He ordered his horse to be saddled and, leaving his regiment on the
He paced up and down for a while and glanced at his notes.
He passed four days in the coach house near the Crimean bridge and
He passed into the next room, and the deep, querulous sounds of his
He passed up to the front rows, not noticing anyone. Anatole went up to
He patted her on the shoulder and himself closed the door after her.
He paused a little while.
He paused and looked around.
He paused and rubbed his face and eyes with his hands.
He paused and sighed, evidently trying to calm himself.
He paused and then suddenly seeing the pistol on the table seized it
He paused at the sight of Pierre. His face quivered and immediately
He paused, and just as he was about to say something more, another ball
He paused, his gaze still on Pierre, and moved aside on the sofa by way
He planned another garden and began a new building for the domestic
He pointed to the French guns, the limbers of which were being detached
He pointed with a smile to a turreted nunnery, and his eyes narrowed and
He pressed her hand and released it, and she went back to the candle and
He pressed her hand.
He pulled himself together, looked round, screwing up his eyes, glanced
He pulled off the quilt and shook it. The purse was not there.
He put his snuffbox into his waistcoat pocket, took it out again, lifted
He put the letter under the candlestick and closed his eyes. And there
He quickly entered the small reception room with its still-unplastered
He read, and read everything that came to hand. On coming home, while
He really was in love with the Tsar and the glory of the Russian
He recognized her, guessed her feelings, saw that it was her debut,
He remained silent awhile.
He remembered his honeymoon and blushed at the recollection.
He rode silently on his small gray horse, indolently answering
He said a few words to Prince Andrew and Chernyshev about the present
He said no more, but expressed his resignation to cruel fate by a
He said something more, but Rostov did not wait to hear it and rode
He said that our wars with Bonaparte would be disastrous so long as we
He said the people had been getting arms in the Kremlin, and that though
He said this at a moment when she alone could hear him. "You are
He said this because on his journey from Petersburg he had had the honor
He sat awhile in the hut joyfully recalling the details of his
He sat down beside Hippolyte and wrinkling his forehead began talking
He sat down by his wife, his elbows on his knees and his hands ruffling
He sat down facing Pierre. "By the way, you know German, then?"
He sat in his short overcoat leaning against a birch tree. On his face,
He sat rather sideways in the armchair next to the countess, arranging
He saw in him a remarkable, clear-thinking man of vast intellect who by
He saw the whips in their red caps galloping along the edge of the
He scattered the burning tobacco, smashed the pipe, and threw it away.
He screwed up his eyes, smiled, lifted her chin with his hand, and said:
He seated himself more comfortably and coughed, evidently preparing to
He seemed in his heart to reproach her for being too perfect, and
He seemed to swell with satisfaction. He had hardly finished speaking
He seized his son by the hand with small bony fingers, shook it, looked
He shaved and scented himself with the care and elegance which had
He showed an interest in trifles, joked about de Beausset's love of
He shrugged his shoulders and spread out his hands. Pierre wished to
He shrugged his shoulders. A footman conducted Boris down one flight of
He sighed, and glanced with a radiant, childlike, tender look at
He signed with a flourish and suddenly turning to his son began to
He smiled and held out his hand to her.
He sometimes noticed with dissatisfaction that he repeated the same
He spoke so rapidly that he did not finish half his words, but his son
He spoke with such self-confidence that his hearers could not be sure
He still had all the letters in his hand. Opening them mechanically he
He stood a little behind the governor and held himself with military
He stood by the balcony door looking at the crowd.
He stopped and remained silent for a long time.
He stopped in front of the Preobrazhensk regiment, sighed deeply, and
He stretched out his hand to take hold of the purse. Rostov let go of
He supported almost singlehanded a poorhouse the order had founded in
He surprised me by asking whether I remembered the threefold aim of
He talked boldly and naturally, and Natasha was strangely and agreeably
He thought that if he challenged him without some fresh cause it might
He thought too of the possibility (which he feared most of all) that
He threw the bottle to the Englishman, who caught it neatly. Dolokhov
He told of his adventures as he had never yet recalled them. He now, as
He took a heavy paperweight and lifted it threateningly, but at once put
He took a potato, drew out his clasp knife, cut the potato into two
He took his seat beside the aide-de-camp on duty and drove into the
He took some gold pieces from his trouser pocket and put them on the
He took the dispatch which was addressed to him and began to read it
He took the lighted pipe that was offered to him, gripped it in his
He took the packet from the table and handed it to Pierre.
He took the pistol in his hand and began asking about the working of the
He touched his horse and having called Miloradovich, the commander of
He treated his Serene Highness with a somewhat affected nonchalance
He tried several times to join in the conversation, but his remarks were
He tried to remember whether he had not done anything else that was
He turned his head and saw that the adjutant was putting another
He turned round. Nesvitski's handsome face looked out of the little
He turned to Kozlovski with urgent questions.
He unbuttoned his coat and sat down on a bench in the porch.
He understood that for him the storm had blown over, and that Kutuzov
He waited a moment to see whether the cornet would answer, but he turned
He was a peasant from Pokrovsk, near the river Gzhat. When Denisov had
He was as careful of the sowing and reaping of the peasants' hay
He was as indifferent as heretofore to money matters, but now he felt
He was awaiting Prince Andrew's return with dread and went every day to
He was deaf and did not hear Prince Andrew ride up. He was sitting on
He was evidently so busy that he even forgot to be polite to the
He was evidently suffering both physically and mentally. There was no
He was flushed and bathed in perspiration, though the room was not hot.
He was given four weeks' leave of absence.
He was himself carried away by the tone of magnanimity he intended to
He was lying in a squirrel-fur dressing gown on a divan, surrounded by
He was met by Gabriel, Marya Dmitrievna's gigantic footman.
He was not a gambler, at any rate he did not care about winning. He was
He was not sleepy and it was still not nearly morning. It was impossible
He was pleased at the gratitude he received, but felt abashed at
He was pressing one hand to his left side, while the other clutched
He was proud of her intelligence and goodness, recognized his own
He was riding almost along the front line. A handful of men came
He was sent for trial and condemned to hard labor, I believe. Now the
He was silent awhile.
He was silent.
He was singing in passionate tones, gazing with his sparkling
He was somewhat flushed with the wine and the drive. His eyes were
He was suffering physically. He, the commander in chief, a Serene
He was the bravest and most useful man in the party. No one found more
He was the same as ever, but the feverish color of his face, his
He was thinking of Prince Andrew, of Natasha, and of their love, at one
He was thinking that Prince Andrew was unhappy, had gone astray, did not
He went about looking at every corner. Every place seemed
He went in silence from one corner of the room to the other and again
He went on talking in this way in French, uttering only those words in
He went out into the street: two men were running past toward the
He went straight up to Prince Vasili.
He went to his bed, drew a purse from under the clean pillow, and sent
He went to the cot in confusion, sure that he would find it empty and
He went up the stairs, puffing and muttering something. His coachman did
He went up to the map and speaking rapidly began proving that no
He wished to explain to Dolgorukov a plan of attack he had himself
He wished to take a decision, but felt with dismay that in this matter
He woke up and looked round for a while with a startled expression,
He woke up...
He would have embraced her but, blushing, she stepped aside fearing to
He would often say the exact opposite of what he had said on a previous
He would sit in his study with a grave air, reading--a task he first
He wrote from the province of Voronezh where he had been sent to procure
He'll show you what law is!" the mob were saying as if reproving one
He's naked, but yet he's given it back."
Hearing not so much the words as the angry tone of Rostopchin's voice,
Hearing that Bezukhov was in Orel, Willarski, though they had never been
Hearing that cry and seeing to whom it was addressed, Nesvitski and the
Hearing those moans Prince Andrew wanted to weep. Whether because he
Heaven only knows who arranged all this and when, but it all got done
Heaven that the Almighty may exalt the race of the just, and mercifully
Heaven."
Heavy night dews alone refreshed the earth. The unreaped corn was
Hebrew, in which the first nine letters denote units and the others
Helena in the peaceful solitude where he said he intended to devote his
Helene always has--men friends who can never change into lovers--once
Helene and tickle her.
Helene answered with a smile that she too had missed it.
Helene had been at Erfurt during the famous meeting of the Emperors
Helene laughed.
Helene nor she at him. But she was just as terribly close to him. He
Helene reached Moscow had been an intimate in her house. The count
Helene returned with Natasha to the drawing room. The Rostovs went away
Helene sat silently side by side almost at the bottom of the table, a
Helene smiled, with a look implying that she did not admit the
Helene still sat talking just as before.
Helene understood that the question was very simple and easy from
Helene welcomed Natasha delightedly and was loud in admiration of her
Helene with her proud, calm smile, rapturously cried "bravo!"--there in
Helene's box was filled and surrounded from the stalls by the most
Helene's face became terrible, she shrieked and sprang aside. His
Helene's hand several times. After a while they were left alone again.
Helene's imperturbable conviction that it was as simple and natural as
Helene's presence (as a lover should be), but had not yet proposed to
Helene, Prince Vasili's daughter, and the little Princess Bolkonskaya,
Helene, and that thought both alarmed him, as if some obligation were
Helene, having returned with the court from Vilna to Petersburg, found
Helene, then she turned to Pierre with the same words of welcome and
Helene. "This happiness is not for you," some inner voice whispered to
Hendrikhovna blushed till her eyes filled with tears and thereby became
Hendrikhovna should stir the sugar for everyone in turn. Rostov received
Hendrikhovna to preside, they all crowded round her. One offered her a
Hendrikhovna's hand, and that the "Booby" should go to refill and reheat
Hendrikhovna's plump little hands with their short and not overclean
Her brother Petya was upstairs too; with the man in attendance on him he
Her brother often wondered as he looked at her. She did not seem at
Her brother shook his head incredulously.
Her eyes grew dim. By the expression of her father's face, not sad, not
Her eyes were smiling expectantly, her downy lip rose and remained
Her face became sad.
Her face suddenly flushed with reckless and joyous resolution. She half
Her fate was decided and happily decided. But what her father had said
Her favorite sonata bore her into a most intimately poetic world and the
Her first exploit, which cost her immense effort and established her
Her first glance at Nicholas' face told her that he had only come to
Her glittering eyes, filled with childlike fear and excitement, rested
Her husband looked at her as if surprised to notice that someone besides
Her husband's account of the boy's agitation while Pierre was speaking
Her letters to him, far from giving her any comfort, seemed to her a
Her lip descended. She brought her face close to her sister-in-law's and
Her love for Rostov no longer tormented or agitated her. It filled her
Her sister dropped the portfolio. Anna Mikhaylovna, stooping, quickly
Her throat quivered with convulsive sobs and, afraid of weakening and
Her tone was now querulous and her lip drawn up, giving her not a
Her voice broke, tears gushed from her eyes, and she turned quickly to
Her voice sounded so serious and so sad that the chirping of the birds
Her voice trembled, and she again nearly cried, but recovered and went
Her words were incoherent, but they attained the purpose at which she
Here Prince Hippolyte paused, evidently collecting his ideas with
Here Prince Hippolyte spluttered and burst out laughing long before his
Here is my hand on it. Are you satisfied?"
Here is wisdom. Let him that hath understanding count the number of
Here, at the extreme left flank, Bennigsen talked a great deal and with
Hessian boots. His short hair had evidently just been brushed, but one
Higher up the hill, on the very horizon, our guns were visible through
Highness a matter of great importance for their country's welfare.
Highness bread and salt. "Her husband has welcomed his Serene Highness
Highness knows you and will receive you graciously. That's what you must
Highness who everybody said possessed powers such as no man had ever had
Highness would not have it, or someone persuaded him. You see..." but
Highness," said the tall fellow with a triumphant smile on his lips and
Highness."
Hill lay spaciously spread out with her river, her gardens, and her
Hill perceived the throb of life in the town and felt, as it were, the
Hills might be dangerous, he respectfully advised her to send a letter
Hills with his wife, his mother, and Sonya.
Hills, she took a special fancy to Mademoiselle Bourienne, spent whole
Him to the greatest extent. And it grows, merges, disappears from the
Hippolyte gazing round with importance at the others, "without
Hippolyte in the carriage, "your little princess is very nice, very nice
Hippolyte interrupted her with the words: "Le Roi de Prusse..." and
Hippolyte is at least a quiet fool, but Anatole is an active one. That
Hippolyte laughed as if ashamed of laughing.
Hippolyte spluttered again, and amid his laughter said, "And you were
Hippolyte told me about your goings on. Oh!" and she shook her finger at
Hippolyte, had come with Mortemart, whom he introduced. The Abbe Morio
His Highness the Archduke Ferdinand has honored me, I imagine that the
His Majesty the Emperor derogates from the principle of our alliance...
His Majesty will no doubt wish to see you, but not today. I thank
His Majesty; but we think the present delay is depriving the splendid
His Serene Highness has passed through Mozhaysk in order to join up with
His activity in Moscow was as amazing and as full of genius as
His adjutants galloped into the yard before him. Kutuzov was impatiently
His arguments were concise, simple, and clear.
His birth and position in society were not bad. "Well, I've nothing
His comrades, the prisoner soldiers walking beside him, avoided looking
His conversation with Count Rostopchin and the latter's tone of anxious
His curly hair, its color, and the shape of his head seemed strangely
His daughter placed chintz-covered down cushions for him to sit on and
His daughter, Princess Helene, passed between the chairs, lightly
His despair was all the greater from feeling that his own weakness was
His dressing gown was unfastened, his face red and distorted. He
His efforts had not been in vain. The dinner, both the Lenten and the
His eyes kept closing, and in his fancy appeared--now the Emperor, now
His eyes, prominent from the emaciation of his face, gazed inquiringly
His face again resumed its former stiff and cold expression. But the
His face expressed entreaty, agitation, and ecstasy. Countess Mary
His face shone with self-satisfaction and pleasure.
His face suddenly softened and tears came into his eyes. With his left
His face suddenly took on a morose expression. He paused. "Yes, he
His face was terrible and piteous to see, especially from its helpless
His face, despite its fine, rounded wrinkles, had an expression of
His father announced to him that he would now pay half his debts for the
His father received his son's communication with external composure, but
His former love? The little princess? His disillusionments?... His hopes
His grandfather, who was his godfather, trembling and afraid of dropping
His head steward came to him at Orel and Pierre reckoned up with him his
His health had to be bad for his place to be taken away and given to
His horses and trap were sent home. Count Ilya Rostov, though not at
His huge figure, with arms hanging down and with a puckered, though
His illness pursued its normal physical course, but what Natasha
His large, glittering, masculine eyes were so close to hers that she saw
His last days and hours passed in an ordinary and simple way. Both
His life meanwhile continued as before, with the same infatuations and
His mind was not in a normal state. A healthy man usually thinks of,
His passion for the Emperor had cooled somewhat in Moscow. But still, as
His physical strength and agility during the first days of his
His plate seemed to him not quite clean, and pointing to a spot he
His position was the more difficult because with his salary of twelve
His remembering such a small detail of everyday life astonished
His room was on the first floor. Those in the rooms above were also
His servant handed him a half-cut novel, in the form of letters, by
His servants too--Terenty and Vaska--in their own way noticed the change
His son only smiled.
His thin, worn, sallow face was covered with deep wrinkles, which always
His troops were the same, his generals the same, the same preparations
His very first, remotest recollections of childhood came back to Prince
His will." With this consoling thought (but yet with a hope for the
His will; but tell me, Michaud, how did you leave the army when it
His wound, though a slight one, had not yet healed even now, six weeks
His wrath, once expended, did not return, and blinking feebly he
Historians of the third class assume that the will of the people
Historical science in its endeavor to draw nearer to truth continually
History (or what is called by that name) replying to these questions
History examines the manifestations of man's free will in connection
History is the life of nations and of humanity. To seize and put into
History proves this at every turn. Is the ferment of the peoples of
History seems to assume that this force is self-evident and known to
History, that is, the unconscious, general, hive life of mankind, uses
Hofs-kriegs-wurst-Raths are! Suvorov couldn't manage them so what chance
Hofs-kriegs-wurst-schnapps-Rath on his hands. It would have puzzled
Holding his little girl with one arm, Nicholas glanced at his wife and,
Hollabrunn and have pursued ever since to this place. The position we
Hollabrunn) received Murat's dispatch with the proposal of a truce and
Holy Spirit. Brother O. was very eloquent. In the evening the admission
Holy Virgin Mother of God'...."
How I love you!"
How bright and glorious was the setting sun! With what soft glitter the
How can one judge Father? But even if one might, what feeling except
How have you spent it? In riotous orgies and debauchery, receiving
How horrified he would have been seven years before, when he first
How was it that the Russian army, which when numerically weaker than the
How, or by what means, he was connected with the great event foretold in
However much he drank, he never lost his clearheadedness. Both Kuragin
However often experiment and reasoning may show a man that under the
However tempting it might be for the French to blame Rostopchin's
However, I will let you know."
However, at nine o'clock the prince, in his velvet coat with a sable
Hundreds of peasants, among them the Bogucharovo folk, suddenly began
Hungarian?" said the commander with an austere gibe.
Hussar cornet Zherkov had at one time, in Petersburg, belonged to the
Hussars, ladies, witches, clowns, and bears, after clearing their
I am again living with my wife. My mother-in-law came to me in tears and
I am also very much afraid for him spiritually. He has not a character
I am as devoted to him as before: I know him thoroughly and very highly
I am for him and for myself and about everything!..." Natasha began, and
I am going to bed with a happy and tranquil mind. Great God, help me to
I am going to love him very much," said Lise, looking with bright and
I am off duty. I'll take another turn and when I get back I'll go to the
I am told."
I am unable to follow in that gentleman's footsteps. If you wish to be
I am very, very sorry for her," he concluded, and was pleased to notice
I beg of you, consider me your friend and if you want help, advice, or
I can't say I have understood it fully, but I understand the general
I can't sit like that?"
I can't tell you. And the Tsarevich was very gracious to all our
I can't."
I cannot agree with you about Pierre, whom I knew as a child. He always
I cannot find words to express to you my displeasure. You command only
I come here?" he wondered.
I confess I understand very little about all these matters of wills and
I could not be eloquent, nor could I frankly mention my doubts to the
I could not help loving him. Yes, his slave! Whatever he orders I shall
I dare say, is braver than any of them. He says nothing about his
I deem it my duty to report to Your Majesty the condition of the various
I devoted myself to him! So there! Oh yes, mon cher, he is the greatest
I do not wish to utilize the fortunes of war to humiliate an honored
I doing? Aren't they laughing at me? Shan't I be ashamed to remember
I don't eat, don't wash... and how is it with you?..."
I don't know and never shall know, for the love of these men here," he
I don't know how to put it. Without you, or when something comes between
I don't know what you will think of it, but I consider it my duty to
I don't say that we ought to oppose this and that. We may be mistaken.
I don't want any of them! And what are they doing here?" she thought.
I dreamed that I was walking in the dark and was suddenly surrounded by
I dreamed that Joseph Alexeevich was sitting in my house, and that I
I expect the Minister (Barclay de Tolly) has already reported the
I felt it," he thought. "I felt then that it was not so, that I had no
I give you my word. Never," he repeated in a trembling voice like a boy
I go in then? What could he have done to me? What could I have lost? And
I got up late. On waking I lay long in bed yielding to sloth. O God,
I grabbed him, like this." (He jumped up quickly and lightly.) "'Come
I had a dream from which I awoke with a throbbing heart. I saw that
I had the power," he began again, "I would not take prisoners. Why take
I had to express my own desire..." She had no time to finish. The old
I hated in my life? And of them all, I loved and hated none as I did
I have a presentiment that for the first time I shall have to show all I
I have a talk with him and see what he thinks?" Pierre reflected. "No,
I have asked these gentlemen to meet to discuss is a military one.
I have been told that her brother Anatole was in love with her and she
I have business...."
I have experienced. Joseph Alexeevich is living poorly and has for three
I have had a letter from my brother, who announces his speedy arrival
I have had a long and instructive talk alone with Brother V., who
I have heard your views. Some of you will not agree with me. But I," he
I have just returned from my benefactor, and hasten to write down what
I have just saved from the flames," said he. "Good-by!" And without
I have seen during these last three months is incredible.
I have thought and thought again about your affair. You see, if you
I have to obey orders, because I always do obey exactly.... You must
I joke about it? Did I hinder you? Who arranged everything for you? Who
I kill him? My hand trembled. And they have given me a St. George's
I know I can't prevent your doing so, but if you have a spark of
I know every word she utters. She will come running to me of her own
I like her."
I love Nicholas. Yes! If I don't sleep for three nights I'll not leave
I mean a good deal, a great deal--forty three thousand."
I must be mistaken, he must be feeling happy, just as I am."
I myself have experienced... and so... because... No, excuse me!
I need nobody."
I need not have said them," he thought. "And then nothing would have
I never could understand the fondness some people have for confusing
I nominated him and was the Rhetor. A strange feeling agitated me all
I nor my mother would ever ask or take anything from him."
I not for eighteen months been doing everything to obtain it? I
I nursed you.... Ooh!"
I once let myself see her I should not have strength to go on refusing
I really to abandon forever the joy of Prince Andrew's love, in which I
I replied that sloth was my chief temptation. He shook his head
I say 'three'... You stand here, and you in my arms--well now! One,
I say it with my hand on my heart!" said he, striking his chest.
I shall be very charmed to see you tonight between 7 and 10--Annette
I shall conclude will be worthy of my people, of you, and of myself.
I shall lead the army."
I should have been happy compared with what I am now. Now there is
I speak to the Emperor? No, that's not it--that's tomorrow. Oh yes!
I stepped on it, but it bent and gave way and I began to clamber up a
I suppose that the nobility have been summoned not merely to express
I suppose," he thought as he turned round. "Yes, really everything is
I take little Masha into society? Perhaps they will be fashionable again
I think..."
I thought quite differently. Had I said what I thought, I should have
I told him everything as best I could, and told him what I had proposed
I understand--Tolstoy's too... a simultaneous expedition.... But what's
I want to weep for joy."
I was his enemy eight years ago. My father was an emigrant count.... But
I was in Moscow in my house, in the big sitting room, and Joseph
I was praying. Don't you pray?"
I was really serving my sovereign and the Fatherland, but it turns out
I was right. Without boasting, you know, I may say that I know the Army
I was to blame for not understanding her, for not understanding that
I was ungrateful, and that Mamma would never allow him to marry me,
I went to my room and reread Joseph Alexeevich's letters and recalled
I will do the impossible--your son shall be transferred to the Guards.
I will invite two or three people, and if he does not understand what he
I will take Boris and go to see him at once, and I shall speak to him
I won't allow it to be said!"
I won't let you off! Mademoiselle George will recite at my house
I would give much to bring back that time... but there's no bringing it
I would give my life for them, and the others I'd throttle if they
I'd sleep a bit and then again go and kiss the relics, and there was
I'll come for you."
I'll do all I can...."
I'll fetch a piece of cloth at once for such an honorable gentleman,
I'll get round him.... Listen! I'll take your bet tomorrow, but now we
I'll let her see...."
I'll take them where they must go, scold them a bit, and pet them a
I'll warrant," said Shinshin, patting him on the shoulder and taking his
I'm a sharper, so I advise you to be careful."
I'm only tormented by the wrong I have done him. Tell him only that I
I'm sure! Bring some rum for tea!... Bonjour, Sonya dear!" she added,
I'm young, and I know that now I am good. I used to be bad, but now I
I've brought the prince's wedding candles to light before his saint, my
I, above all, who am to blame for everything. Help me, teach me, and
I, and it cannot be seen if one looks on our life here as the end
I, the daughter of Prince Nicholas Bolkonski, asked General Rameau for
I, too, am afraid of him--and in fact I am afraid of him," he thought,
I, you see, am hard at it." He pointed to his manuscript book with that
I...? I am something altogether different and higher.'"
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
INHABITANTS OF MOSCOW!
Icon of St. Nicholas, Murat halted to await news from the advanced
If I examine an act I performed a moment ago in approximately the same
If I were asked what I desire most on earth, it would be to be poorer
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
If at first the members of the council thought that Kutuzov was
If he did not at once give his consent to a reunion with his wife, it
If he will not assist his godson--you know he is Bory's godfather--and
If history dealt only with external phenomena, the establishment of this
If history had retained the conception of the ancients it would have
If in a thousand years even one man in a million could act freely, that
If in the descriptions given by historians, especially French ones, we
If instead of a divine power some other force has appeared, it should
If instead of imagining to ourselves commanders of genius leading the
If it had depended on Napoleon's will to fight or not to fight the
If many simultaneously and variously directed forces act on a given
If men descended from the apes at an unknown period of time, that is
If only they knew how little I am concerned about any of them."
If power be the collective will of the people transferred to their
If that activity displeases somebody, this is only because it does
If the Deity issues a command, expresses His will, as ancient history
If the aim of the European wars at the beginning of the nineteenth
If the aim of the Russians consisted in cutting off and capturing
If the commanders had been guided by reason, it would seem that it must
If the conception of freedom appears to reason to be a senseless
If the consciousness of freedom were not a separate and independent
If the man whose actions we are considering is on a very low stage
If the purpose of dinner is to nourish the body, a man who eats two
If the purpose of food is nourishment and the purpose of marriage is the
If the purpose of history be to give a description of the movement of
If the purpose of marriage is the family, the person who wishes to have
If the realm of human knowledge were confined to abstract reasoning,
If the source of power lies neither in the physical nor in the moral
If the will of every man were free, that is, if each man could act as he
If there be a single law governing the actions of men, free will cannot
If throughout his reign Napoleon gave commands concerning an invasion
If we admit that human life can be ruled by reason, the possibility of
If we assume as the historians do that great men lead humanity to the
If we consider a man alone, apart from his relation to everything around
If we go we are almost sure to be taken prisoners, and God knows..."
If we unite both these kinds of history, as is done by the newest
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
If, however, the Emperor of Russia ratifies that convention, I will
If, observing himself, man sees that his will is always directed by
Ignat left off smiling, adjusted his belt, and went out of the room with
Ilagin indifferently, of the red-spotted bitch Erza, for which, a year
Ilagin was saying at the same time, breathless from his gallop and his
Ilya Rostov separately, as the organizer of the banquet. At that
Ilya Rostov, cheerful, flushed, and with quivering cheeks, drove up
Ilya? Only fancy, I didn't know you at first. Do you remember how we
Ilyin put a few drops of rum into the bucket of water and brought it to
Ilyin went out and Zdrzhinski rode away.
Ilyin, Lavrushka, and Alpatych, came up to the crowd, Karp, thrusting
Immediately after greeting the count he went up to Natasha and followed
Immediately on leaving the governor's, Nicholas hired post horses and,
Imperial Majesty. I grieve that my waning strength prevents rejoicing
Imperial aide-de-camp Wolzogen. He is said to be more Napoleon's man
Imperial family as well as to all Moscow and Petersburg, and both cities
Impossible!" And suddenly he was seized by a panic of fear for himself
In 1789 a ferment arises in Paris; it grows, spreads, and is expressed
In 1806 Pfuel had been one of those responsible, for the plan of
In 1806 the old prince was made one of the eight commanders in chief
In 1808 the Emperor Alexander went to Erfurt for a fresh interview with
In 1809 Count Ilya Rostov was living at Otradnoe just as he had done
In 1809 the intimacy between "the world's two arbiters," as Napoleon
In 1811 there was living in Moscow a French doctor--Metivier--who had
In 1812 and 1813 Kutuzov was openly accused of blundering. The Emperor
In 1812 it reaches its extreme limit, Moscow, and then, with remarkable
In Anna Pavlovna's circle only those Frenchmen were admitted who were
In April the troops were enlivened by news of the Emperor's arrival,
In April, Rostov was on orderly duty. One morning, between seven and
In Brunn everybody attached to the court was packing up, and the heavy
In Julie's set, as in many other circles in Moscow, it had been agreed
In June the battle of Friedland was fought, in which the Pavlograds did
In June, after many balls and fetes given by the Polish magnates, by the
In Kiev Pierre found some people he knew, and strangers hastened to make
In Kudrino, from the Nikitski, Presnya, and Podnovinsk Streets came
In Marya Dmitrievna's anteroom the footman who helped him off with his
In Moscow as soon as he entered his huge house in which the faded and
In Natasha Prince Andrew was conscious of a strange world completely
In Natasha's receptive condition of soul this prayer affected her
In November, 1805, Prince Vasili had to go on a tour of inspection in
In October, 1805, a Russian army was occupying the villages and towns of
In Petersburg at that time a complicated struggle was being carried on
In Petersburg she had enjoyed the special protection of a grandee who
In Petersburg, as in Moscow, Pierre found the same atmosphere of
In a corner of the hut stood a standard captured from the French, and
In a corner of the room something red and tiny gave a grunt and squealed
In a few days Princess Mary was ready to start. Her equipages were the
In a moment the men came running gaily from their campfires and began
In a neighboring hut lay Raevski's adjutant with a fractured wrist. The
In a queenless hive no life is left though to a superficial glance it
In a rather low room lit by one candle sat the princess and with her
In a side street near the crossroads where the vehicles had stopped, a
In a trembling, faltering voice Pierre began adducing proofs of the
In actual life each historic event, each human action, is very clearly
In all these plottings the subject of intrigue was generally the conduct
In an hour's time the whole hunting party was at the porch. Nicholas,
In an hour, all the costumes were crumpled and disordered. The corked
In another form but along the same path of reflection the other sciences
In another three years, by 1820, he had so managed his affairs that he
In answer to Rostov's renewed questions, Denisov said, laughing, that he
In answer to questions with which he was greeted, the courier made a
In both cases his personal activity, having no more force than the
In burned and devastated Moscow Pierre experienced almost the extreme
In chapter 13, verse 18, of the Apocalypse, it is said:
In consequence of this battle Kutuzov received a diamond decoration,
In consequence of this discovery his whole manner of life, all
In contrast with the dread felt by the infantrymen placed in support,
In dealing with humanity's inquiry, the science of history up to now
In dealing with this period they sternly condemn the historical
In external ways Pierre had hardly changed at all. In appearance he
In fact, however, though now much farther off than before, the Rostovs
In front of a landowner's house to the left of the road stood carriages,
In front of him soldiers, probably Frenchmen, were running from right
In front of the Governor's house Alpatych found a large number of
In front of them rows of gray cloaks were already visible through the
In front of this position, they say, a fortified outpost was set up on
In general at Bald Hills the little princess lived in constant fear, and
In general the trait of Speranski's mentality which struck Prince Andrew
In giving and accepting battle at Borodino, Kutuzov acted involuntarily
In half an hour all was again in order, only the squares had become gray
In her absence Nicholas allowed himself to give his little daughter a
In his large study, the walls of which were hung to the ceiling with
In his soul there suddenly arose such an unexpected turmoil of youthful
In historical works on the year 1812 French writers are very fond of
In history we find a very similar progress of conviction concerning
In line with the knoll on both sides stood other guns which also fired
In military affairs the strength of an army is the product of its mass
In moments of pride, when he thought of his position it seemed to
In neither case--however we may change our point of view, however plain
In one company dinner was ready, and the soldiers were gazing eagerly
In passing Prince Vasili seized Pierre's hand and said to Anna Pavlovna:
In practical matters Pierre unexpectedly felt within himself a center
In quiet and untroubled times it seems to every administrator that it
In regard to philanthropy, the greatest virtue of crowned heads,
In regard to this question, history stands to the other sciences as
In reply Boris wrote these lines:
In reply to an inquiry about the convicts in the prison, Count
In reply to the count's anxious inquiries as to why she was so dejected
In seeking the laws of historical movement just the same thing happens.
In spite of Prince Andrew's disagreeable, ironical tone, in spite of
In spite of her one desire to see her brother as soon as possible, and
In spite of the many pills she swallowed and the drops and powders out
In spite of the obscurity of the soldier's words Pierre understood what
In spite of the trampling of the French gendarmes' horses, which were
In ten minutes the table was ready and a napkin spread on it. On the
In the Emperor's suite all exchanged rapid looks that expressed
In the Finnish war he also managed to distinguish himself. He had picked
In the Rostovs' staid old-fashioned house the dissolution of former
In the autumn of 1806 everybody had again begun talking of the war with
In the autumn the Rostovs returned to Moscow. Early in the winter
In the ballroom guests stood crowding at the entrance doors awaiting
In the beginning of the winter of 1805-6 Pierre received one of Anna
In the corner room at the Club, members gathered to read these
In the count's room, which was full of tobacco smoke, they talked of war
In the damp chill air and crowded closeness of the swaying carriage, she
In the darkness of the night one of the servants noticed, above the high
In the darkness, it seemed as though a gloomy unseen river was flowing
In the deathlike stillness only the tramp of horses was heard. This
In the deep gaze that seemed to look not outwards but inwards there
In the dining room, which like all the rooms in the house was
In the disposition it is said first that the batteries placed on the
In the domain of jurisprudence, which consists of discussions of how a
In the drawing room the conversation was still going on.
In the early days of October another envoy came to Kutuzov with a letter
In the evening Andrew and Pierre got into the open carriage and drove to
In the evening I went down to the countess and told a funny story about
In the evening Michael Ivanovich, sent by the prince, came to Princess
In the evening, after supper, when all were about to retire, Anatole
In the evening, when Prince Andrew had left, the countess went up to
In the experimental sciences what we know we call the laws of
In the eyes of the world Pierre was a great gentleman, the rather blind
In the family's feeling toward this wedding a certain awkwardness and
In the first case it was necessary to renounce the consciousness of an
In the first case, if inevitability were possible without freedom
In the first place the historian describes the activity of individuals
In the first place the marriage was not a brilliant one as regards
In the fourth act there was some sort of devil who sang waving his arm
In the fresh morning air were now heard, not two or three musket shots
In the hall she met her father, who had returned with bad news.
In the hall the porch door opened, and someone asked, "At home?" and
In the higher command there were two sharply defined parties: Kutuzov's
In the highest spirits Nicholas arrived at night at a hotel in Voronezh,
In the house that poetic dullness and quiet reigned which always
In the hut which the men had passed, the chief officers had gathered and
In the intervals of the dance the count, breathing deeply, waved and
In the last analysis we reach the circle of infinity--that final limit
In the letter from his parents was enclosed a letter of recommendation
In the long room, brightly lit up by the sun through the large windows,
In the meantime, not only was it known in the maidservants' rooms that
In the middle of a sober conversation begun by Ilagin about the year's
In the middle of his story, just as he was saying: "You cannot imagine
In the middle of the summer Princess Mary received an unexpected letter
In the middle of their talk in the sitting room, Dimmler came in and
In the middle of this fresh tale Pierre was summoned to the commander in
In the midst of a conversation on political matters Anna Pavlovna burst
In the midst of the third ecossaise there was a clatter of chairs being
In the midst of this conversation, which was beginning to interest
In the miserable, sobbing, enfeebled man whose leg had just been
In the morning Anna Mikhaylovna said to Pierre:
In the morning all that was left of the night mist on the heights was
In the morning, on an empty stomach, all the old questions appeared as
In the night he called his valet and told him to pack up to go to
In the offices and shops and at the post office everyone was talking
In the one case as in the other, on both sides the struggle provokes
In the organism of states such men are necessary, as wolves are
In the passage Denisov, with a pipe, was squatting on the threshold
In the past he had never been able to find that great inscrutable
In the porch and in the yard the men whom Petya had armed with swords
In the presence of Tikhon and the doctor the women washed what had been
In the rearguard, Dokhturov and others rallying some battalions kept up
In the room next their bedroom there was a confusion of sabers,
In the same way we can never imagine the action of a man quite devoid of
In the second act there was scenery representing tombstones, there was a
In the second case, if freedom were possible without inevitability we
In the second category Pierre reckoned himself and others like him,
In the second room of the inn the lieutenant was sitting over a dish of
In the shed everyone was ready, dressed, belted, shod, and only awaited
In the silence that ensued, the snoring of those who had fallen asleep
In the spring of 1807 he decided to return to Petersburg. On the way he
In the spring of 1809 he went to visit the Ryazan estates which had been
In the summer of 1809 Pierre returned to Petersburg. Our Freemasons knew
In the sunshine the air was warm, and that warmth was particularly
In the tavern, before which stood the doctor's covered cart, there were
In the third category he included those Brothers (the majority) who saw
In the third circle, Naryshkin was speaking of the meeting of the
In the total darkness the soldiers walked with Pierre to Mozhaysk.
In the vicinity of Bogucharovo were large villages belonging to the
In the village of Hosjeradek there were Russian troops retiring from
In the village through which they passed there were red lights and a
In the village, in the house, in the garden, by the well, by the pond,
In the winter of 1813 Nicholas married Princess Mary and moved to Bald
In the wood, wagons and horses were standing. The horses were eating
In the year 1812, when news of the war with Napoleon reached
In their attitude toward him could still be felt both uncertainty as
In their childlike glee, aroused by the fire and their luck in
In their new, clean, and light study with its small busts and pictures
In their rear, more than a mile from Mikulino where the forest came
In this contradiction lies the problem of free will, which from most
In this group Helene, as soon as she had settled in Petersburg with her
In this question he saw subtle cunning, as men of his type see cunning
In this room it was almost dark; only two tiny lamps were burning before
In this way two cavalry regiments galloped through the Semenovsk hollow
In truth everything presented itself in a dark and gloomy light to
In various corners of Moscow there still remained a few people aimlessly
In very few words Nicholas bought seventeen picked stallions for six
In what does the substance of those reproaches lie?
In whatever direction a ship moves, the flow of the waves it cuts
Influence in society, however, is a capital which has to be economized
Inhabitants of the city and villages, and you, workingmen and artisans,
Inside the shed Alpatych and the coachman arranged the tangled reins and
Instantly his regret at not having been in action and his dejected mood
Instead of an enemy, Nicholas found in Ilagin a stately and courteous
Instead of men endowed with divine authority and directly guided by
Instead of serried rows of bees sealing up every gap in the combs and
Instead of the demand of four months earlier to withdraw from Pomerania,
Instead of the moving horses and hussars' backs, he saw nothing before
International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
Into the insignificant, trifling, and artificial interests uniting that
Involuntarily Rostov recalled all the good he had heard about him from
Iogel's were the most enjoyable balls in Moscow. So said the mothers as
Iogel, flying about like a feather and bowing according to the rules of
Is everything ready?" he added. "Only tell me where to go and where to
Is it possible that the meaning of life was not disclosed to him
Is that what you're here for? Nothing's cleared away down there and
Is the army retreating or will there be another battle?"
Is the movement of the Russian people eastward to Kazan and Siberia
Is the movement of the peoples at the time of the Crusades explained by
Ismail.
It began to run away only when suddenly seized by a panic caused by the
It cannot be the direct physical power of a strong man over a weak
It comforted her to reflect that she was not better as she had formerly
It had always seemed to Prince Andrew before that he was antipathetic
It had been raining since morning and had seemed as if at any moment it
It hurt her to think that while she lived only in the thought of him, he
It is easy now to understand the significance of these events--if
It is fate. Clearly it is fate that everything led up to this! Already
It is in your hands."
It is natural for a man who does not understand the workings of a
It is natural for us who were not living in those days to imagine that
It is time for bed."
It is very difficult for events to be reflected in their real strength
It lies in the fact that an historic character like Alexander I,
It naturally seemed to Napoleon that the war was caused by England's
It needs no critical exertion to reduce utterly to dust any deductions
It really was Melyukovka, and maids and footmen with merry faces came
It seemed as if from some words Boris had spoken that evening about the
It seemed so natural to Pierre that everyone should like him, and it
It seemed that all these men, now that they had stopped amid fields
It seemed to Daniel irksome and improper to be in a room at all, but to
It seemed to Natasha that even at the time she first saw Prince Andrew
It seemed to her that not only did everybody know that her fate would be
It seemed to her that something heavy was beating rhythmically against
It seemed to him that he was thinking of nothing, but far down and
It seemed to the count that things were beginning to stir in the French
It taught men to be wise and good and for their own benefit to follow
It very often happened that in a moment of irritation husband and wife
It was Dokhturov again whom they sent to Forminsk and from there to
It was Kutuzov, who had been riding round the position and on his way
It was Napoleon accompanied by two aides-de-camp. Bonaparte riding
It was Natasha, Sonya, and Petya, who had come to see whether they were
It was Prince Andrew. The first thing he saw on riding up to the space
It was St. Natalia's day and the name day of two of the Rostovs--the
It was a cavalry general who had obtained the Emperor's special favor
It was a gay and brilliant fete. Connoisseurs of such matters declared
It was a long time before Pierre could fall asleep that night. He paced
It was a long time before she could sleep. She kept thinking that no one
It was a portrait, painted in bright colors by Gerard, of the son borne
It was a system--a concurrence of circumstances.
It was a war for a great cause, the end of uncertainties and the
It was a warm rainy autumn day. The sky and the horizon were both
It was a warm, dark, autumn night. It had been raining for four days.
It was a warm, gray morning. Princess Mary stopped at the porch, still
It was a warm, rainy, autumnal day. The wide expanse that opened out
It was about eleven o'clock. The sun shone somewhat to the left and
It was all that they could do to get the guns up the rise aided by the
It was already dark, and Pierre could not make out whether the
It was already growing dusk when Denisov, Petya, and the esaul rode up
It was already late when he rose after sealing the letter. He wished
It was already quite dark when Prince Andrew rattled over the paved
It was already six in the morning and he still paced up and down the
It was already the beginning of June when on his return journey he drove
It was becoming dangerous to remain in Bogucharovo. News of the approach
It was becoming more and more dangerous to remain at Bald Hills, and
It was by now late in the afternoon. Half the street was in shadow, the
It was clear and frosty. Above the dirty, ill-lit streets, above the
It was clearing, and over the tops of the trees clouds were swiftly
It was eleven by the clock, but it seemed peculiarly dark out of doors.
It was empty in the sense that a dying queenless hive is empty.
It was evening. As usual after dinner he was slightly feverish, and his
It was evident that Prince Andrew was not interested in such abstract
It was evident that Prince Andrew's ironical tone toward the pilgrims
It was evident that he did not like the vicomte and was aiming his
It was evident that this strange, strong man was under the irresistible
It was far from being the same words or the same order that reached the
It was getting dusk when Prince Andrew and Pierre drove up to the front
It was growing light, the sky was clearing, only a single cloud lay in
It was impossible first because--as experience shows that a three-mile
It was impossible to give battle before information had been collected,
It was in French.
It was in July, 1805, and the speaker was the well-known Anna Pavlovna
It was just the moment before a big dinner when the assembled guests,
It was just then that he received a letter from his wife, who implored
It was just when the count's affairs had become so involved that it was
It was late in the evening when they entered the palace at Olmutz
It was long since Rostov had felt such enjoyment from music as he did
It was long since the Rostovs had news of Nicholas. Not till
It was nearly three o'clock but no one was yet asleep, when the
It was necessary to fight an unexpected battle at Smolensk to save our
It was nine o'clock in the morning. The fog lay unbroken like a sea down
It was no longer, as before, a dark, unseen river flowing through the
It was not Napoleon alone who had experienced that nightmare feeling
It was not a ball, nor had dancing been announced, but everyone knew
It was not the dress, but the face and whole figure of Princess Mary
It was not till nearly evening that the officer commanding the escort
It was now hot spring weather. The whole forest was already clothed in
It was on the very fact of being so young that Petya counted for success
It was one of those March nights when winter seems to wish to resume its
It was only at headquarters that there was depression, uneasiness, and
It was only by the keener wind that met them and the jerks given by the
It was only gradually during his convalescence that Pierre lost the
It was only now that he noticed wounded men staggering along or being
It was past one o'clock when Pierre left his friend. It was a cloudless,
It was plain that Balashev's personality did not interest him at all.
It was plain that l'amour which the Frenchman was so fond of was not
It was plain that the Russian nest was ruined and destroyed, but in
It was plain that this "well?" referred to much that they both
It was plain that this cadet had already repeatedly asked for a lift and
It was plain that what troubled him most was that he had grieved me.
It was pleasant and touching to see these little girls in love; but
It was quite impossible to understand these sounds. The doctor thought
It was rumored that Savary had been sent to propose to Alexander
It was said that Prince Vasili and the old count had turned upon the
It was so light that he could see the moonlight reflected from the metal
It was still quite dark outside. The rain was over, but drops were still
It was taking place at the English Club and someone near and dear to him
It was that first period of a campaign when troops are still in full
It was the custom for Mitka to play the balalayka in the huntsmen's room
It was the eve of St. Nicholas, the fifth of December, 1820. Natasha had
It was the feeling that induces a volunteer recruit to spend his last
It was the second night that neither of them had slept, watching the boy
It was the voice of the groom, trying to wake him. The sun shone
It was three o'clock in the morning. The footmen came in with sad and
It was true that a view over nearly the whole Russian position and the
It was two o'clock in the afternoon. The French had already entered
It was, in fact, only the commencement of the campaign that prevented
It was, in fact, solely to meet Prince Vasili that she had obtained an
It would be a mistake to think that this is ironic--a caricature of the
It would be difficult to explain why and whither ants whose heap
It would be too painful to me to think that I might be a cause of sorrow
It would have been senseless, first because Napoleon's disorganized
It would seem that having rejected the belief of the ancients in man's
It would take a dozen pages to enumerate all the reproaches the
It's all the Club and his easygoing nature. Even in the country do we
It's not pleasant, but what's to be done, my dear fellow? You landed
It's not true!"
It's such pain, you know, that I wonder how he can bear it."
It's too risky to attack them by oneself, and if we put it off till
Italian singing master), "that's why she's ashamed!"
Italian, but the latter had produced such letters from the unfortunate
Italian, oblivious of decorum, followed him and continued to speak.
Italy and on the Rhine; how fifty thousand Russians and as many English
Ivanovich (who always went into a corner to blow his nose on his checked
Ivanovich and now for Tikhon or Dron. Dunyasha, the nurse, and the other
Ivanovich are the two people to whom he is always gentle and kind,
Ivanovich went on, lowering his voice--"now he's at his desk, busy with
Ivanovich, the late prince's architect, who was living on in retirement
Ivanovna the buffoon sat with a sad face at the window with two old
Ivanovna, joyously playing with the word, called it, seemed to Natasha
Ivanovna, the priest was a man of very severe and lofty life. There were
Ivanushka's face, who, seeing that she was being spoken about, looked
Ivanushka, sipping out of her saucer, looked with sly womanish eyes from
JULIE
Jerusalem, and he responded in the same manner, asking me with a mild
Jests fell flat, news was not interesting, and the animation was
Jobert came to see Helene when she was alone, and after that often came
Joseph Alexeevich condemned my speech and my whole activity, and in the
Joseph Alexeevich is never weary of life though he loves death, for
Joseph Alexeevich was not in Petersburg--he had of late stood aside
Joseph, his valet, handed him his sabretache and saber, and they all
Julie Karagina in Petersburg, whom she had dreamed (as all girls dream)
Julie and Boris looked on one another as the only souls who understood
Julie had long been expecting a proposal from her melancholy adorer and
Julie on the contrary accepted his attentions readily, though in a
Julie said this was charming
Julie smiled.
Julie was at that stage in the life of a society woman when she feels
Julie was preparing to leave Moscow next day and was giving a farewell
Julie wrote in French:
June. The first army, with which was the Emperor, occupied the fortified
Junot's spoon might be of some use, but that cold and hungry soldiers
Just as "Uncle's" pickled mushrooms, honey, and cherry brandy had seemed
Just as Pierre reached the door, the corporal who had offered him a
Just as Prince Andrew met Nesvitski and Zherkov, there came toward them
Just as Prince Andrew was a young man who gave promise of rising high
Just as before, they never mentioned him so as not to lower (as they
Just as he was going to open it the sounds ceased, the door opened,
Just as he went in he saw that the nurse was hiding something from him
Just as horses shy and snort and gather about a dead horse, so the
Just as in a clock, the result of the complicated motion of innumerable
Just as in a dream when all is uncertain, unreasoning, and
Just as in the mechanism of a clock, so in the mechanism of the military
Just as prolonged and stubborn is the struggle now proceeding between
Just as the mother and son, having reached the middle of the hall, were
Just at the time Prince Andrew was living unoccupied at Drissa,
Just before dinner, Count Ilya Rostov presented his son to Bagration,
Just like a boy! And the legs!... I can't look at him..." different
Just once, looking into those eyes to say..."
Just so it now seems as if we have only to admit the law of
Just then Boris, with his courtierlike adroitness, stepped up to
Just then Count Bezukhov was announced. Husband and wife glanced at one
Just then Petya came running in from the drawing room.
Just then Zherkov entered the room.
Just then a closed carriage and another with a hood drove up to the
Just then a commissariat soldier, a hospital orderly, came in from the
Just then another visitor entered the drawing room: Prince Andrew
Just then at a distance behind Kutuzov was heard the sound of regiments
Just then the countess came in from the sitting room with a weary and
Just then the lady companion who lived with Helene came in to announce
Just then the last chords of the overture were heard and the conductor
Kaluga road and began to enter Forminsk, where only Broussier had
Karagins' with the firm intention of proposing. Julie met him in a gay,
Karagins'! Please come! No! Really, eh?" said he.
Karataev for its master.
Karataev generally lay down at the halting places, and when he smelled
Karataev looked at Pierre with his kindly round eyes now filled with
Karataev paused, smiling joyously as he gazed into the fire, and he drew
Karataev smiled thoughtfully and was silent awhile looking at the
Karataev's absence at this halt--and he was on the point of realizing
Karataev's advice he tied with string round the ankles for warmth, and
Karataev's face as he told it, and the mystic significance of that joy.
Karataev, on account of the warm weather and for convenience at work,
Karataev," he added, evidently wishing to make it easier for Pierre to
Karataev.
Karataev. Would he have approved of you now, do you think?"
Karl gained a victory, what effect would that have on the general course
Karp and Vlas (who after the French had evacuated Moscow drove in their
Karp, who possessed great influence in the village commune and had
Kashmir--that's settled. Vive l'Empereur! Hurrah! hurrah! hurrah! The
Kaysarov recited.... Kutuzov smilingly nodded his head to the rhythm of
Kaysarov was about to draw back the curtain of the window facing
Kaysarov, his adjutant's brother.
Kazan, and the things belonging to these institutions had already been
Keep calm, I will call again tomorrow," said Metivier; and putting his
Kiev province, where he had the greatest number of serfs, taking with
Kiev ware. "These--yes, these must go among the carpets," she said,
Kindle in all hearts the flame of virtue. Share thy happiness with thy
Kindly do as you are ordered."
King of Prussia and others: 'So much the worse for you. Tu l'as voulu,
King of Prussia what he is to do if he is summoned to surrender.... All
Kirilych--isn't it?"
Know, monseigneur, that in all that relates to my intimate feelings I
Knowing that Denisov had a reputation even in Poland for the masterly
Knyazkovo with a crowd of soldiers, reached the dressing station, and
Kochubey said a few words about the reception Arakcheev had given
Kochubey shook his head smilingly, as if surprised at Bolkonski's
Kochubey, and Strogonov--whom he himself in jest had called his Comite
Kolocha, and had he not then ordered an immediate attack on the redoubt
Kolocha, presents itself as obvious for an army whose object was to
Kolocha--which crosses the highroad not at a right angle but at an acute
Komoneno's. Pierre drove to the Club. In the Club all was going on as
Konovnitsyn had brought him.
Konovnitsyn had foreseen on the night of the eleventh of October began
Konovnitsyn had understood at once that the news brought was of great
Konovnitsyn's handsome, resolute face with cheeks flushed by fever,
Konovnitsyn, and Bolkhovitinov.
Konovnitsyn, who listened in weary silence, reminded him that they must
Kozlovski scanned the ranks resolutely and included Rostov in his
Kozlovski were squatting on the floor by a tub so near to the commander
Kozlovski, who was sitting at the window with a book.
Krasnoe and Orsha.
Krasnoe and the Berezina he deprived the Russian army of the glory of
Krasnoe. And here as in a game of blindman's buff the French ran into
Krasnoe. Toward evening--after much disputing and many mistakes made by
Kremlin and in Posnyakov's house were closed again at once because the
Kremlin, were thronging the Moskva and the Stone bridges, a great many
Kremlin.
Krems excited but not weary, with dispatches from Dokhturov to Kutuzov,
Kuragin asked her opinion of the performance and told her how at a
Kuragin have turned all our ladies' heads."
Kuragin in Turkey, Prince Andrew did not think it necessary to rush back
Kuragin into whose society Pierre's wife had thrown her and with whom
Kuragin was much more sensible and simple with women than among men.
Kuragin who he knew was now in the army.
Kuragin's.
Kutaysov is! How sorry I am!"
Kutuzov a garrison report and the keys of the town. The contemptuously
Kutuzov accompanied by his adjutants rode at a walking pace behind the
Kutuzov alone used all his power (and such power is very limited in the
Kutuzov alone would not see this and openly expressed his opinion that
Kutuzov as far as was in his power, instead of trying to check the
Kutuzov as they had done the day before, they condemned him as the cause
Kutuzov asking whether he wished his caleche to be sent for, Kutuzov in
Kutuzov bowed with the same smile.
Kutuzov by his willingness and accuracy in work. Not having found
Kutuzov ceased chewing and fixed an astonished gaze on Wolzogen, as
Kutuzov chose this latter course.
Kutuzov could not yet admit the possibility of retreating beyond Moscow
Kutuzov did not reply, but when they reported to him that Murat's troops
Kutuzov did not reply. He seemed to have forgotten what he had been
Kutuzov did not understand what Europe, the balance of power, or
Kutuzov fell back toward Vienna, destroying behind him the bridges over
Kutuzov felt and knew--not by reasoning or science but with the whole of
Kutuzov glanced inquiringly at him.
Kutuzov got out of his carriage and sat down on a bench by the roadside.
Kutuzov had a whip slung across his shoulder.
Kutuzov had found himself unable any longer to restrain the army he
Kutuzov here woke up, coughed heavily, and looked round at the generals.
Kutuzov himself with all his transport took the road to Znaim.
Kutuzov laughed bitterly.
Kutuzov like all old people did not sleep much at night. He often fell
Kutuzov looked at Rostopchin as if, not grasping what was said to him,
Kutuzov looked at him with eyes wide open with dismay and then took off
Kutuzov looked long and intently at these two soldiers. He puckered his
Kutuzov looked sternly at his adjutant and, after a pause, replied: "I
Kutuzov looked wearily at him and, lifting his hands with a gesture of
Kutuzov made a grimace and sent an order to Dokhturov to take over the
Kutuzov never talked of "forty centuries looking down from the
Kutuzov noticed Pierre's figure and the group gathered round him.
Kutuzov noticed an expression of extreme tension. He was satisfied with
Kutuzov only replied that movements arranged from a distance were always
Kutuzov raised his head and looked for a long while into the eyes of
Kutuzov replied to this letter as he had done to the one formerly
Kutuzov replied: "I should be cursed by posterity were I looked on as
Kutuzov reported so to the Emperor. He gave orders to prepare for a
Kutuzov sat up with one leg hanging down from the bed and his big paunch
Kutuzov seemed preoccupied and did not listen to what the general was
Kutuzov sighed deeply on finishing this paragraph and looked at the
Kutuzov swayed his head, as much as to say: "How is one man to deal with
Kutuzov to anyone; in his opinion Kutuzov was not only admirable
Kutuzov to report the offer he had received.
Kutuzov to the Emperor. "I can neither punish him if he does wrong nor
Kutuzov turned away. The same smile of the eyes with which he had turned
Kutuzov turned round without answering and his eye happened to fall upon
Kutuzov walked slowly and languidly past thousands of eyes which were
Kutuzov walked through the ranks, sometimes stopping to say a few
Kutuzov was chewing a piece of roast chicken with difficulty and glanced
Kutuzov was in Gorki, near the center of the Russian position. The
Kutuzov was occupying a nobleman's castle of modest dimensions near
Kutuzov was silent for a few seconds and then, submitting with evident
Kutuzov went out into the porch with Bagration.
Kutuzov went purple in the face, not because that officer was to blame
Kutuzov who, wearing a white cap with a red band and a padded overcoat
Kutuzov without replying, striking the table with his podgy fist. "They
Kutuzov's activity was directed toward restraining his troops, by
Kutuzov's adjutant whispered to Prince Andrew that this was the wife of
Kutuzov's and animated by different motives.
Kutuzov's expectations that the proposals of capitulation (which were in
Kutuzov's face as he stood in the open doorway remained perfectly
Kutuzov's flabby lips were trembling and that tears were in his eyes. He
Kutuzov's general expression was one of concentrated quiet attention,
Kutuzov's headquarters and the staffs of the commanders of columns. By
Kutuzov's merit lay, not in any strategic maneuver of genius, as it is
Kutuzov's order to retreat through Moscow to the Ryazan road was issued
Kutuzov's staff in charge of the provisioning of the Russian army, and
Kutuzov's suite like a flock of little birds.
Kutuzov's upper lip twitched unnaturally as he said the word "waiting.")
Kutuzov's whole army. To be able to crush it absolutely he awaited the
Kutuzov's words were hardly understood by the troops. No one could have
Kutuzov's, collected in groups and began to talk about the awards, about
Kutuzov's.
Kutuzov, Count Rostopchin had returned to Moscow mortified and offended
Kutuzov, but the latter moved his hand angrily and Kaysarov understood
Kutuzov, his gray head hanging, his heavy body relaxed. He gave no
Kutuzov, sat apart in a dark corner behind the oven. He sat, sunk deep
Kutuzov, shrugging his shoulders, replied with his subtle penetrating
Kutuzov, where he inquired for Bolkonski, all the adjutants and even the
Kutuzov, whom he had formerly praised (it was excusable for him in his
Kutuzov, whom he had overtaken in Poland, had received him very kindly,
Kutuzov, with his uniform unbuttoned so that his fat neck bulged over
Kutuzov, without looking at Wolzogen, gave directions for the order to
Kutuzov.
Kutuzov. With his sixty years' experience he knew what value to attach
Kutuzov."
Kutuzov: 'Your Emperor and the Fatherland award you this honor.'"
Kuzmich and at the same time his eyes glanced toward his daughter, and
Kuzmich, From all sides,'... and tears, till at last somebody else was
Kuzmich...' Poor Vyazmitinov could not get any farther! He began the
Kuzminichna tried to get as many of the wounded as possible into their
Kuzminichna who had entered silently. "How he's grinning, the fat mug!
Kuzminichna, and Vasilich came into the drawing room and, having closed
Kuzminichna, raising her arm threateningly. "Go and get the samovar to
Kuzminichna, who was standing at the gate, had him brought into the
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
Langeron's objections were valid but it was obvious that their chief
Langeron, trying as virulently as possible to sting Weyrother's vanity
Langeron, with a subtly ironical smile, again glancing round for support
Language: English
Lannes and was thrown into confusion. Bagration had sent Zherkov to the
Lannes' sharpshooters were already seen crossing the milldam and forming
Laocoon's head.
Larrey, was much more likely to end in death than in convalescence.
Last night a proposition was made me on your account and, as you know my
Late in the evening, when Rostov was about to leave, he asked Denisov
Late one evening the Rostovs' four sleighs drove into Marya Dmitrievna's
Late that night, when all had separated, Denisov with his short hand
Latterly that private life had become very trying for Princess Mary.
Laughter and singing in particular seemed to her like a blasphemy,
Lauriston and Barthelemi having been sent, and by the reports of the
Lavrushka about Napoleon and laughed at his stories, and raced one
Lavrushka noticed this and to entertain him further, pretending not to
Lavrushka turned all the bedding over, looked under the bed and under
Lavrushka was one of those coarse, bare-faced lackeys who have seen all
Lavrushka, however, ran up to Karp and seized him by the arms from
Lavrushka, understanding that this was done to perplex him and that
Lavrushka. "I know by now, if he wins he comes back early to brag about
Laws of motion of any kind become comprehensible to man only when he
Lay me down like a stone, O God, and raise me up like a loaf," he
Lazarev (who rolled his eyes and persistently gazed at his own monarch),
Lazarev sat in the place of honor. Russian and French officers embraced
Le charmant Hippolyte was surprising by his extraordinary resemblance
Learned military authorities quite seriously tell us that Kutuzov should
Left alone, Pierre went on smiling in the same way. Once or twice he
Lelorgne d'Ideville smilingly interpreted this speech to Napoleon thus:
Lelorgne d'Ideville, an interpreter, he overtook Napoleon at a gallop
Lemarrois had just arrived at a gallop with Bonaparte's stern letter,
Let the others make mistakes now!" said they, arguing that our
Let them twy me, I'm not afwaid of anyone. I've served the Tsar and
Let us be quite, quite friends."
Let us imagine two men who have come out to fight a duel with rapiers
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
Lichtenstein, le Prince, de Hohenlohe, and finally Prishprish, and so on
Lieutenant Colonel Denisov, better known as 'Vaska,'" said Denisov,
Life meanwhile--real life, with its essential interests of health and
Life was cheaper because it was circumscribed: that most expensive
Lightly swaying on the flexible springs of his carriage and no longer
Like Dokhturov he had the reputation of being a man of very limited
Like a somnambulist aroused from her sleep Natasha went out of the room
Like all men who have grown up in society, Prince Andrew liked meeting
Like all the others near the speaker, Prince Andrew looked at him with
Like some huge many-limbed animal, the regiment began to prepare its
Like the others, Anna Pavlovna Scherer showed Pierre the change of
Like wind over leaves ran an excited whisper: "They're coming! They're
Likhachev got up, rummaged in his pack, and soon Petya heard the warlike
Lise sighed too.
Listen, I'm w'iting to them stwaight. This is what I say: 'If I had
Listening to Bilibin he was already imagining how on reaching the army
Listening to the captain's tales, Pierre--as often happens late in the
Literary Archive Foundation
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
Little Mytishchi burning--set on fire by Mamonov's Cossacks.
Little Nicholas and his education, her brother Andrew, and religion were
Little Nicholas cried because his heart was rent by painful perplexity.
Little Tushin, moving feebly and awkwardly, kept telling his orderly to
Little as Nicholas had occupied himself with Sonya of late, something
Livonian gentleman should propose marriage to a Countess Rostova; but
Loaded carts stood at the house next to Ferapontov's and women were
Lobnoe Place, Pierre had so definitely made up his mind that he could no
Lodge--were so strong that he could not resist them. Again whole days,
Lodge. Willarski coughed, he was answered by the Masonic knock with
Look at the smoke, the smoke!" exclaimed the artillerymen, brightening
Look what folks are saying."
Looking down at the waters of the Enns under the bridge, Nesvitski
Lopukhin and the old general occasionally took part in the conversation.
Lord!" and he wept.
Lorrain considered.
Lorrain in French which he pronounced badly.
Lorrain, pursing up his lips, waved a severely negative finger before
Louis XVI. But why did it not react on Louis XIV or on Louis XV--why
Lubyanka Street.
Lucca laying their petitions before Monsieur Buonaparte, and Monsieur
M. de Beausset, the man so fond of travel, having fasted since morning,
MARY
MARY
MONSIEUR LE PRINCE KOUTOUZOV: I am sending one of my adjutants-general
MOSCOW, OCTOBER 30, 1812
Mack, have by now already gained a decisive victory and no longer need
Mack, the news of his defeat, and the thought of what lay before the
Madame Schoss, but perhaps it's not, and this Circassian with the
Madame Schoss, who had been out to visit her daughter, increased the
Madame de Souza. He began reading about the sufferings and virtuous
Madame de Stael, and others spoke certain words to one another only
Mademoiselle Bourienne alone smiled agreeably.
Mademoiselle Bourienne and Lise. Both these women quite sincerely tried
Mademoiselle Bourienne and had read the note to Princess Mary in which
Mademoiselle Bourienne and the little princess had to own to themselves
Mademoiselle Bourienne blushing.
Mademoiselle Bourienne came into Princess Mary's room smiling and making
Mademoiselle Bourienne either. Tikhon alone attended him.
Mademoiselle Bourienne gave a scream and ran away. Anatole bowed to
Mademoiselle Bourienne in her arms and gently stroking her hair. The
Mademoiselle Bourienne jumped up eagerly.
Mademoiselle Bourienne took from her reticule a proclamation (not
Mademoiselle Bourienne walked up and down the conservatory for a long
Mademoiselle Bourienne was the first to recover herself after this
Mademoiselle Bourienne's advice had allowed this doctor to visit him and
Mademoiselle Bourienne's and Anatole's smiles, and the loneliness of his
Mademoiselle Bourienne's hand. (This was not etiquette, but then he did
Mademoiselle Bourienne's ribbon, Princess Mary's unbecoming coiffure,
Mademoiselle Bourienne's voice. "We must go at once, at once!" she said,
Mademoiselle Bourienne, also roused to great excitement by Anatole's
Mademoiselle Bourienne, and subsided into his study.
Mademoiselle Bourienne, the cause of her misery, but also to the man who
Mademoiselle Bourienne. The idea that at the first moment of receiving
Mademoiselle George looked sternly and gloomily at the audience and
Mademoiselle George, expressing their enthusiasm.
Mademoiselle George, with her bare, fat, dimpled arms, and a red shawl
Mademoiselle George; that at her house he came upon Bonaparte, who also
Mademoiselle Przazdziecka (out of rivalry to the Uhlans who had given
Mademoiselle Sophie, whatever may happen, to turn to him alone for
Madonna was depicted playing at stick and ball. The ball represented the
Madrid.
Magnitski have been deported to their proper place. Mr. Klyucharev has
Magnitski was going to say. When Prince Andrew entered the room
Magnitski's words were again crowned by laughter. Stolypin gave a deep
Majesty of Balashev's mission, whose name he could not pronounce.
Majesty to preserve humanity from the calamity of another war. I am,
Majesty's service demands that the army should be rallied at Smolensk
Majesty, "who, thank God, was better today." And each visitor, though
Majesty.
Major-General Grekov with two Cossack regiments decided to go with the
Makar Alexeevich was standing with parted lips, swaying, as if about to
Makarin embraced Anatole with tears in his eyes.
Makarin, a retired hussar, a kindly, weak fellow who had an unbounded
Malakhov Gate, he had hardly dozed off in a paroxysm of fever before he
Malasha, who had long been expected for supper, climbed carefully
Malasha, who kept her eyes fixed on what was going on before her,
Malo-Yaroslavets the field of conflict again remained theirs) without
Malo-Yaroslavets, but Kutuzov lingered with the main army and gave
Malo-Yaroslavets, the place where the last battle with the French was
Malvintseva had evidently not liked, and having asked what Nicholas
Mamma does not understand. It is wonderful how clever I am and how...
Mamma had long been thinking of it; but I had never happened to meet her
Mamma said she was angling for you. How could she say such a thing! I
Mamma too! Only you need not have bought me this," she added, unable to
Mamonov's regiments which looted Russian villages, and the lint the
Man can be master of nothing while he fears death, but he who does not
Man in connection with the general life of humanity appears subject
Man is the creation of an all-powerful, all-good, and all-seeing God.
Man lives consciously for himself, but is an unconscious instrument in
Man's actions proceed from his innate character and the motives acting
Man's free will differs from every other force in that man is directly
Man's mind cannot grasp the causes of events in their completeness, but
Many have died these last days on the road or at the bivouacs. This
Many historians say that the French did not win the battle of Borodino
Many persons withdrew from the circle, noticing the senator's sarcastic
Marching thirty miles that stormy night across roadless hills, with his
Marina and drowned some eighteen thousand in one day."
Markov, and Prince Vyazemski--did not show themselves at the Club, but
Markov, probably expecting Markov to pick it up for him, and how Markov
Martinists, even in Novikov's time. For a long while after he had gone,
Mary Hendrikhovna assented and began looking for the spoon which someone
Mary Hendrikhovna was the wife of the regimental doctor, a pretty young
Mary Hendrikhovna, asking her to stir it with her finger.
Mary did not frighten them (she never inspired fear in anyone), but they
Mary entered the antechamber as usual at the time appointed for the
Mary for Prince Andrew's letter which had been forgotten in the drawing
Mary for the first time, "to forget yourself again before her as you
Mary looked at them in silence. She could not understand it. At last
Mary more than anything else; this was his ever-increasing intimacy with
Mary stop short on the threshold.
Mary that he was even glad that the family connection between them
Mary to emerge from the realm of secluded contemplation in which she
Mary turned red and then pale, but continued to sit with head bowed and
Mary! Say..." And the little princess began to cry capriciously like
Mary's happiness.
Mary's questions and hardly refrained from sobbing as he looked at her.
Mary, and the little princess. Prince Andrew had been called to his
Mary, but did not at once take his arm from the waist of Mademoiselle
Mary, of the theater, and of Kuragin mingled with her thoughts. The
Mary, to whom they were trying to get him engaged, he could never
Mary, who had been won by his gentleness with the pilgrims, gave him her
Mary--"Haven't you read it?"
Mary.
Mary.
Mary.
Mary.
Mary.
Mary.
Mary. How good it would be to know where to seek for help in this life,
Mary. Neither he nor she said a word about what "Natasha nursing him"
Mary. The countess did not sleep at night, or when she did fall asleep
Mary. They had evidently both formed the same resolution; the eyes of
Mary: that she purposely worried and irritated him, and that by
Marya Antonovna! And how simply she is dressed! Lovely! And that stout
Marya Dmitrievna and the count, both with merry countenances. The count,
Marya Dmitrievna and the countess burst out laughing, and all the guests
Marya Dmitrievna came back to dinner taciturn and serious, having
Marya Dmitrievna informed him that Natasha had refused Prince Andrew
Marya Dmitrievna is with her and she too asks you to come."
Marya Dmitrievna liked Sundays and knew how to keep them. Her whole
Marya Dmitrievna on her right and Anna Mikhaylovna on her left, the
Marya Dmitrievna only shrugged her shoulders.
Marya Dmitrievna went on admonishing her for some time, enjoining on her
Marya Dmitrievna who had such faith in Natasha seemed to Sonya terrible.
Marya Dmitrievna, curved his arms, beat time, straightened his
Marya Dmitrievna, having found Sonya weeping in the corridor, made her
Marya Dmitrievna.
Marya Dmitrievna. He drew himself up, a smile of debonair gallantry lit
Marya Ignatevna Peronskaya, a thin and shallow maid of honor at the
Master began answering him, and Pierre began developing his views with
Master, "but those between virtue and vice. Beware of making any
Matins, or Mass.
Matrena Matrevna and ask her for the sable cloak. I have heard what
Mavra Kuzminichna and Vasilich, who were to remain in Moscow, and while
Mavra Kuzminichna cordially.
Mavra Kuzminichna did not let him finish.
Mavra Kuzminichna flicked the dust off the clavichord and closed it, and
Mavra Kuzminichna grew abashed and confused. The officer did not
Mavra Kuzminichna opened the gate and an officer of eighteen, with the
Mavra Kuzminichna went to the gate.
Mavra Kuzminichna, who stood talking compassionately to the officer.
Meantime, according to the dispositions which said that "the First
Meanwhile Kutuzov had reached the village and seated himself in the
Meanwhile Morel was sitting in the best place by the fire, surrounded by
Meanwhile Moscow was empty. There were still people in it, perhaps a
Meanwhile Nesvitski, Zherkov, and the officer of the suite were standing
Meanwhile Prince Vasili had opened the door into the princess' room.
Meanwhile an agitated consultation was being carried on in whispers
Meanwhile another column was to have attacked the French from the front,
Meanwhile downstairs in young Nicholas Bolkonski's bedroom a little lamp
Meanwhile the staff officer standing in front pointed out something to
Meanwhile the younger generation: Boris, the officer, Anna Mikhaylovna's
Meanwhile, Mavra Kuzminichna was attentively and sympathetically
Meanwhile, Petya, having found and seized the sabers in the outer room,
Meanwhile, the city itself was deserted. There was hardly anyone in the
Melyukova was a widow, who, with her family and their tutors and
Melyukovka, it is still stranger that we drove heaven knows where and
Melyukovka? Heaven only knows where we are going, and heaven knows what
Melyukovs'."
Men are hauling a log. Each of them expresses his opinion as to how and
Men uniting in these combinations always assume such relations toward
Men. How is it you know everything? Why do I alone not see what you see?
Mere to be inscribed on the charitable institutions, thereby combining
Merry senseless words of abuse flowed freely.
Met by this difficulty historians of that class devise some most
Metivier out by the scruff of his neck because he is a Frenchman and a
Metivier, shrugging his shoulders, went up to Mademoiselle Bourienne who
Metivier, who came in the morning with his felicitations, considered
Michael Ivanovich did not at all know when "you and I" had said such
Michael Ivanovich rose and went to the study. But as soon as he had left
Michael Ivanovich went up to the plan, and the prince after speaking to
Michael Zakharych was in the library, but Paul Timofeevich had not yet
Michaud had only waited for this to bring out the phrase he had
Michaud respectfully delivered the message Kutuzov had entrusted to him,
Mikhaylovich Volkonski and Baron Stein, and the door closed behind them.
Mikhaylovna and snatching the portfolio from her.
Mikhaylovna entered the hall. Though she came upon the count in his
Mikhaylovna evinced no surprise, she only smiled faintly and sighed, as
Mikhaylovna out of the carriage, and only then began to think of the
Mikhaylovna returned to the Rostovs' and went to bed. On waking in the
Mikhaylovna whom I would not take for a housemaid... the infamous, vile
Mikhaylovna with her eyes indicated a chair that stood beside the bed.
Mikhaylovna's voice alone in a long speech, then a cry, then silence,
Mikhaylovna, or you will not hold out."
Mikhaylovna, whom she had not seen properly since she returned from
Mikhaylovna.
Mikhaylovna.
Mikhaylovna. Though the latter held on tenaciously, her voice lost none
Military Settlement. We join hands only for the public welfare and the
Military science, seeing in history innumerable instances of the fact
Miloradovich asking whether he is to engage the French or retire. An
Miloradovich had not yet arrived with the militia, and for many other
Miloradovich too was away, but here he was told that he had gone to a
Miloradovich wheeled his horse sharply and stationed himself a little
Miloradovich, who said he did not want to know anything about the
Mind, the last..." concluded the prince, in a tone which showed that
Minister of Foreign Affairs, Prince Adam Czartoryski.... It is such men
Minister of This and B Governor General of That, and that the Emperor
Minister of War."
Minister should command the army, does not love our sovereign and
Minnesingers can evidently not cover the life of the peoples. And the
Mishka had opened the clavichord and was strumming on it with
Mitenka flew headlong down the six steps and ran away into the
Mitenka's wife and sisters-in-law thrust their heads and frightened
Mitya was naughty at table. Papa said he was to have no pudding. He had
Modern history has rejected the beliefs of the ancients without
Modern history replying to these questions says: you want to know what
Modern history, in theory, rejects both these principles.
Mokhavaya, or Kutafyev Street, nor the Troitsa Gate (places familiar in
Moldavia and Wallachia; I would have given your sovereign those
Momentum (quantity of motion) is the product of mass and velocity.
Monsieur Magnitski," he said, fully articulating every word and
Monsieur Pierre!"
Monsieur Pierre?" he concluded.
Monsieur mon frere,
Montesquieu," he added with a smile. "You know how much I..." he began
Morally the wielder of power appears to cause the event; physically
Morand and Gerard did not take the redoubt but were driven back, and the
Morand's and Gdrard's divisions (for whose movements no directions are
More important still, Alpatych learned that on the morning of the
More men collected behind the wattle fence of the Eighth Company than
More than anyone else, Prince Vasili took possession of Pierre's affairs
More than anything else in Pierre's story the captain was impressed by
More than two hours passed and Gerasim took the liberty of making a
Moreau," he said, alluding to the invitation made that year to Moreau
Morel brought candles and a bottle of wine. The captain looked at Pierre
Morel will warm us up another little bottle. Morel!" he called out
Morel, a short sturdy Frenchman with inflamed and streaming eyes, was
Morel, wrinkling up his face, laughed too.
Moreover, he could see by her manners that she was one of those
Moreover, paying such honor to Bagration was the best way of expressing
Moreover, the assertion made by various writers that his cold was
Morgen!" * he said winking with a merry smile, evidently pleased to
Morio? He is a most interesting man."
Morning came with its cares and bustle. Everyone got up and began to
Moscou, la capitale asiatique de ce grand empire, la ville sacree des
Moscow I will accept terms of peace worthy of myself and of my people.
Moscow after that battle had said unanimously that it was impossible to
Moscow after the death of Count Bezukhov, he would call Pierre, or go to
Moscow and Petersburg, came to see him. Berg arrived in an immaculate
Moscow and of a leaflet in circulation stating that Napoleon promised
Moscow and the position of our army, round which he had ridden. Prince
Moscow and when traveling, but at such times I collapsed so that I don't
Moscow any day, the trousseau had to be ordered and the estate near
Moscow are elated by enthusiasm for our adored Emperor.
Moscow as blood flows to the heart.
Moscow as that year.
Moscow balls.
Moscow based in 1812? What reason was there for assuming any probability
Moscow gave General Sabastiani strict orders to observe the movements
Moscow had to be sold, besides which the opportunity of presenting his
Moscow had to burn as inevitably as a heap of shavings has to burn on
Moscow in the month of October there was no government and no churches,
Moscow is not the loss of Russia. In reply to Lauriston's proposal of
Moscow ladies have conspired to give him all their sons as adjutants."
Moscow ladies, the Moscow balls, and the English Club, he felt himself
Moscow long since.
Moscow ought to be grateful to Napoleon. It was said that Mamonov's
Moscow society in 1812. Those who had quitted Moscow already in July
Moscow society, from the old women down to the children, received Pierre
Moscow society. For a long time he could not reconcile himself to the
Moscow their house was always full of visitors. The night after the
Moscow to carry off to the villages what had been abandoned in the
Moscow was a misfortune."--"I regret it very much, my dear sir."
Moscow was no longer, as it had been, to conquer, but merely to keep
Moscow where there was to be fighting in a few days, and chiefly because
Moscow who was expected every moment, and men on horseback with lanterns
Moscow without a battle," though Moscow was then already abandoned. When
Moscow without a battle?" Kutuzov replied: "And I shall not abandon
Moscow!"
Moscow's last day had come. It was a clear bright autumn day, a Sunday.
Moscow), but a new battlefield which would probably prove sanguinary.
Moscow, 17th November
Moscow, a thin, sallow, tattered French soldier came up to the door of
Moscow, and I promise you I will see to it that there you shall want for
Moscow, and news of the surrender of Moscow to the French spread through
Moscow, and now allowed Madame Aubert-Chalme (the center of the whole
Moscow, and of how some German fellow had been brought to Rostopchin
Moscow, and to this Shinshin's witticism was added--that for that alone
Moscow, and when did I do so? When was it decided? Can it have been
Moscow, concealing his name, and must meet Napoleon and kill him, and
Moscow, entered the room.
Moscow, minutely explained to him his whole policy and his magnanimity,
Moscow, or losing Moscow alone, the field marshal had to choose the
Moscow, or of the roughness of their treatment by the French, or of the
Moscow, or victory, or glory (what need had he for any more glory?). The
Moscow, spoke of the direction the army should take in its retreat.
Moscow, when the whole population streamed out of Moscow as one man,
Moscow, which had just been printed, the last army orders, and his own
Moscow--filled Pierre's soul during his convalescence. He was surprised
Moscow.
Moscow. All Denisov's Moscow friends gave him a farewell entertainment
Moscow. All the members of the lodges were men Pierre knew in ordinary
Moscow. As a result he could not go to the country with the rest of the
Moscow. Half the wagons laden with hardtack that had traveled the first
Moscow. I am just starting myself. Inform them..."
Moscow. In front rode a detachment of Wurttemberg hussars and behind
Moscow. Pierre knew this, but instead of acting he only thought about
Moscow. The remembrance of the Rostovs' house and of his childish love
Moscow. The state of the count's affairs became quite obvious a month
Moscow. They had started so late on the first of September, the road
Moscow. Wait for me!"
Moscow; and though there was nothing for him to do at Bald Hills, Prince
Moscow; for he foresees the encounters that would result from his way
Moscow; then he suddenly ran away from Moscow, and the Emperor
Moscow? They meant to leave for the country long ago. Natalie is quite
Moscow? What a queer idea! What had they to be afraid of?"
Moscow? Yes, here it lies before me, but why is the deputation from the
Moscow? Yes, there she lies."
Moscow?" he asked.
Moscow?" he asked.
Most of the guests, uncertain how to regard this sally, looked at the
Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:
Mother keep you in their holy and all-powerful care!
Mounting his horse again Prince Andrew lingered with the battery,
Mounting the steps to the knoll Pierre looked at the scene before him,
Mouton who, speaking last, said what they all felt: that the one thing
Moving the money forward he prepared to deal. Rostov sat down by his
Mozhaysk and understood what the soldier had meant when he said: "They
Mozhaysk.
Much that they remembered had slipped from her mind, and what she
Murat approached the interpreter and told him to ask where the Russian
Murat had not lost sight of the Russians? If Napoleon had not remained
Murat solemnly drew himself up, assumed the pose in which he had stood
Murat was informed that the way had been cleared. The French entered
Murat was spending the night less than a mile from where they were,
Murat was there, and they all gazed eagerly at this little group of
Murat's face beamed with stupid satisfaction as he listened to "Monsieur
Murat. Bonaparte himself, not trusting to his generals, moved with all
Murat:
Murmurs arose among the wounded who were waiting.
Muttering to herself, she sat down on a chair.
My Lady, but the well-known song: Came a maiden down the street. The
My dear pet!"
My father has not spoken to me of a suitor, but has only told me that
My leisure then, and my old age, would have been devoted, in company
My youngest daughter is left behind. She's burned! Ooh! Was it for this
Mytishchi a mile and a half away, and through the night came the noise
Mytishchi she moved into a worse hut simply to be farther away from the
NAPOLEON
NAPOLEON
NAPOLEON
Naples, who knows what's what, cried 'Bravo!' Ha, ha! So you are one of
Napoleon also did all in his power. He caused the words Maison de ma
Napoleon and Alexander, but we shall be unable to consider them to
Napoleon and defeats for Kutuzov.
Napoleon and his marshals--and that aim was not merely frustrated but
Napoleon at the battle of Borodino fulfilled his office as
Napoleon began the war with Russia because he could not resist going
Napoleon bowed his head and remained silent a long time.
Napoleon came out of the tent the shouting of the Guards before his
Napoleon did not notice that in regard to his army he was playing the
Napoleon did not sit well or firmly in the saddle. The battalions
Napoleon enters Moscow after the brilliant victory de la Moskowa; there
Napoleon expected him to be frightened, to gratify his new masters
Napoleon felt this, and from the time he took up the correct fencing
Napoleon frowned and sat silent for a long time leaning his head on his
Napoleon grinned maliciously and again raised his snuffbox to his nose.
Napoleon had assented and had given orders that news should be brought
Napoleon having cut our armies apart advanced far into the country and
Napoleon his waterproof boots on the twenty-fourth would have been
Napoleon if we take this bridge, so let us three go and take it!' 'Yes,
Napoleon into the depths of the country was not the result of any plan,
Napoleon knew that it was only necessary for his hand to deign to touch
Napoleon looked at him.
Napoleon looked up and down the river, dismounted, and sat down on a log
Napoleon meant. He could not understand it. For the representative of
Napoleon met Balashev cheerfully and amiably. He not only showed no sign
Napoleon might fight him with his own weapon and remain in Moscow
Napoleon nodded and walked away.
Napoleon nodded assent.
Napoleon noticed Balashev's embarrassment when uttering these last
Napoleon noticed at once what they were about and guessed that they were
Napoleon ordered an army to be raised and go to war. We are so
Napoleon preferred to supply them with money with which to purchase food
Napoleon raised his voice.
Napoleon rode on, dreaming of the Moscow that so appealed to his
Napoleon rode over the plain and surveyed the locality with a profound
Napoleon rose and having summoned Caulaincourt and Berthier began
Napoleon sat at the foot of the knoll, drinking punch, when Murat's
Napoleon sat on a campstool, wrapped in thought.
Napoleon shook his head in dissatisfaction as if not believing that
Napoleon shrugged his shoulders and continued to pace up and down
Napoleon silently shook his head in negation. Assuming the negation to
Napoleon slightly turned his head, and put his plump little hand out
Napoleon smiled and told them to give the Cossack a horse and bring the
Napoleon smiled and, lifting his head absent-mindedly, glanced to the
Napoleon suddenly and unexpectedly gave a new one.
Napoleon termed the church of Basil the Beatified) was to have been
Napoleon to Madame de Stael, Photius, Schelling, Fichte, Chateaubriand,
Napoleon took a lozenge, put it in his mouth, and glanced at his watch.
Napoleon turned to him gaily and pulled his ear.
Napoleon walked about in front of his tent, looked at the fires and
Napoleon was already not far from Kutuzov on the old Kaluga road.
Napoleon was experiencing a feeling of depression like that of an
Napoleon was in that well-known after-dinner mood which, more than
Napoleon was so concerned, produced an unheard-of result. The French
Napoleon was standing among his troops on the Poklonny Hill looking at
Napoleon who said it. He heard the speaker addressed as Sire. But he
Napoleon wished to come to Moscow, grew angry, abused the French in very
Napoleon with even greater warmth than the year before. Orders were
Napoleon with his suite rode up to the Shevardino Redoubt where he
Napoleon's army felt this and the invasion moved on by its own momentum.
Napoleon's army had only awaited to begin its flight.
Napoleon's army was retiring, incomparably greater forces than the
Napoleon's eyes Prince Andrew thought of the insignificance of
Napoleon's face as, shading his eyes with his hand, he looked at the
Napoleon's face wore an unpleasant and artificial smile. Alexander was
Napoleon's generals--Davout, Ney, and Murat, who were near that region
Napoleon's historians describe to us his skilled maneuvers at Tarutino
Napoleon's own. See what horses! And the monograms with a crown! It's
Napoleon's proclamation was as follows:
Napoleon's soldiers who were not on duty--Germans, Italians, and
Napoleon's wish, but one of them was slapped in the face by a French
Napoleon's, there were also several French officers of the Guard, and
Napoleon's, were concentrated in one place, the troops inspired by the
Napoleon, Berthier's eyes turned to look at a general with a suite, who
Napoleon, accentuating each syllable, as with a composure and assurance
Napoleon, and he himself, thought otherwise.
Napoleon, predestined by Providence for the gloomy role of executioner
Napoleon, riding to Valuevo on the twenty-fourth, did not see (as the
Napoleon, standing on the knoll, looked through a field glass, and in
Napoleon, the firmness he displayed in 1812 and the campaign of 1813)
Napoleon, the man of genius, did this! But to say that he destroyed his
Napoleon, with his usual assurance that whatever entered his head was
Napoleon--hardly able to keep pace in words with the rush of thoughts
Napoleon. And all this was found in Alexander I; all this had been
Napoleon. It was plain to him that all these things were no business
Napoleon. They did not fear getting into trouble for not fulfilling
Napoleon."
Napoleonic alliance, the circle of Count Rumyantsev and Caulaincourt.
Narrow and burdensome and useless to anyone as his life now seemed to
Naryshkin, Uvarov, Dolgorukov, Apraksin, Valuev, to the committee, to
Nastasya Ivanovna.
Natasha Rostova!"
Natasha a Cossack) and she stroked the child's arm as she came up
Natasha alone, yet the cares of life demanded her attention and she
Natasha and Boris, escape from the drawing room.
Natasha and I used to as children, that the snow might turn into
Natasha and Pierre were living in Petersburg at the time and had no
Natasha and Pierre, left alone, also began to talk as only a husband
Natasha and Princess Mary also wept now, but not because of their own
Natasha and sat down beside her. Pierre saw how Prince Andrew asked her
Natasha and the countess remained in the room. Petya was no longer
Natasha and was about to sit down beside her, but the count, who never
Natasha and whispered: "Well, what?"
Natasha as grown up.
Natasha asked nothing for herself, and gave him commissions for others
Natasha at that moment felt so softened and tender that it was not
Natasha ate of everything and thought she had never seen or eaten such
Natasha awoke and saw Sonya.
Natasha became thoughtful.
Natasha began in a mild voice such as children use when they wish to be
Natasha began putting on the dress.
Natasha began to sing her mother's favorite song.
Natasha blushed and laughed.
Natasha blushed happily. "I like him and all his family. Now listen! You
Natasha blushed scarlet when she heard this.
Natasha came in and walking straight up to Pierre said, laughing and
Natasha considered.
Natasha continued to lean out of the window for a long time, beaming at
Natasha continued: "Don't you really understand? Nicholas would
Natasha could not be binding either on her or on him. He had a brilliant
Natasha could not remain calm, seeing him in such a plight. She began to
Natasha did not answer her questions.
Natasha did not care for society in general, but prized the more the
Natasha did not change her position, but her whole body heaved with
Natasha did not follow the golden rule advocated by clever folk,
Natasha did not hear him.
Natasha did not let her finish. She drew the countess' large hand to
Natasha did not like the visitor's tone of condescension to childish
Natasha did not remember how that day passed nor that night, nor the
Natasha did not reply, nor did she sob any longer, but she grew cold
Natasha did not speak to Sonya again and avoided her. With the same
Natasha did not understand what he was saying any more than he did
Natasha did not want to go, but could not refuse Marya Dmitrievna's kind
Natasha did. She could not see people unconcernedly, but had to send
Natasha drew closer to him. Her face shone with rapturous joy.
Natasha entered with a softened and agitated expression of face and
Natasha entered, and his face expressed rapturous astonishment. This
Natasha experienced a feeling new to her, a sense of the possibility
Natasha fell in love the very moment she entered the ballroom. She
Natasha felt happy and agitated, but at once remembered that this would
Natasha felt offended by the hesitation she had noticed in the anteroom,
Natasha felt very strongly with him that moral barrier the absence of
Natasha first one thing and then another.
Natasha flared up. "I don't want to marry anyone. And I'll tell him so
Natasha gave him her hand and went out. Princess Mary on the other hand
Natasha glanced at her ironically without knowing why.
Natasha glanced with frightened eyes at the face of the wounded officer
Natasha glanced with frightened imploring eyes at Prince Andrew and at
Natasha had already opened her mouth to speak but suddenly stopped.
Natasha had broken off her engagement. He seemed in better spirits than
Natasha had grown thin and pale and physically so weak that they all
Natasha had made a strong impression on Kuragin. At supper after
Natasha had married in the early spring of 1813, and in 1820 already had
Natasha had not had a moment free since early morning and had not once
Natasha had promised to come out to Kuragin at the back porch at ten
Natasha had said to him: "Are you remaining in Moscow?... How splendid!"
Natasha had told him that she had rejected Bolkonski.
Natasha had too much of something, and that because of this she would
Natasha had tried to elope during her father's absence, in order to be
Natasha he approached his sister, laid his well gloved hand on the edge
Natasha in a mortified voice that trembled slightly. (She used the word
Natasha in the tone of one being deprived of her property. "Well, I
Natasha involuntarily gazed at that neck, those shoulders, and pearls
Natasha kept pulling everyone by sleeve or dress, urging them to "look
Natasha kissed her on the hair.
Natasha knew so well, the deacon brought out a small stool, the one he
Natasha knew that she ought to go away, but was unable to do so:
Natasha knew why he mentioned Mitya's likeness to Nicholas: the
Natasha laughed, and the countess too smiled slightly.
Natasha lay on the bed and in the semidarkness of the room scanned
Natasha left the room with her father and, as if finding it difficult to
Natasha listened with concentrated attention, trying but failing to take
Natasha lit the candles, one on each side of one of the looking glasses,
Natasha looked at Sonya with astonishment. Evidently this question
Natasha looked at Sonya with wide-open eyes as if she could not grasp
Natasha looked at Sonya with wondering and inquisitive eyes, and said
Natasha looked at her inquiringly.
Natasha looked at her with eyes full of tears and in her look there was
Natasha looked at him, and by way of answer to his words her eyes
Natasha looked at the fat actress, but neither saw nor heard nor
Natasha looked from one to the other as a hunted and wounded animal
Natasha looked in the direction in which her father's eyes were turned
Natasha looked in the mirrors and could not distinguish her reflection
Natasha looked intently at him and went on:
Natasha looked joyfully at the familiar face of Pierre, "the buffoon,"
Natasha moved a few steps forward and stopped shyly, still holding her
Natasha neither saw nor heard her. She went in with rapid steps, pausing
Natasha never remembered how she entered the drawing room. When she came
Natasha no less proud of her first long dress and of being at a real
Natasha only desisted when she had been told that there would be
Natasha put her hand on her mother's mouth.
Natasha put one knee on the armchair, stooped over her mother, embraced
Natasha quieted herself for a moment, but again some instinct told her
Natasha quietly repeated her question, and her face and whole
Natasha raised her head and, kissing her friend on the lips, pressed her
Natasha ran into the house and went on tiptoe through the half-open door
Natasha ran with light footsteps to the anteroom.
Natasha rejoined with conviction. "The soul is immortal--well then, if I
Natasha remained alone and, from the time Princess Mary began making
Natasha remained silent, from shyness Marya Dmitrievna supposed, but
Natasha rose and curtsied to the splendid countess. She was so pleased
Natasha sat down and, without joining in Boris' conversation with the
Natasha sat erect, gazing with a searching look now at her father and
Natasha saw there was nothing to be afraid of and so she braved even
Natasha seemed rough, but she was so sensitive and tactful that however
Natasha seldom occurred to him. If it did it was only as a pleasant
Natasha set to work to effect a reconciliation, and so far succeeded
Natasha smiled and was on the point of speaking.
Natasha smiled bashfully.
Natasha smiled rapturously.
Natasha smiled through her tears.
Natasha softly closed the door and went with Sonya to the window, not
Natasha spent most of the time in her room by herself, sitting huddled
Natasha spoke to Pierre about her brother's life and doings, of how she
Natasha stepped back to look at herself in the pier glass. The dress was
Natasha stepped up to the window and pondered.
Natasha stopped abruptly.
Natasha stopped him.
Natasha stopped. It was impossible to talk. It was plain that he was
Natasha suddenly flushed.
Natasha threw off the shawl from her shoulders, ran forward to face
Natasha to sing.
Natasha told her that at first there had been danger from his feverish
Natasha took the first note, her throat swelled, her chest rose,
Natasha turned her pretty little head toward the elegant young officer
Natasha understood that) but simply because he thought it was all that
Natasha up warmly and took leave of her with quite a new tenderness. He
Natasha was and jested resolutely and loudly at table with the count and
Natasha was ashamed of doing nothing when everyone else was so busy, and
Natasha was calmer but no happier. She not merely avoided all external
Natasha was evidently dismayed at the thought of what he might think she
Natasha was foremost in setting a merry holiday tone, which, passing
Natasha was gazing at her, but seemed afraid and in doubt whether to say
Natasha was going to her first grand ball. She had got up at eight that
Natasha was listening and considering.
Natasha was not in the room.
Natasha was one of the first to meet him. She was wearing a dark-blue
Natasha was sad and irritable all that time, especially when her mother,
Natasha was sixteen and it was the year 1809, the very year to which she
Natasha was standing in the middle of the drawing room, emaciated, with
Natasha was suffering from, as no disease suffered by a live man can be
Natasha went to the table and without a moment's reflection wrote that
Natasha went up to her. "You have improved in looks and grown more
Natasha went up to the monk for his blessing, and he advised her to pray
Natasha were talking about. She heard the sound of their voices through
Natasha where she was to stand--a spot where nothing could possibly run
Natasha whose radiant, happy expression--of which he was conscious
Natasha with him, went to Moscow at the end of January.
Natasha without knowing it was all attention: she did not lose a word,
Natasha without waiting for Princess Mary to finish again looked
Natasha won't lack suitors. Still, it has been going on so long, and
Natasha would have had no doubt as to the greatness of Pierre's idea,
Natasha would make an exemplary wife and mother.
Natasha's beauty. She looked at Natasha's dresses and praised them, as
Natasha's censure it was only for buying too many and too expensive
Natasha's face and eyes would have to tell her all more clearly and
Natasha's face had told her. She did not speak any more to Natasha of
Natasha's face twitched. She frowned and lowered her eyes for a moment.
Natasha's face, leaning out of the window, beamed with quizzical
Natasha's face, prepared either for despair or rapture, suddenly
Natasha's hair.
Natasha's having rejected him) and again asked Nicholas to retire from
Natasha's illness was so serious that, fortunately for her and for
Natasha's large mouth widened, making her look quite ugly, and she began
Natasha's looks, as everyone told her, had improved in the country, and
Natasha's prediction proved true. Dolokhov, who did not usually care
Natasha's remark, but she did not express agreement in words.
Natasha's reputation.
Natasha's room.
Natasha's voice broke. She blushed, pressed her clasped hands on her
Natasha's wedding to Bezukhov, which took place in 1813, was the last
Natasha's wound healed in that way. She thought her life was ended,
Natasha, Sonya, Madame Schoss, and two maids got into Nicholas' sleigh;
Natasha, afraid that her brother would do something dreadful, had
Natasha, after she had pulled him down toward her and covered his face
Natasha, almost perplexed by her feelings. They remained silent a long
Natasha, and he was not surprised but quietly happy. Natasha, motionless
Natasha, and heard for the first time the story of those last days of
Natasha, animated and excited, looked about her with wide-open
Natasha, but despite that resolution he called again a few days later
Natasha, following the direction of that look, saw an exceptionally
Natasha, half grown up and half child, was now childishly amusing, now
Natasha, have you considered what these secret reasons can be?"
Natasha, in the light-blue dresses they had worn at the theater, looking
Natasha, leaning on her elbow, the expression of her face constantly
Natasha, on the cheek with her large hand.
Natasha, pale and stern, was sitting beside Marya Dmitrievna, and her
Natasha, pointing out Prince Andrew. "You remember, he stayed a night
Natasha, raising her face for a moment from her mother's mantilla,
Natasha, seeing the impression the news of her brother's wound produced
Natasha, she saw the terrible moral symptoms which to her were more
Natasha, she was seized by a joyful and superstitious feeling that God
Natasha, so seriously and excitedly that it was evident that what she
Natasha, stopping suddenly. "I feel so happy!"
Natasha, that winter, had for the first time begun to sing seriously,
Natasha, the young Melyukovs' favorite, disappeared with them into the
Natasha, throwing a clean pocket handkerchief over her hair and holding
Natasha, what have I done to deserve it?..."
Natasha, who felt her glance, did not look at her. All three were again
Natasha, who had borne the first period of separation from her betrothed
Natasha, who had come in during the conversation, looked joyfully at her
Natasha, who had left off singing but had not yet come into the drawing
Natasha, who had long expected to be fetched to nurse her baby, now
Natasha, who was sitting opposite to him with her eldest daughter on her
Natasha, whose lead he always followed, was in high spirits. Natasha was
Natasha, with her surprise, her delight, her shyness, and even her
Natasha--are you glad?"
Natasha.
Natasha.
Natasha.
Natasha.
Natasha.
Natasha.
Natasha.
Natasha. "Here, hand some fruit jelly to the Turk!" she ordered the
Natasha. "Which was most delighted? Lisa, I'm sure."
Natasha. "You know it happened the very day we were rescued. I saw him.
Natasha. (Ramballe despised both these kinds of love equally: the one
Natasha. Flushed and agitated she went about the house all that day,
Natasha. In the whole narrative she saw only Pierre and his goodness.
Natasha. It was a letter from Princess Mary.
Natasha. Nicholas understood that something must have happened between
Natasha. Though with the intimacy now established between the wounded
Natasha... sabretache... saber them... Whom? The hussars... Ah, the
Nativity of the Virgin. But there seemed to be no one to celebrate this
Neapolitans. The Imperial army, strictly speaking, was one third
Near by could be seen the familiar ruins of a half-burned mansion
Near the altar of the church at Bald Hills there was a chapel over the
Nearer at hand glittered golden cornfields interspersed with copses.
Nearly two years before this, in 1808, Pierre on returning to Petersburg
Negroes and her women jesters from Moscow to her Saratov estate, with
Neither Pierre nor any of the others spoke of what they had seen in
Neither her father, nor her mother, nor Sonya, nor Prince Andrew himself
Neither in Moscow nor anywhere in Russia did anything resembling an
Neither in his presence nor out of it did they weep, nor did they ever
Nesvitski and Zherkov were so surprised by this outburst that they gazed
Nesvitski looked round and saw, some fifteen paces away but separated by
Nesvitski rose, puffing, and went up to the general, smiling.
Nesvitski stopped him and took him home.
Nesvitski tried to move on, soldiers and carts pushed him back again and
Nesvitski was there as an old member of the Club. Pierre, who at his
Nesvitski with a laugh threw his arms round Prince Andrew, but
Nesvitski's and Dolokhov's sabers, which were stuck into the ground
Nesvitski, Bezukhov's second. Pierre went home, but Rostov with Dolokhov
Nesvitski. Count Ilya Rostov with the other members of the committee sat
Never had love been so much in the air, and never had the amorous
News was received at the Emperor's quarters that very day of a fresh
Next came four soldiers, carrying something heavy on a cloak, and passed
Next day Anatole left for Petersburg.
Next day Count Rostov returned from his estate near Moscow in time for
Next day Davout rode out early and, after asking Balashev to come to
Next day Nicholas took his mother's letter and went to see Princess
Next day Pierre came to say good-by. Natasha was less animated than
Next day Prince Andrew called at a few houses he had not visited before,
Next day Prince Andrew thought of the ball, but his mind did not dwell
Next day Prince Vasili had arrived and settled in the count's house. He
Next day Rostov saw Denisov off. He did not wish to stay another day in
Next day after her talk with her mother Natasha expected Bolkonski all
Next day he came early, dined, and stayed the whole evening. Though
Next day he woke late. Recalling his recent impressions, the first
Next day the Emperor arrived in Moscow, and several of the Rostovs'
Next day the Emperor left Moscow. The assembled nobles all took off
Next day the French army did not renew their attack, and the remnant of
Next day the countess called Boris aside and had a talk with him, after
Next day the decrepit Kutuzov, having given orders to be called early,
Next day the field marshal gave a dinner and ball which the Emperor
Next day the following letter was sent to Napoleon:
Next day the imperial gentleman-in-waiting, the Comte de Turenne, came
Next day the old count called his son aside and, with an embarrassed
Next day the prince did not say a word to his daughter, but she noticed
Next day the troops assembled in their appointed places in the evening
Next day toward evening the princess set off, and Pierre's head steward
Next day when Denisov had left Pokrovsk, having quite forgotten about
Next day, at eight in the morning, Pierre and Nesvitski drove to the
Next day, by Marya Dmitrievna's advice, Count Rostov took Natasha to
Next day, having been invited by the count, Prince Andrew dined with the
Next day, overtaking the army, he went in a carriage to the Niemen, and,
Next day, the army began its campaign, and up to the very battle of
Next day, the third of March, soon after one o'clock, two hundred and
Next day, with the sole idea of not sparing himself and not lagging in
Next morning Marya Dmitrievna took the young ladies to the Iberian
Next morning when the valet came into the room with his coffee, Pierre
Next morning, after the fatigues of their journey, the travelers slept
Next morning, having taken leave of no one but the count, and not
Next, bolts for the doors of the new building were wanted and had to be
Ney, who came last, had been busying himself blowing up the walls of
Nicholas Bolkonski also in a whisper.
Nicholas Bolkonski who died on the fifteenth of this month, finding
Nicholas Bolkonski."
Nicholas Rostov experienced this blissful condition to the full when,
Nicholas Rostov meanwhile remained at his post, waiting for the wolf. By
Nicholas Rostov served and which was in Prince Bagration's detachment,
Nicholas Rostov turned away and, as if searching for something, gazed
Nicholas Rostov, awarded a St. George's Cross of the Fourth Class for
Nicholas Rostov, with Denisov and his new acquaintance, Dolokhov, sat
Nicholas alone was in danger the countess imagined that she loved her
Nicholas and Denisov were walking up and down, looking with kindly
Nicholas and Sonya, the niece. Sonya was a slender little brunette with
Nicholas and even made him regard Bolkonski's courtship skeptically.
Nicholas and for ingratitude. Sonya listened silently with downcast eyes
Nicholas and his attendant, with "Uncle" and his huntsman, were all
Nicholas and his wife lived together so happily that even Sonya and the
Nicholas and the others that she might not do the right thing was at an
Nicholas arrived at the governor's rather late, but with the phrase
Nicholas ate and drank (chiefly the latter) in silence. He finished a
Nicholas began pacing up and down the room.
Nicholas blushed and was confused when people spoke to him about the
Nicholas brusquely (imagining this to be characteristically military)
Nicholas came in serious and taciturn. Princess Mary seemed even quieter
Nicholas came the crunching, whistling sound of Sonya's feet in her thin
Nicholas can't go out today, it's very cold."
Nicholas coughed and said no more. Countess Mary moved away from the
Nicholas could already see not far in front of him the wood where the
Nicholas did not go to Moscow, and the countess did not renew the
Nicholas did not reply and tried to avoid speaking of the princess any
Nicholas did not think it the proper thing to visit her again; but all
Nicholas dismounted, and with Natasha and Petya, who had ridden up,
Nicholas expressed his disapproval of the postponement of the marriage
Nicholas gave the horses the rein, and Zakhar, stretching out his arms,
Nicholas glanced at her and, wishing to appear not to notice her
Nicholas glanced round at Sonya, and bent down to see her face closer.
Nicholas immediately recognized Princess Mary not so much by the profile
Nicholas in 1805, and many other incidents betokening that it had to be.
Nicholas looked at her face with surprise. It was the same face he had
Nicholas looked into the radiant eyes that were gazing at him, and
Nicholas lowered his legs, rose, and took his daughter in his arms.
Nicholas might come in to say good night.
Nicholas neither saw nor heard Daniel until the chestnut, breathing
Nicholas no longer considered it necessary to show his manly superiority
Nicholas overtook the first sleigh. They were driving downhill and
Nicholas promised to come and blushed again as he bowed. At the mention
Nicholas put all his horses to a gallop and passed Zakhar. The horses
Nicholas put down the book and looked at his wife. The radiant eyes
Nicholas remained silent. It comforted him to hear these arguments.
Nicholas said nothing. He flushed crimson, left her side, and paced up
Nicholas sang a song he had just learned:
Nicholas sat at some distance from Sonya, beside Julie Karagina, to
Nicholas sat leaning slightly forward in an armchair, bending closely
Nicholas saw a queer, short-legged red fox with a fine brush going hard
Nicholas sent the man to call Natasha and Petya to him, and rode at a
Nicholas set off, following the first sleigh; behind him the others
Nicholas sighed, bit his mustache, and laid out the cards for a
Nicholas standing in a fallow field could see all his whips.
Nicholas started angrily.
Nicholas suddenly at supper. "She will really begin to arrange a
Nicholas suddenly felt a desire and need to tell his most intimate
Nicholas that this was all he could let him have till May, and asked him
Nicholas the flattering things Princess Mary said of him and vice
Nicholas to be saying.
Nicholas too was greatly pleased by "Uncle's" playing, and "Uncle"
Nicholas took the two letters, one of which was from his mother and
Nicholas tried to keep silence when his mother spoke of the princess,
Nicholas tried to say "Yes," but could not: and he nearly burst into
Nicholas turned away from her. Natasha too, with her quick instinct, had
Nicholas was present, was held in the cathedral for the Russian victory.
Nicholas was silent and agreed with her.
Nicholas was sleeping came the sound of his even breathing, every
Nicholas was spending the last of his leave at home. A fourth letter had
Nicholas was the first to meet her, as the countess' room could only be
Nicholas was to go with him to the regiment; then came Anna Mikhaylovna
Nicholas was with the Russian army in Paris when the news of his
Nicholas went out holding the child by the hand.
Nicholas went out into the wet and muddy porch. There was a smell of
Nicholas went to her, kissed her hand, and sitting down silently at her
Nicholas went up to her and kissed her hand. This was the first time
Nicholas will tell her himself, and he doesn't care at all for Julie."
Nicholas with a smile. "You and I haven't seen anything of one another
Nicholas! I am horrid sometimes, but I was ashamed to be happy while
Nicholas' letter in which he mentioned Princess Mary had elicited, in
Nicholas' letter was read over hundreds of times, and those who were
Nicholas' position became worse and worse. The idea of putting something
Nicholas' prayer, was prompted by this: the thought of getting Nicholas
Nicholas, Princess Mary confessed to herself that she had been right in
Nicholas, and Natasha, but even the old countess, who--dreading
Nicholas, and looked sternly at his sister, trying to make her feel the
Nicholas, but had never learned music or thought about it, and so the
Nicholas, dear noble Nicholas, do when he hears of it? So this is
Nicholas, having as usual exhausted two pairs of horses, without
Nicholas, in his old lady's dress over which he had belted his hussar
Nicholas, not stopping to talk to the man, asked his sister and Petya to
Nicholas, though free from Denisov's readiness to find fault with
Nicholas, though he had never seen Ilagin, with his usual absence
Nicholas, when he had come to tell her that her brother was with the
Nicholas, who had left his nephew, irritably pushed up an armchair, sat
Nicholas, who, as the roads were in splendid condition, wanted to take
Nicholas--having exchanged kisses with the landowner, with whom he was
Nicholas.
Nicholas.
Nicholas. "Pray come and see me."
Nicholas. In the first place he was sorry that Natasha, for whom he
Niemen when the enemy was already at the Dnieper, but Princess Mary,
Night had come. There were stars in the sky and the new moon shone out
Nikita Ivanych to share his joke, he began to tell him of his intention
Nikolaevich's, to exchange the gossip of the town.
Nikolenka too, I remember him well," she said. "But I don't remember
Nikolenka; by his relations as a charming, attractive, and polite young
Nine days after the abandonment of Moscow, a messenger from Kutuzov
Nizhegorod estates.
No betrothal ceremony took place and Natasha's engagement to Bolkonski
No command ever appears spontaneously, or itself covers a whole series
No one answered.
No one contradicted him.
No one gave any reply.
No one had given Tushin orders where and at what to fire, but after
No one in the house sent people about or gave them as much trouble as
No one replied a word to Dolokhov's laughter, and a French officer whom
No one replied and Princess Mary, looking round at the crowd, found that
No one replied to his remarks.
No one replied to this remark and for some time they all gazed silently
No one replied. Natasha rose slowly and carefully, crossed herself, and
No one slept.
No one spoke for a long time.
No residents were left in Moscow, and the soldiers--like water
No!" (She shut her eyes.) "No! there's nothing at all."
No, I'll tell you now. You know Sonya's my dearest friend. Such a friend
No, but I am not praying for trifles now," he thought as he put his pipe
No, but I know I must work to comfort my mother, to repay you, and not
No, certainly I must not approach him, I must not intrude on his
No, it can't be!" Pierre kept saying as he kissed Princess Mary's hands.
No, it can't be," he told himself at every look, gesture, and word that
No, it was something, something in the drawing room. Princess Mary
No, we mustn't forget Suvorov and his rule--not to put yourself in a
No. 17 of the captured Russians, arrested and detained for some reason
None of them, not even the middle-aged Dimmler, wanted to break off
Nor did the latter, having risen and curtsied, know what to do.
Nor do words alone prove that only he understood the meaning of the
Not all the Cossacks and hussars were asleep; here and there, amid the
Not at all expecting so loud a report, Pierre shuddered at the sound and
Not expecting to come on the enemy down by the stream, and having
Not far from the artillery campfire, in a hut that had been prepared
Not finding the young prince in his study the valet went with the
Not in vain had Berg shown everybody his right hand wounded at
Not letting the abbe and Pierre escape, Anna Pavlovna, the more
Not merely in these cases but continually did that old man--who by
Not one of the plans Nicholas tried succeeded; the estate was sold by
Not only did Prince Andrew know he would die, but he felt that he was
Not only did his contemporaries, carried away by their passions, talk
Not only did his reason not reproach him for what he had done, but
Not only did the Russians not fortify the position on the field of
Not only on that day, as he rode over the battlefield strewn with men
Not only was the Russian army on the twenty-sixth defended by weak,
Not to speak of the fact that no description of the collective activity
Not two minutes had passed before Prince Vasili with head erect
Nothing Petya could have seen now would have surprised him. He was in a
Nothing in life seemed to him of much importance, and under the
Nothing is the cause. All this is only the coincidence of conditions in
Nothing more stirred behind the screens and the French infantry soldiers
Nothing outside himself had any significance for him, because everything
Noticing him, an officer said: "The town is being abandoned. Get away,
Noticing the black outline of a man crossing the road, Dolokhov stopped
Notwithstanding the tone of wearied assurance with which these words
November 9: twenty miles from Smolensk.
November, 1805, announcing that he and his son would be paying him a
November, the last day of the Krasnoe battles, it was already growing
Novoe to Utitsa, and consequently had to move their forces from right to
Novosiltsev get? None. The English have not understood and cannot
Novosiltsev, Prince Volkonsky, Strogonov, and the others, all richly
Now all these men were replaced by Speranski on the civil side, and
Now having come to the army, he informed Kutuzov of the Emperor's
Now he was a lieutenant of hussars, in a jacket laced with silver, and
Now her face and body were often all that one saw, and her soul was
Now the Pope's turn has come and Bonaparte doesn't scruple to depose the
Now the other sister, though they are the same family, is quite
Now then!"
Now to his surprise he found that he no longer felt either doubt or
Now why are you asking silly questions about the Fire Brigade? They have
Now, hunting is another matter--that's it, come on! Open the door,
Number one jumped briskly aside. The gun rang out with a deafening
Nurse Savishna, knitting in hand, was telling in low tones, scarcely
Obolenski's Cossacks and went to Belaya Tserkov where the regiment is
Occasionally he stopped, listened to the firing, and gazed intently at
October. Its first period had passed: when the partisans themselves,
Odyntsova had married an old man, and that there was a suitor for Mary,
Of a fourth opinion the most conspicuous representative was the
Of all the affairs awaiting Pierre that day the sorting of Joseph
Of all the combinations in which men unite for collective action one of
Of all these men Prince Andrew sympathized most with Pfuel, angry,
Of his former bachelor acquaintances many were no longer in Petersburg.
Of late, since the Emperor's return from the army, there had been some
Of the Russian commanders Kutuzov alone understood this. When the flight
Of the activities that presented themselves to him, army service was the
Of the artillery baggage train which had consisted of a hundred and
Of the three precepts of Freemasonry Pierre realized that he did not
Of the two soups he chose turtle with savory patties and went on to the
Of the war Princess Mary thought as women do think about wars. She
Officers who approached him with disturbed countenances became calm;
Officious hands, Russian and French, immediately seized the cross and
Often in afterlife Pierre recalled this period of blissful insanity. All
Often, approaching the chest of drawers containing this secret treasure,
Often, listening to the pilgrims' tales, she was so stimulated by their
Often, speaking with vexation of some failure or irregularity, he would
Oh, how glad I am to have you!"
Oh, how that chord vibrated, and how moved was something that was finest
Oh, that wicked Prince Hippolyte!" she said.
Oho! How you blush. Why, are...?"
Old Bolkonski had always had a poor opinion of Prince Vasili's
Old Daniel Terentich, the count's valet (as he was called), came up to
Old Gabriel brought in the wine.
Old Guryev.... Oh, but Denisov's a fine fellow. But that's all nonsense.
Old Karay had turned his head and was angrily searching for fleas,
Old Michael was asleep on the chest. Prokofy, the footman, who was so
Old Prince Bolkonski heard all the rumors current in the town from
Old Prince Nicholas Bolkonski received a letter from Prince Vasili in
Old Rostov could not tell his wife of what had passed without tears, and
Oldenburg wronged. We cannot grasp what connection such circumstances
Oldenburg," said Prince Bolkonski. "He shifts the Dukes about as I might
Oldenburg; for had he not wished to serve, and had a second, a third,
Olga went out. Pierre stood looking at the sisters; then he bowed and
Olmutz to visit a certain Caroline the Hungarian, who had recently
Olmutz where Bolkonski had seen him for the first time abroad, but there
Olmutz, was preparing to be reviewed next day by the two Emperors--the
On August 1, a second letter was received from Prince Andrew. In his
On August 24 Davydov's first partisan detachment was formed and then
On August 25, the eve of the battle of Borodino, M. de Beausset, prefect
On December 6--St. Nicholas' Day and the prince's name day--all Moscow
On February 26, 1807, the old prince set off on one of his circuits.
On Friday the Rostovs were to return to the country, but on Wednesday
On Helene's name day, a small party of just their own people--as his
On Kutuzov's staff, among his fellow officers and in the army generally,
On November 1 Kutuzov had received, through a spy, news that the army he
On October 11, 1805, one of the infantry regiments that had just reached
On October 11, the day when all was astir at headquarters over the news
On October 22, Denisov (who was one of the irregulars) was with his
On Saturday, the thirty-first of August, everything in the Rostovs'
On Sunday morning Marya Dmitrievna invited her visitors to Mass at her
On all sides they saw rain-soaked officers with dejected faces who
On another page he drew a tomb, and wrote:
On approaching it, Rostov felt as he had done when approaching his home
On being relieved from picket duty Rostov had managed to get a few
On coming to a path in the forest along which he could see far to the
On entering the ballroom the regular hum of voices, footsteps, and
On entering the earthwork he noticed that there were men doing something
On entering the room now he crossed himself, turning toward the front
On everything--far and near--lay the magic crystal glitter seen only
On hearing that sound Natasha put down the stocking, leaned nearer to
On hearing this indifferent voice, Rostov grew frightened at what he
On her way past the butler's pantry she told them to set a samovar,
On her way to supper Natasha passed him.
On his return from Italy he finds the government in Paris in a process
On his return from his furlough Nicholas, having been joyfully welcomed
On his return to Moscow from the army, Nicholas Rostov was welcomed
On his right sat the Italian abbe whom Pierre had met at Anna Pavlovna's
On his thin, weak legs were heavy chains which hampered his irresolute
On his way home from Vorontsovo, as he was passing the Bolotnoe Place
On his way to the house Pierre kept thinking of Prince Andrew, of their
On inquiry, the countess learned that Madame Schoss was offended because
On moving to the drawing room he handed the letter to Princess Mary and,
On one of his estates the three hundred serfs were liberated and became
On our right flank commanded by Bagration, at nine o'clock the battle
On re-entering the shed Prince Andrew lay down on a rug, but he could
On reaching Moscow after her meeting with Rostov, Princess Mary had
On reaching Petersburg Pierre did not let anyone know of his arrival, he
On reaching Smolensk on the evening of the fourth of August he put up
On reaching home Pierre gave orders to Evstafey--his head coachman who
On reaching home Prince Andrew decided to go to Petersburg that autumn
On reaching the vestibule Natasha saw a tall figure in a fur coat
On reaching the village he dismounted and went to the nearest house,
On reading that letter (she always read her husband's letters) Natasha
On receiving command of the armies Kutuzov remembered Prince Andrew and
On receiving news of Natasha's illness, the countess, though not quite
On receiving this dispatch the Emperor sent Prince Volkonski to Kutuzov
On retiring to her own room, she sat in an armchair, her eyes fixed on a
On returning from a second inspection of the lines, Napoleon remarked:
On returning from the review, Kutuzov took the Austrian general into his
On returning home in the evening he would jot down in his notebook four
On returning late in the evening Sonya went to Natasha's room, and to
On returning to France, to the bosom of the great, strong, magnificent,
On returning to Gorki after having seen Prince Andrew, Pierre ordered
On seeing his face and meeting his eyes Princess Mary's pace suddenly
On seeing the Russian general he threw back his head, with its long hair
On seeing the crowd and the bloodstained man the workman ceased
On such feelings, more or less dimly shared by all, the unanimity and
On that bright evening of August 25, Prince Andrew lay leaning on his
On that first evening Bolkonski spent with him, having mentioned the
On that third of March, all the rooms in the English Club were filled
On the French side, amid the groups with cannon, a cloud of smoke
On the Poklonny Hill, four miles from the Dorogomilov gate of Moscow,
On the Pratzen Heights, where he had fallen with the flagstaff in his
On the Tverskoy Boulevard a familiar voice called to him.
On the appointed day Prince Andrew entered Count Arakcheev's waiting
On the contrary it tormented her more than anything else of late, and
On the contrary, just because he happened to be there he thought it one
On the contrary, the army had never under the best material conditions
On the day of his rescue he had seen the body of Petya Rostov. That same
On the day the count left, Sonya and Natasha were invited to a big
On the eighteenth and nineteenth of November, the army advanced two
On the eighth of September an officer--a very important one judging by
On the eleventh of July, which was Saturday, the manifesto was received
On the eve of his departure from Petersburg Prince Andrew brought with
On the eve of the Sunday when the special prayer was read, Pierre had
On the evening of October 11 Seslavin came to the Aristovo headquarters
On the evening of the first of September, after his interview with
On the evening of the last day's march an order had been received that
On the evening of the twenty-fourth of June, Count Zhilinski arranged a
On the evening of the twenty-sixth of August, Kutuzov and the whole
On the faces of all the Russians and of the French soldiers and officers
On the fifteenth, when young Rostov, in his dressing gown, looked out of
On the first arrival of the news of the battle of Austerlitz, Moscow had
On the first of September he had come to Moscow from the army.
On the fourth day fires broke out on the Zubovski rampart.
On the high ground where the enemy was, the smoke of a cannon rose,
On the left our troops were close to a copse, in which smoked the
On the march from Vyazma to Tsarevo-Zaymishche he rode his light bay
On the morning of the day that the young couple were to arrive, Princess
On the morning of the fourth of October Kutuzov signed the dispositions.
On the morning of the twenty-fifth Pierre was leaving Mozhaysk. At the
On the night of the eleventh of October he lay leaning on his arm and
On the ninth of August Prince Vasili at Anna Pavlovna's again met the
On the one side reflection shows that the expression of a man's
On the opposite side the enemy could be seen by the naked eye, and from
On the other question, how the battle of Borodino and the preceding
On the rest of the way to Moscow, though the princess' position was not
On the right a single deep report of a cannon resounded and died away in
On the rug-covered bench where Pierre had seen him in the morning sat
On the same day the Chief of Police came to Pierre, inviting him to send
On the second of October a Cossack, Shapovalov, who was out scouting,
On the seventeenth of August Rostov and Ilyin, accompanied by Lavrushka
On the seventh of August Prince Bagration wrote as follows from his
On the sixth, which was his name day when the house would be full of
On the tenth of August the regiment Prince Andrew commanded was marching
On the tenth of October when Dokhturov had gone halfway to Forminsk and
On the third day after Christmas Nicholas dined at home, a thing he had
On the third day after Kutuzov's report a country gentleman arrived from
On the third day after his arrival he heard from the Drubetskoys that
On the third day after leaving Moscow Karataev again fell ill with the
On the third day of Christmas week, after the midday dinner, all the
On the third of September Pierre awoke late. His head was aching, the
On the thirteenth of August Pierre reached Moscow. Close to the gates of
On the thirteenth of July the Pavlograds took part in a serious action
On the thirteenth of June a rather small, thoroughbred Arab horse was
On the thirteenth of June the French and Russian Emperors arrived in
On the thirty-first of December, New Year's Eve, 1809 - 10 an old
On the twelfth of July, on the eve of that action, there was a heavy
On the twelfth of November, Kutuzov's active army, in camp before
On the twenty-eighth of October Kutuzov with his army crossed to the
On the twenty-fifth of August, so his historians tell us, Napoleon spent
On the twenty-fourth of August the battle of the Shevardino Redoubt was
On the twenty-fourth the weather cleared up after a spell of rain, and
On the twenty-ninth of May Napoleon left Dresden, where he had spent
On the twenty-ninth of November Kutuzov entered Vilna--his "dear Vilna"
On the way back Nicholas drove at a steady pace instead of racing and
On the way home, Prince Andrew could not refrain from asking Kutuzov,
On the way to his sister's room, in the passage which connected one
On these three considerations alone is based the conception of
On waking up that morning Count Ilya Rostov left his bedroom softly, so
On what, then, was Count Rostopchin's fear for the tranquillity of
Once a Frenchman Tikhon was trying to capture fired a pistol at him
Once again it pushed from outside. His last superhuman efforts were vain
Once in summer he had sent for the village elder from Bogucharovo, a
Once in the regiment I had not gone to some merrymaking where there was
Once more something whistled, but this time quite close, swooping
Once more the conversations concentrated, the ladies' at the one end and
Once she came to her mother, tried to say something, and suddenly began
Once she had a talk with her friend Natasha about Sonya and about her
One afternoon noticing Natasha shivering with fever, Princess Mary took
One army fled and the other pursued. Beyond Smolensk there were several
One cannon ball after another whistled by and struck the earthwork, a
One cannon ball, another, and a third flew over him, falling in front,
One day he took the countess to a Roman Catholic church, where she knelt
One day in Moscow in Princess Mary's presence (she thought her father
One day in midwinter when sitting in the schoolroom attending to her
One day she went quickly upstairs and found herself out of breath.
One day toward the end of December Natasha, pale and thin, dressed in a
One desperate, frightened yell from the first French soldier who saw the
One fair-haired young soldier of the third company, whom Prince Andrew
One group of the French stood close to the road, and two of them, one of
One man ought to be in command, and not two. Your Minister may perhaps
One matter connected with his management sometimes worried Nicholas, and
One morning Colonel Berg, whom Pierre knew as he knew everybody in
One need only admit that public tranquillity is in danger and any action
One night when the old countess, in nightcap and dressing jacket,
One of the doctors came out of the tent in a bloodstained apron,
One of the generals rode up to Napoleon and ventured to offer to lead
One of the hindmost guns that was going onto the dam turned off onto the
One of the men came out of the crowd and went up to Rostov.
One of the men got up and went over to the Fifth Company.
One of the most obvious and advantageous departures from the so-called
One of the next arrivals was a stout, heavily built young man with
One of the old men nearest to him looked round, but his attention was
One of the players said he hoped he might be trusted.
One of the wounded, an old soldier with a bandaged arm who was following
One of them was a sallow, clean-shaven civilian with a thin and wrinkled
One of them was leading by the bridle a fine large French horse he had
One of these was running to cross the path of Count Rostopchin's
One of these, a nimble little man, was wearing a blue coat tied round
One person, better dressed than the rest, seemed to know everyone and
One shot struck a French soldier's foot, and from behind the screens
One was on a white horse. Prince Bagration and Prince Dolgorukov with
One was snatched out before my eyes... and there were women who had
One would have thought it impossible for a man to stretch himself
One would have thought that under the almost incredibly wretched
One... "Oh mio crudele affetto."... One, two, three... One. "Oh, this
Only Count Orlov-Denisov with his Cossacks (the least important
Only Countess Helene, considering the society of such people as the
Only I am sorry for my old wife and the children,' and the old man began
Only Marya Dmitrievna Akhrosimova, who had come to Petersburg that
Only a man who has experienced it--that is, has passed some months
Only after she had reached home was Natasha able clearly to think over
Only by reducing this element of free will to the infinitesimal, that
Only by renouncing our claim to discern a purpose immediately
Only by separating the two sources of cognition, related to one another
Only by taking infinitesimally small units for observation (the
Only by uniting them do we get a clear conception of man's life.
Only by watching closely moment by moment the movement of that flow and
Only in our self-confident day of the popularization of
Only let me tell you, I want to know my son-in-law better. You know
Only now did Pierre realize the full strength of life in man and the
Only now, on his visit to Bald Hills, did Pierre fully realize the
Only now, when he was confronted by the stern authorities, did his guilt
Only once, after the affair of the Berezina, did he get angry and write
Only one terrible doubt sometimes crossed his mind: "Wasn't it all
Only the eldest princess, the one with the stony face and long waist,
Only the expression of the will of the Deity, not dependent on time, can
Only the following considerations can have led the historians to such
Only the really heartless, the stupid ones of that household, and the
Only the recognition of the fact that he possessed this feeling caused
Only the skeleton of life remained: his house, a brilliant wife who now
Only the vicissitudes of life can show us its vanity and develop our
Only then will our order have the power unobtrusively to bind the hands
Only to distinguish themselves! As if fighting were fun. They are
Only to the old countess at night in bed could Natasha have told all she
Only two things indicated the social condition of Moscow--the rabble,
Only when Bennigsen had entered the hut did Kutuzov leave his corner and
Only when Prince Andrew was gone did Rostov think of what he ought to
Only when alone together were they free from such outrage and pain.
Only when approaching Bagration did Rostov let his horse gallop again,
Only when the victim ceased to struggle and his cries changed to a
Only young Nicholas and his tutor remained. Dessalles whispered to the
Opinions were divided, and arguments were advanced for and against that
Or he would suddenly feel ashamed of he knew not what. He felt it
Or in other words, the conception of a cause is inapplicable to the
Order after order was issued by the French commanders that day
Order of St. Anne for the last maneuvers; strange as it was to think
Order of the third grade, which the Emperor was conferring on him. The
Orders by heart and know the Regulations as well as I do the Lord's
Orders, and the Star of St. George on his left breast. Evidently just
Orlov felt distrustful of the adventure when he looked at the enemy's
Orlov's, you remember, in a white Cossack coat, and bring him along to
Orsha, abandoning standards, artillery, and nine tenths of his men.
Ostermann, Rostov, remembering that he had charged without orders,
Ostermann-Tolstoy, seemingly absorbed in his own thoughts. His broad
Ostralitz. In the large drawing room which had become the commander in
Ostrovna he was brought into notice, received command of an hussar
Other detachments passed through the Kremlin and encamped along
Others did not like that tone and said it was stupid and vulgar. It was
Others joined those men and stopped and told how cannon balls had fallen
Otradnoe and showed him his last letter.
Otradnoe was quieter than in former years, but still the enormous house
Otradnoe, but had never been to see them.
Otradnoe, impoverished old squires and their daughters, Peronskaya a
Our army, after repeated retreats and advances and battles at Pultusk
Our body is a machine for living. It is organized for that, it is its
Our body is like a perfect watch that should go for a certain time; the
Our conception of the degree of freedom often varies according to
Our false conception that an event is caused by a command which precedes
Our family life goes on in the old way except for my brother Andrew's
Our infantry were stationed there, and at the farthest point the
Out of sorts?"
Outside, there was the same cold stillness and the same moon, but even
Over the whole field, previously so gaily beautiful with the glitter of
Overtaking the battalions that continued to advance, he stopped
Owing to the count's customary carelessness nothing was ready for their
Owing to the rapidity of the French flight and the Russian pursuit
Owing to the terrible uproar and the necessity for concentration and
P.S. Let me have news of your brother and his charming little wife.
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK
PROCLAMATION!
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
Pahlen, has been sent to New York in America, to fetch the Frenchman,
Palace, when he had suddenly felt that wealth, power, and life--all that
Pale and agitated, Natasha ran into the drawing room.
Pale, with quivering lips, Pierre snatched the copy.
Papa" (he smote himself on the breast as a general he had heard speaking
Papa, which Natasha, and which Petya. Everyone shouted, talked, and
Paris would have been the capital of the world, and the French the envy
Paris, quite clear and very pleasing.
Paris, the ultimate goal, is reached. The Napoleonic government and army
Paris. It was not calculation that guided her (she did not even for a
Particularly vivid, humiliating, and shameful was the recollection of
Partly because of the depressing memories associated with Bald Hills,
Passing behind one of the lines of a regiment of Foot Guards he heard a
Passing between the companies that had been eating porridge and drinking
Passing by Kutuzov's carriage and the exhausted saddle horses of his
Patience and time are my warriors, my champions," thought Kutuzov. He
Patriarch's Ponds, where the widow Bazdeev's house was.
Paul had exiled him to his country estate had lived there continuously
Paul was a market village where a fair was held on St. Peter's day,
Paulucci and Michaud both attacked Wolzogen simultaneously in French.
Paulucci was there because he was bold and decided in speech. The
Paulucci, who did not know German, began questioning him in French.
Paulucci, whom he had known in Turkey, into the drawing room where the
Pavlovich joined the army. He had taken part in the beginning of the
Pavlovna disapproved.
Pavlovna in dismay detained him with the words: "Do you know the Abbe
Pavlovna was the representative. And in Helene's salon, which Rumyantsev
Pavlovna whispered the next words in advance, like an old woman
Pavlovna's drawing room he considered an important step up in the
Pavlovna's soiree. The matter was mentioned to the Emperor, an exception
Pavlovna's they talked with perplexity of Bonaparte's successes just
Pavlovna's usual pink notes with an invitation to which was added: "You
Pavlovna, not yet seeing all those whom she wanted in her drawing room,
Peasants having no clear idea of the cause of rain, say, according to
Pelageya Danilovna Melyukova, a broadly built, energetic woman wearing
Pelageya Danilovna smiled.
Pelageya Danilovna, having given orders to clear the rooms for the
Pelageya interrupted her companion; she evidently wished to tell what
Pelageya stopped doubtfully, but in Pierre's face there was such a look
Pelageya suddenly grew quite pale and clasped her hands.
Penza (they have enormous estates there), and she, poor thing, has no
People have called this kind of war "guerrilla warfare" and assume that
People were anxiously roaming about the streets.
Perhaps he came yesterday and I have forgotten it." She rose, put down
Perhaps it need not be done so pedantically, thought Nicholas, or even
Perhaps she lacks egotism, I don't know, but from her is taken away, and
Perkhushkovo the earth trembled from the firing, but nobody could answer
Peronskaya was pointing out to the countess the most important people at
Peronskaya was quite ready. In spite of her age and plainness she had
Peronskaya, indicating Helene who had just entered. "How lovely! She
Persia, where he killed the Shah's brother. Now all the Moscow ladies
Persian rugs, bearskins, and weapons, sat Dolokhov in a traveling cloak
Peter I, or that the French Empire was formed and the war with Russia
Peter Petrovich Konovnitsyn, like Dokhturov, seems to have been included
Peter could sit.
Peter the footman made some remark to the coachman; the latter assented.
Peter the valet, who was now wide awake, had roused the doctor.
Petersburg I felt (I can say this to you) that the whole affair would go
Petersburg Prince Andrew met Kutuzov, his former commander who was
Petersburg a vast civil conflict was in preparation, the commander in
Petersburg and staying at his house. With apparent absent-mindedness,
Petersburg and that a copy, which he had himself seen, had that day been
Petersburg as a buffoon, and so of what she had said they only noticed,
Petersburg during those last four months as if it were something new. He
Petersburg he inquired for Kuragin but the latter had already left the
Petersburg life, and especially the life of its salons. That life of
Petersburg militia, presiding over the enrollment of recruits at the
Petersburg plan) special hopes had been placed by the Russians, and
Petersburg society anxious and uneasy, a terrible piece of news was
Petersburg society was assembled there: people differing widely in age
Petersburg to Moscow it is usually with the object of marrying an
Petersburg to ascertain what Moscow was thinking about Austerlitz.
Petersburg to procure an appointment in the Guards for her only son.
Petersburg" was so well established that no one took his freaks
Petersburg, 23rd November
Petersburg, and had been expelled from there for riotous conduct and
Petersburg, and his court service with its dull formalities. And this
Petersburg, and the likeness between Natasha and Prince Andrew which
Petersburg, and wrote enthusiastic letters to his "brother-instructor"
Petersburg, he should tell her so afresh.
Petersburg, kept urging Pierre to tell them about what had happened in
Petersburg, look round, and choose your profession. I will agree to
Petersburg, on business as he told his family, but really to meet
Petersburg, on their estate near Moscow, or with her mother, that is to
Petersburg, or even, in the case of a reverse, return to Smolensk or
Petersburg, paid calls, and prepared everything for a brilliant wedding.
Petersburg, plans which might very easily be realized. When he entered
Petersburg--no one knows who will inherit his immense fortune, Pierre
Petersburg.
Petersburg.
Petersburg.
Petersburg.
Petersburg. Anna Mikhaylovna, with her tear-worn but pleasant face, drew
Petersburg. But now this head was swaying helplessly with the uneven
Petersburg. Hand this to Count Willarski" (he took out his notebook and
Petersburg. He could not imagine how he could speak to her now. He
Petersburg. It is high time for you to get away from these terrible
Petersburg. Whatever I may be, I can't live under Bonaparte's rule."
Petya and Natasha surprised Nicholas most. Petya was a big handsome
Petya badly wanted to laugh, but noticed that they all refrained from
Petya blushed.
Petya came out, peered into the darkness, and went up to the wagons.
Petya clenched his teeth and looked around, throwing back his head and
Petya did not know how long this lasted: he enjoyed himself all the
Petya had come rushing out to talk to his namesake about this affair.
Petya in, closed again. A sound of laughter came from behind it.
Petya leaped quickly into the saddle unconscious of his own weight and,
Petya ought to have known that he was in a forest with Denisov's
Petya paced the room in silence for a time.
Petya pulled him by the arm to attract his attention.
Petya ran in at the same time.
Petya ran up and offered her his back. She jumped on it, putting her
Petya replied that he wanted the French lad who had been captured that
Petya rushed in delightedly, to say that some mummers had arrived.
Petya shook himself, jumped up, took a ruble from his pocket and gave it
Petya so as not to let him go again, but always get him appointed to
Petya soon came to himself, the color returned to his face, the pain had
Petya took off his wet clothes, gave them to be dried, and at once began
Petya was carried out like a log and laid in the larger of the two
Petya was in the porch, engaged in giving out weapons to the servants
Petya was not at home, he had gone to visit a friend with whom he meant
Petya was now a handsome rosy lad of fifteen with full red lips and
Petya was standing at the door when Denisov said this. He slipped in
Petya went on. "What would it be to you?... Oh, you want a knife?" he
Petya wiped his perspiring face with his hands and pulled up the damp
Petya wished to say "Good night" but could not utter a word. The
Petya woke up.
Petya's eyes began to close and he swayed a little.
Petya's mad action at the battle of Vyazma, where instead of riding by
Petya's mind and he galloped on to the place from which the rapid firing
Petya's rapturous account. "But, devil take you, I haven't slept because
Petya's tutors, the girls' former governess, and other people who simply
Petya, "I consider it so horrid, so abominable, so... I don't know what.
Petya, clinging to his legs, kept shouting, "And me too!"
Petya, having left his people after their departure from Moscow, joined
Petya, rapidly turning his head, looked now at the drummer boy, now
Petya," she thought.
Petya.
Petya. "Vasilich told me. I consider..."
Pfuel and saying, "Is it not so, your excellency?" But Pfuel, like a man
Pfuel was evidently of that sort. He had a science--the theory of
Pfuel was short and very thin but broad-boned, of coarse, robust build,
Pfuel, Prince Andrew, thanks to his Austerlitz experiences, was able to
Pfuel, always inclined to be irritably sarcastic, was particularly
Pfuel, remarking that Prince Andrew was just back from Turkey where the
Pictures of the near past--her father's illness and last moments--rose
Piedmontese, Swiss, Genevese, Tuscans, Romans, inhabitants of the
Pierre a wooden spoon after licking it clean.
Pierre admitted that it was true, and from that was gradually led by
Pierre again emptied his glass and poured himself out a third.
Pierre also went out into the porch.
Pierre and Helene, whose presence he seemed not to notice. He enlivened
Pierre and himself was in the room, and addressed her in a tone of
Pierre and much better dressed than he. They looked at him and at his
Pierre and proposed that he should ride with him along the line.
Pierre and the Frenchman and surrounded them. Pierre remembered nothing
Pierre and there were lines of pain on his face and a shamefaced smile.
Pierre and thirteen others were moved to the coach house of a merchant's
Pierre approached Prince Andrew and was about to start a conversation
Pierre as "the man who does not give his name." Glancing indolently and
Pierre at the age of ten had been sent abroad with an abbe as tutor,
Pierre began describing what he had done on his estates, trying as far
Pierre began feeling in his pockets for the papers, but could not find
Pierre began to feel dissatisfied with what he was doing. Freemasonry,
Pierre began to tell about Karataev, but paused. By this time he had
Pierre blushed, as he always did when it was mentioned, and said
Pierre by the arm and pointed to a round, graveled space where a
Pierre came early so as to find them alone.
Pierre came up to him and caught him by the arm.
Pierre changed places several times during the game, sitting now with
Pierre choked, his face puckered, and he turned hastily away, went back
Pierre clutched his temples, and turning round went into the forest,
Pierre considered.
Pierre considered.
Pierre continued, in French, to persuade the officer not to hold that
Pierre continued. When he spoke of the execution he wanted to pass
Pierre could not afterwards remember how he went, whether it was far, or
Pierre could not and did not wish to break this silence.
Pierre could not go on. He gulped and turned away.
Pierre could not make out what it was all about, and still less what
Pierre could not refrain from making them happy by the news of their
Pierre did not allow himself to reflect on what lay before him, but
Pierre did not answer and left Rostopchin's room more sullen and angry
Pierre did not answer him and asked briefly whether his proposal would
Pierre did not answer, but looked cordially into the Frenchman's eyes
Pierre did not catch what they were saying, but knew they were talking
Pierre did not come either and Natasha, not knowing that Prince Andrew
Pierre did not find his groom and rode along the hollow with the
Pierre did not go to bed or order horses but paced up and down the room,
Pierre did not know that these troops were not, as Bennigsen supposed,
Pierre did not look out at the battlefield and was not concerned to know
Pierre did not reply and went out of the room.
Pierre did not see the people as individuals but saw their movement.
Pierre did not stay for dinner, but left the room and went away at once.
Pierre did not understand a word, but the conviction that all this had
Pierre dined at the club that day and heard on all sides gossip about
Pierre dined with them and would have spent the whole evening there, but
Pierre distinctly heard the pleasantly human voice of the Emperor saying
Pierre drank one glass after another, looking from under his brows at
Pierre dressed hastily and ran out to the porch. Outside all was bright,
Pierre dropped his eyes, lifted them again, and wished once more to see
Pierre drove on toward Gorki.
Pierre drove to Marya Dmitrievna's to tell her of the fulfillment of her
Pierre drove up to the house of the old prince in a most serious mood.
Pierre exchanged glances with Countess Mary and Nicholas (Natasha he
Pierre felt confused and wished to avoid that look, but the bright old
Pierre felt her eyes on him and tried not to look round. The countess
Pierre felt himself far poorer than when his father had made him
Pierre felt that Helene not only could, but must, be his wife, and that
Pierre felt that he was the center of it all, and this both pleased and
Pierre felt the different outlooks of these various worlds and made
Pierre felt unable to disappoint him. Every day he said to himself one
Pierre felt uncomfortable and even depressed in his friend's company and
Pierre finished his story. Natasha continued to look at him intently
Pierre finished what he had begun. It was the sequel to his complacent
Pierre first looked down the field across which vehicles and horsemen
Pierre flushed and, hurriedly putting his legs down from the bed, bent
Pierre gave her an inquiring look. She kissed the young man on his
Pierre gave his word of honor.
Pierre gave no answer, for he neither heard nor saw anything. He had
Pierre gazed at the door through which she had disappeared and did not
Pierre gazed now with dazed eyes at these sharpshooters who ran in
Pierre glanced absently at Natasha and was about to say something, but
Pierre glanced at him with amazement, unable to understand what he
Pierre glanced into the pit and saw that the factory lad was lying with
Pierre glanced round at the first cloud, which he had seen as a round
Pierre glanced round at the speaker and saw that it was a soldier who
Pierre got out and talked to the doctor, explaining his intention of
Pierre got up and, having told them to harness and overtake him, went on
Pierre gradually began to recover himself and looked about at the room
Pierre grew confused.
Pierre had already long been feeling in himself that refreshing source
Pierre had been educated abroad, and this reception at Anna Pavlovna's
Pierre had been silent and preoccupied all through dinner, seeming not
Pierre had come just at dinnertime and was sitting awkwardly in the
Pierre had evoked the passionate affection of the Italian merely by
Pierre had failed to notice Natasha because he did not at all expect to
Pierre had got up and gone to the next one, which was burning better.
Pierre had had done by a miniaturist in Petersburg. The countess had
Pierre had known slightly in Petersburg society, came into his room
Pierre had long been familiar with that story. Karataev had told it
Pierre had met in Petersburg society. In the President's chair sat a
Pierre had none of the practical persistence that would have enabled him
Pierre had not eaten all day and the smell of the potatoes seemed
Pierre had of late rarely seen his wife alone. Both in Petersburg and in
Pierre had seen in their own homes with their buffoons, or playing
Pierre had taken part in tying a policeman to a bear. He had now been
Pierre had the air of a man preoccupied with considerations which had no
Pierre had watched kindle burned up brightly. Pierre standing beside the
Pierre hastened to her. He thought she would give him her hand as
Pierre heard her say:
Pierre heard it plainly, but at that moment he remembered that he
Pierre heard the French consulting whether to shoot them separately or
Pierre held out one at random and drank with enjoyment, gazing with
Pierre hesitated.
Pierre hurriedly turned away from her and again addressed Princess Mary,
Pierre hurriedly.
Pierre in his secret soul agreed with the steward that it would be
Pierre inquired what was being said about leaving, and the corporal told
Pierre interrupted him.
Pierre interrupted him.
Pierre knew all the details of the attempt on Bonaparte's life in 1809
Pierre knew he was not to blame, for he could not have come sooner; he
Pierre knew so well in his wife, revolted him.
Pierre knew that Makar Alexeevich was Joseph Bazdeev's half-insane
Pierre knew very well what a hieroglyph was, but dared not speak. He
Pierre laughed.
Pierre leaped up from the sofa and rushed staggering toward her.
Pierre left the room and went to the old prince and Princess Mary.
Pierre listened to her attentively and seriously. Prince Andrew went
Pierre listened to her with lips parted and eyes fixed upon her full of
Pierre listened to the colonel's speech and nodded approvingly.
Pierre listened with swelling heart, gazing into the Mason's face with
Pierre looked again at the companion's pale, delicate face with its
Pierre looked around him with bloodshot eyes and did not reply. His
Pierre looked at Dolokhov with a smile, not knowing what to say to him.
Pierre looked at Rostopchin with naive astonishment, not understanding
Pierre looked at Timokhin with the condescendingly interrogative smile
Pierre looked at her over his spectacles.
Pierre looked at him in silence.
Pierre looked at him in surprise.
Pierre looked at his friend and, noticing that he did not like the
Pierre looked intently at her.
Pierre looked over his spectacles with naive surprise, now at him and
Pierre looked over the wall of the trench and was particularly struck
Pierre looked round at his fellow prisoners and scrutinized them.
Pierre looked round. Boris Drubetskoy, brushing his knees with his hand
Pierre looked silently and inquiringly at him over his spectacles.
Pierre looked silently and searchingly into Prince Andrew's face, which
Pierre looked up and saw at a window of the large house some Frenchmen
Pierre made up his mind not to go to the Rostovs' any more.
Pierre mastered his wrath. "I don't know that and don't want to," he
Pierre met the old count, who seemed nervous and upset. That morning
Pierre more strongly with the solemnity and importance of the moment
Pierre most of all was the view of the battlefield itself, of Borodino
Pierre murmured something unintelligible, and continued to look round as
Pierre no longer suffered moments of despair, hypochondria, and disgust
Pierre nodded, and went on with what he had been saying when the
Pierre nor did Natasha speak of him.
Pierre noticed that after every ball that hit the redoubt, and after
Pierre now recognized in his friend a need with which he was only too
Pierre now understood the count's dissatisfaction with the wording of
Pierre obediently sat down, his eyes asking if he were doing right.
Pierre on the shoulder. "What a thing to say!" he exclaimed. "Paris?...
Pierre paid no more attention to this occurrence than to the rest of
Pierre paused and looked at Anatole no longer with an angry but with a
Pierre paused, seeking a reply.
Pierre quickly took out his purse and watch, but could not manage for
Pierre raised his shoulders and listened open-mouthed to what was told
Pierre ran after him, avoiding the spot where the young officer was
Pierre ran down the slope once more.
Pierre reaching the house first went into Prince Andrew's study like
Pierre realized what contempt and animosity they all felt for the
Pierre recalled, counting them on his fingers, he felt already in his
Pierre received him unwillingly at first, but got used to him after a
Pierre remained gloomily silent, answering in monosyllables and
Pierre remembered Ramballe, and named him and his regiment and the
Pierre replied that he could not tell him his name and, blushing,
Pierre replied that the child belonged to a woman in a black coat who
Pierre rode up to them. Without being aware of it he had come to the
Pierre rose and took his leave.
Pierre rose to help him.
Pierre rose, rubbed his eyes, and seeing the pistol with an engraved
Pierre rubbed his forehead.
Pierre rushed to the wing, but the heat was so great that he
Pierre said nothing; he looked fixedly at his friend with surprise. He
Pierre sat between his wife and the old countess. He spoke of what he
Pierre sat down by the fire and began eating the mash, as they called
Pierre sat down with his little partner. Natasha was perfectly happy;
Pierre sat opposite Dolokhov and Nicholas Rostov. As usual, he ate and
Pierre sat up on the sofa, with his legs tucked under him.
Pierre saw that Boris wished to change the subject, and being of the
Pierre saw that Platon did not want to understand what the Frenchman
Pierre saw that Prince Andrew was going to speak of Natasha, and his
Pierre saw that his words were not in vain and that Prince Andrew would
Pierre saw that the count was much upset and tried to change the
Pierre seized the crossbeam, tugged, and wrenched the oak frame out with
Pierre shook his head and arms as if attacked by mosquitoes or bees.
Pierre shook his head and went on. In another side street a sentinel
Pierre sighed, rose submissively, emptied his glass, and, waiting till
Pierre smiled absent-mindedly, evidently not grasping what she said.
Pierre smiled in his good-natured way as if afraid for his companion's
Pierre smiled, Natasha began to laugh, but Nicholas knitted his brows
Pierre smiled, but his smile showed that he knew it was not the story
Pierre sniffed as he looked at her, but did not speak. Till then he had
Pierre sometimes opened and sometimes closed his eyes. But as soon as
Pierre spoke little but examined the new faces, and ate a great deal.
Pierre spoke rapidly and with animation. He glanced once at the
Pierre stepped out of his carriage and, passing the toiling militiamen,
Pierre still went into society, drank as much and led the same idle
Pierre stood with his arms hanging down and legs apart, before his
Pierre stopped, being pressed against the side of the cutting in which
Pierre suddenly flushed crimson and for a long time tried not to look
Pierre suddenly saw an outlet for his excitement. He hardened his heart
Pierre that he should, all the same, prefer her to Mary and to all
Pierre that it was his duty to conceal the whole affair and re-establish
Pierre that she understood just what he wished to convey. It was clear
Pierre the following prophecy concerning Napoleon, drawn from the
Pierre then explained that he had loved this woman from his earliest
Pierre thought he had never eaten anything that tasted better.
Pierre thought he invented himself, but the chief charm of his talk lay
Pierre threw off his cloak and entered the first room, in which were the
Pierre to translate what he said.
Pierre told her the price.
Pierre told him about the sick man.
Pierre told them.
Pierre too bent his head and let his hands fall. Without further thought
Pierre too drew near the church where the thing was that evoked these
Pierre too loved her. "He will do anything for me."
Pierre too when she had gone almost ran into the anteroom, restraining
Pierre took her outstretched hand and kissed it awkwardly as he walked
Pierre took his feet off the table, stood up, and lay down on a bed that
Pierre took it and began reading.
Pierre took off his coat, waistcoat, and left boot according to the
Pierre took off his hat and bowed respectfully to Kutuzov.
Pierre took off his spectacles, which made his face seem different and
Pierre took one of the glasses and emptied it. Ramballe emptied his too,
Pierre took the letter Anatole handed him and, pushing aside a table
Pierre took the packet. Prince Andrew, as if trying to remember whether
Pierre took them off, and his eyes, besides the strange look eyes have
Pierre tried several times to speak, but, on one hand, Prince Vasili did
Pierre turned back, giving a spring now and then to keep up with her.
Pierre turned back, not to his companions by the campfire, but to an
Pierre turned his whole body, making the sofa creak. He lifted his eager
Pierre turned over heavily on the ottoman and opened his mouth, but
Pierre understood nothing of all this and coloring shyly looked in
Pierre walked along, looking from side to side, counting his steps in
Pierre walked up and down the drawing room, not listening to what Petya
Pierre wanted to speak himself. He pushed forward, feeling stirred,
Pierre was about to reply, but Prince Vasili interrupted him.
Pierre was agitated and undecided. Natasha's unwontedly brilliant eyes,
Pierre was as if intoxicated. His elation increased at the sight of the
Pierre was evident. She kept an anxious watch on him when he approached
Pierre was in a state bordering on insanity. He was completely obsessed
Pierre was in an agreeable after-dinner mood. He looked straight before
Pierre was in such a transport of rage that he remembered nothing and
Pierre was just the husband needed for a brilliant society woman. He was
Pierre was looking into Princess Mary's eyes.
Pierre was no longer able to turn away and close his eyes. His curiosity
Pierre was not at all surprised at this question. He understood his
Pierre was one of those people who, in spite of an appearance of what
Pierre was one of those retired gentlemen-in-waiting of whom there were
Pierre was shown into the large, brightly lit dining room; a few minutes
Pierre was silent because he was incapable of uttering a word. To him
Pierre was silent.
Pierre was sitting in the drawing-room where Shinshin had engaged him,
Pierre was so deep in thought that he did not hear the question. He was
Pierre was staying at Prince Vasili Kuragin's and sharing the dissipated
Pierre was still afraid that this officer might inadvertently say
Pierre was struck by the modesty of the small though clean house after
Pierre was the sixth to enter. He was conducted through a glass gallery,
Pierre was there too, buttoned up since early morning in a nobleman's
Pierre was ungainly. Stout, about the average height, broad, with huge
Pierre well knew this large room divided by columns and an arch, its
Pierre went down the corridor, trying to avoid making a noise or meeting
Pierre went in at the door, stepping on the soft carpet, and noticed
Pierre went into that gloomy study which he had entered with such
Pierre went on with his diary, and this is what he wrote in it during
Pierre went out into the yard and, covering himself up head and all, lay
Pierre went out.
Pierre went to Princess Mary's to dinner.
Pierre went to the battery and the adjutant rode on. They did not meet
Pierre went to the children, and the shouting and laughter grew still
Pierre went to the right, and unexpectedly encountered one of Raevski's
Pierre went up to him, though he knew his attempt would be vain.
Pierre went up to the fire, ate some roast horseflesh, lay down with his
Pierre went with rapid steps to the door and suddenly came face to
Pierre were borne along lightly and joyously, nearer and nearer to their
Pierre who has inherited all the property and has besides been
Pierre whom the count had met in the street and dragged home with
Pierre will not be Pierre but will become Count Bezukhov, and will then
Pierre wished to be there with that smoke, those shining bayonets, that
Pierre wished to join the former, but Anna Pavlovna--who was in the
Pierre wished to reply, but could not get in a word. He felt that his
Pierre wished to say something, looked at her with eyes whose strange
Pierre wished to say that he was ready to sacrifice his money, his
Pierre wished to say this to the Mason, but did not dare to. The
Pierre with bright, ecstatic eyes.
Pierre without greeting his wife whom he had not seen since his
Pierre's animation that his visit had been interesting and that he had
Pierre's attire by now consisted of a dirty torn shirt (the only
Pierre's coachman shouted angrily at the convoy of wounded to keep to
Pierre's confusion had now almost vanished, but at the same time he felt
Pierre's confusion was not reflected by any confusion on Natasha's part,
Pierre's direction with a frown and ordered him to be led away. But
Pierre's eyes with it and tied it in a knot behind, catching some hairs
Pierre's eyes.
Pierre's eyes.
Pierre's face, already pale, became distorted by fury. He seized Anatole
Pierre's face, flushed and rapturous, but yet shy before his superior
Pierre's gaiety vanished completely. He anxiously questioned the
Pierre's gloomy, unhappy look struck her. She stopped in front of him.
Pierre's insanity consisted in not waiting, as he used to do, to
Pierre's interest.
Pierre's mind was in such a confused state that the word "stroke"
Pierre's mind, and then he remembered his benefactor at Torzhok. And now
Pierre's one feeling at the moment was a desire to show that he was
Pierre's outburst Anna Pavlovna, despite her social experience, was
Pierre's physical condition, as is always the case, corresponded to his
Pierre's remarks, rose and made a sign to his wife that it was time to
Pierre's side near Kutuzov and in a most natural manner, without
Pierre's subjection consisted in the fact that he not only dared not
Pierre's unpleasant and unamiable outburst. After the anecdote the
Pierre's way led through side streets to the Povarskoy and from there
Pierre's words. More than once, when the noise of the wheels prevented
Pierre) had not replied, had suddenly taken a very large dose of the
Pierre, "to kill a man means nothing to him. It must seem to him that
Pierre, Natasha met her on the threshold.
Pierre, after all, had not managed to choose a career for himself in
Pierre, and he gazed with his eyes fixed on the red reflection of the
Pierre, answering Natasha's words, told her how intolerable it had been
Pierre, as one of the principal guests, had to sit down to boston
Pierre, began talking of love and of his love affairs.
Pierre, but by involuntary intonations and a half smile betraying her
Pierre, feeling out of place there, having nothing to do, and afraid of
Pierre, for she had become even handsomer than before. What did surprise
Pierre, from joy, agitation, and embarrassment, was not in a state to
Pierre, girt with a rope round his waist and wearing shoes Karataev had
Pierre, glancing at him again.
Pierre, hardly restraining his sobs, began running toward Dolokhov and
Pierre, having decided that until he had carried out his design he would
Pierre, having made up his mind to obey his monitress implicitly, moved
Pierre, hearing greetings and the steps of someone who had entered the
Pierre, however, seized her and lifted her in his arms. She screamed
Pierre, in reply, sincerely agreed with her as to Helene's perfection of
Pierre, lost in thought, did not rise or lift his glass.
Pierre, not knowing whom to answer, looked at them all and smiled. His
Pierre, on unexpectedly becoming Count Bezukhov and a rich man, felt
Pierre, perplexed, looked round with his shortsighted eyes without
Pierre, seeing a large crowd round the Lobnoe Place, stopped and got out
Pierre, swaying his stout body, advanced, making way through the crowd
Pierre, trying to remember who this young man was.
Pierre, who had been growing more and more agitated as he listened to
Pierre, who had so often that day senselessly repeated that word
Pierre, whom it had been pitiful to see, so stricken was he with grief,
Pierre, with a gentle smile of pity and remorse, his arms and legs
Pierre, with all his memories, aspirations, hopes, and thoughts? Who was
Pierre, with downcast eyes, drank out of his glass without looking at
Pierre, without knowing why, was having his enormous Petersburg house
Pierre--have talked and laughed about this. So it's all right." And
Pierre--there was something resembling what he had seen on the face of
Pierre.
Pierre.
Pierre.
Pierre.
Pierre.
Pierre.
Pierre.
Pierre.
Pierre.
Pierre.
Pierre.
Pierre.
Pierre.
Pierre.
Pierre. "Put him beside his wife and he looks a regular buffoon!"
Pierre. He spoke in French. "I only know two very real evils in life:
Pierre. He went up to him, took his hand (a thing he never used to do),
Pierre. The estates he had not before visited were each more picturesque
Pierre. The satisfaction of his hunger and the wine rendered the captain
Pierre. Whatever he may tell me, I will do it. Mucius Scaevola burned
Pierre: he looked at Helene and she too seemed disconcerted, and her
Pierre; it constricted his limbs and destroyed the unconsciousness and
Placing the bottle on the window sill where he could reach it easily,
Platon Karataev (of whom he had heard from Pierre), his love for Natasha
Platon Karataev knew nothing by heart except his prayers. When he began
Platon Karataev must have been fifty, judging by his stories of
Platon with one of his round smiles, obviously pleased with his work.
Platon's whole figure--in a French overcoat girdled with a cord, a
Platon, and at once resumed the story he had begun.
Platon.
Platov's division was acting independently of the main army. Several
Please announce me."
Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
Please impress upon Leppich to be very careful where he descends for
Pointing to the French troops, Denisov asked him what these and those
Pointing to the fields, he spoke of the improvements he was making in
Poland, and the reaction of 1820 and later) also flowed?
Polish Uhlans, a handsome old man, flushed and, fumbling in his speech
Polish ladies by her massive, so called Russian type of beauty. The
Polish lady wished to elope with him, but, prompted by magnanimity, the
Polish sergeant.
Poniatowski's collision with Tuchkov; but these two were detached and
Poor Liza aloud to her, and more than once interrupted the reading
Pope himself would hear of her and would send her a certain document.
Posting Date: January 10, 2009 [EBook #2600]
Potemkins or Suvorovs left to oppose him; but he was also convinced that
Potocka who, he thought, had gone out onto the veranda, and glided over
Povarskaya was quite still and deserted. The huge courtyard of the
Povarskoy. He did not at first recognize the place from which he had set
Powdered footmen, in livery with buckled shoes and smart stockings,
Power is the collective will of the people transferred, by expressed or
Power, from the standpoint of experience, is merely the relation that
Pratzen Heights, now at the sun floating up out of the mist.
Pratzen Heights.
Pratzen, interrupted by such frequent reports of cannon that sometimes
Pratzen, which was full of troops of all kinds.
Prayer. So, Count, there never is any negligence in my company, and so
Prechistenka Boulevard, surrounded and sprinkled on all sides by stars
Preis geben," * said one of them.
Preussisch-Eylau.
Previously he had talked a great deal, grew excited when he talked, and
Prince Andrew (she never mentioned him to her husband, who she imagined
Prince Andrew again pondered as if trying to remember something.
Prince Andrew always became specially keen when he had to guide a young
Prince Andrew and did not even nod to him.
Prince Andrew and his sister, hand in hand, kissed one another, and
Prince Andrew arrived at Bennigsen's quarters--a country gentleman's
Prince Andrew arrived at Tsarevo-Zaymishche on the very day and at the
Prince Andrew arrived in Petersburg in August, 1809. It was the time
Prince Andrew as past him--and said, with a laugh: "That must have been
Prince Andrew began to explain to her the reasons for this delay.
Prince Andrew began to reply and to state his own plan, which might have
Prince Andrew bowed his head in token of having understood from the
Prince Andrew caught him by the hand.
Prince Andrew clearly with his arms outside the quilt, and such as she
Prince Andrew could no longer restrain himself and wept tender loving
Prince Andrew could not have explained how or why it was, but after that
Prince Andrew could not understand.
Prince Andrew did not notice that she called his sister Mary, and only
Prince Andrew did not reply. The carriage and horses had long since been
Prince Andrew did not see how and by whom it was replaced, but the
Prince Andrew did not think it proper to write and challenge Kuragin.
Prince Andrew dimly realized that all this was trivial and that he had
Prince Andrew during the battle had been in attendance on the Austrian
Prince Andrew entered a plain tidy room and saw at the table a man of
Prince Andrew expressed his ideas so clearly and distinctly that it was
Prince Andrew felt that either the actions of Kutuzov's army interested
Prince Andrew followed Speranski's every word and movement with
Prince Andrew followed her with a courteous but sad expression.
Prince Andrew found Barclay de Tolly, to whom he had been assigned, on
Prince Andrew found life easier to bear. After his betrothed had broken
Prince Andrew frowned again, expressing his annoyance with whoever was
Prince Andrew frowned and remained silent.
Prince Andrew galloped off to execute the order.
Prince Andrew gave him a look, but said nothing and went away. He felt
Prince Andrew gazed with anxious curiosity at that impassive face
Prince Andrew glanced again at the artillery officer's small figure.
Prince Andrew glanced at Kutuzov's face only a foot distant from him and
Prince Andrew glanced at Timokhin, who looked at his commander in alarm
Prince Andrew got up and went on tiptoe up to the little bed, wineglass
Prince Andrew grew more and more animated. His eyes glittered feverishly
Prince Andrew had arrived in the evening and Pierre came to see him next
Prince Andrew had gone out into the hall, and, turning his shoulders
Prince Andrew had hoped to find with the army, was not there. He had
Prince Andrew had no time to answer. The servants came out to meet them,
Prince Andrew had often occupied Pierre's thoughts and now recurred to
Prince Andrew had only seen on the faces of soldiers who had been long
Prince Andrew had spent two years continuously in the country.
Prince Andrew had to see the Marshal of the Nobility for the district
Prince Andrew had, as he had had in Petersburg society, two quite
Prince Andrew held her hands, looked into her eyes, and did not find
Prince Andrew hesitated. The smoking shell spun like a top between him
Prince Andrew in his riding cloak, mounted on a black horse, was looking
Prince Andrew interrupted him and cried sharply: "Yes, ask her hand
Prince Andrew ironically.
Prince Andrew jumped up as if someone had burned him, and again began
Prince Andrew kept looking with an amused smile from Pierre to the
Prince Andrew knew Denisov from what Natasha had told him of her first
Prince Andrew knew how to take his stand so that they respected and even
Prince Andrew laughed disagreeably, again reminding one of his father.
Prince Andrew led Pierre to his own apartments, which were always kept
Prince Andrew left the Rostovs' late in the evening. He went to bed from
Prince Andrew liked dancing, and wishing to escape as quickly as
Prince Andrew listened to the account of the opening of the Council of
Prince Andrew lived he had never seen anyone who together with awkward
Prince Andrew looked Anna Pavlovna straight in the face with a sarcastic
Prince Andrew looked at him and without replying went on speaking to
Prince Andrew looked at his sister. In the dim shadow of the curtain her
Prince Andrew looked at the laughing Speranski with astonishment,
Prince Andrew looked inquiringly at him and gave no reply.
Prince Andrew looked kindly at him, yet his glance--friendly and
Prince Andrew looked out of the shed and saw Pierre, who had tripped
Prince Andrew looked sternly at her and an expression of anger suddenly
Prince Andrew looked up his former acquaintances, particularly those he
Prince Andrew made use of Bogucharovo, began building and spent most of
Prince Andrew moved toward the door from whence voices were heard.
Prince Andrew needed his father's consent to his marriage, and to obtain
Prince Andrew nodded to him. He still looked ahead while Prince Andrew
Prince Andrew now seemed excited. He could apparently not refrain from
Prince Andrew only shrugged his shoulders at Pierre's childish words. He
Prince Andrew opened his eyes and looked up at the speaker from the
Prince Andrew politely.
Prince Andrew reached the general headquarters of the army at the end of
Prince Andrew received notice that he was to go to see the Minister of
Prince Andrew recognized him at once, and felt a throb within him, as
Prince Andrew remained at Bald Hills as usual during his father's
Prince Andrew remembered nothing more: he lost consciousness from the
Prince Andrew replied that he was not on his Serene Highness' staff
Prince Andrew replied. Then followed other questions just as simple:
Prince Andrew rode up to the house. Several limes in the old garden had
Prince Andrew rose hastily, listened to the business they had come
Prince Andrew rose, shrugged his shoulders, and walked about the room.
Prince Andrew said nothing to Tushin. They were both so busy as to seem
Prince Andrew said that for that work an education in jurisprudence was
Prince Andrew saw clearly that the old man hoped that his feelings, or
Prince Andrew saw that the officer was in that state of senseless,
Prince Andrew screwed up his eyes and turned away. Pierre, who from
Prince Andrew shared their wish for the success of their enterprise. He
Prince Andrew shrugged his shoulders.
Prince Andrew sighed and broke the seal of another envelope. It was
Prince Andrew sighed and made no reply.
Prince Andrew sighed with relief, smiled, and held out his hand.
Prince Andrew smiled as he looked at his sister, as we smile at those we
Prince Andrew smiled involuntarily as he looked at the artillery officer
Prince Andrew smiled ironically.
Prince Andrew smiled just perceptibly and for the first time, but
Prince Andrew smiled.
Prince Andrew smiled.
Prince Andrew spent half his time at Bald Hills with his father and his
Prince Andrew spoke so earnestly that Pierre could not help thinking
Prince Andrew stayed at Brunn with Bilibin, a Russian acquaintance of
Prince Andrew stood leaning on the railing of the raft listening to
Prince Andrew stood right in front of Kutuzov but the expression of the
Prince Andrew stopped short.
Prince Andrew to himself. While listening to this whispering and feeling
Prince Andrew to leave the room.
Prince Andrew to the staff officer.
Prince Andrew told Kutuzov all he knew of his father's death, and what
Prince Andrew told his driver to stop, and asked a soldier in what
Prince Andrew turned away with startled haste, unwilling to let them
Prince Andrew understood that this was said of him and that it was
Prince Andrew was as glad to find the boy like that, as if he had
Prince Andrew was behind, among the immense number forming the commander
Prince Andrew was carried in and laid on a table that had only just been
Prince Andrew was in command of a regiment, and the management of that
Prince Andrew was lying raised high on three pillows. His pale face was
Prince Andrew was most favorably placed to secure good reception in the
Prince Andrew was on duty that day and in constant attendance on the
Prince Andrew was one of those rare staff officers whose chief interest
Prince Andrew was silent, but the princess noticed the ironical and
Prince Andrew was somewhat refreshed by having ridden off the dusty
Prince Andrew was standing before her, saying something to her with a
Prince Andrew was surveying the position, was the easiest and most
Prince Andrew was to leave next evening. The old prince, not altering
Prince Andrew was watching these men abashed by the Emperor's presence,
Prince Andrew went again to his wife and sat waiting in the room next
Prince Andrew went out.
Prince Andrew went to visit him.
Prince Andrew went up to Pierre, and the latter noticed a new and
Prince Andrew went up to Speranski and took his leave.
Prince Andrew went up to the child and felt him. He was burning hot.
Prince Andrew when he drove up to the palace felt even more vigorous and
Prince Andrew who had not yet had time to eat anything.
Prince Andrew winced as at an electric shock.
Prince Andrew wished to leave at once, but Princess Mary persuaded him
Prince Andrew with a smile drew Pierre's attention to a commotion going
Prince Andrew with one word, one argument, would upset all his teaching,
Prince Andrew without joining in the conversation watched every movement
Prince Andrew without lifting his eyes rode hastily away from the
Prince Andrew without replying took out a notebook and raising his knee
Prince Andrew would prevent Nicholas from marrying Princess Mary, she
Prince Andrew" (he always spoke thus of his son) "has been telling
Prince Andrew's eyes were still following Pfuel out of the room when
Prince Andrew's former atheistic convictions.
Prince Andrew's joyous feeling was considerably weakened as he
Prince Andrew's last days had bound Princess Mary and Natasha together;
Prince Andrew's last stay at Bogucharovo, when he introduced hospitals
Prince Andrew's little son was seven. He could scarcely read, and knew
Prince Andrew's mind.
Prince Andrew's regiment was among the reserves which till after one
Prince Andrew's regiment, had joined him in Moscow and was being
Prince Andrew's relations with Natasha might, if he recovered, be
Prince Andrew's study and amuse himself by looking through and reading
Prince Andrew, and knew that the Rostovs had lived in the country ever
Prince Andrew, and striking his horse he rode up to Kutuzov.
Prince Andrew, as he entered the study, rubbing his small white hands.
Prince Andrew, depressed and preoccupied with the business about which
Prince Andrew, especially after the abandonment of Smolensk on the sixth
Prince Andrew, evidently confused. "I know that out of a million cases
Prince Andrew, having reached the front line, rode along it. Our front
Prince Andrew, he knew not why. He was unpleasantly struck, too, by the
Prince Andrew, in the white uniform of a cavalry colonel, wearing
Prince Andrew, leaning his arms on the raft railing, gazed silently at
Prince Andrew, looking straight in front of him, listened in silence to
Prince Andrew, out of breath with his rapid ride, spoke quickly.
Prince Andrew, pale and gloomy like everyone in the regiment, paced up
Prince Andrew, seeing that his father insisted, began--at first
Prince Andrew, taking advantage of the Emperor's permission, accompanied
Prince Andrew, trying to resist Speranski's influence, of which he began
Prince Andrew, who had also been brought forward before the Emperor's
Prince Andrew, who had evidently wished to tone down the awkwardness of
Prince Andrew, who had thought it was all the same to him whether or
Prince Andrew, who was beside him. Seeing him, Kutuzov's malevolent and
Prince Andrew, with a beaming, ecstatic expression of renewed life on
Prince Andrew, without replying, put him down from his knee and went out
Prince Andrew.
Prince Andrew. "But where is it?" he again wondered, gazing at the left
Prince Andrew. "I build a house and lay out a garden, and you build
Prince Andrew. "The others, one's neighbors, le prochain, as you and
Prince Andrew. Pierre went up to his friend and, asking whether they
Prince Andrew. They had known each other previously in Petersburg, but
Prince Andrew. Two... Frederick and Suvorov; Moreau!... Moreau would
Prince Auersperg von Mautern himself. 'Dearest foe! Flower of the
Prince Auersperg was defending Vienna?" he said.
Prince Bagration and Tushin looked with equal intentness at Bolkonski,
Prince Bagration looked at Tushin, evidently reluctant to show distrust
Prince Bagration proposed to Dolgorukov to send to inquire of the
Prince Bagration screwed up his eyes, looked round, and, seeing the
Prince Bagration turned to the officer and with his dull eyes looked at
Prince Bagration, having reached the highest point of our right flank,
Prince Bagration, uttering his words with an Oriental accent, spoke
Prince Bolkonski frowned.
Prince Bolkonski listened as a presiding judge receives a report, only
Prince Bolkonski sat down in his usual place in the corner of the sofa
Prince Bolkonski surveyed Anatole.
Prince Bolkonski's household felt that their life had not been real
Prince Dolgorukov to the advanced post of the French army.
Prince Eugene of Wurttemberg fired from a hill over the French crowds
Prince Hippolyte approached the little princess and, bending his face
Prince Hippolyte himself glanced around with amused surprise. He knew no
Prince Hippolyte hurriedly put on his cloak, which in the latest fashion
Prince Hippolyte was lolling in a lounge chair with his legs over its
Prince Hippolyte, having brought the workbag, joined the circle and
Prince Hippolyte, who had been gazing at the vicomte for some time
Prince Koutouzov, to keep you in His holy and gracious protection!
Prince Kuragin about me. I only wanted to ask because I fear the Guards
Prince Kutuzov's adjutant has brought me a letter in which he demands
Prince Kutuzov. It was Kutuzov's report, written from Tatarinova on the
Prince Michael Ilarionovich! (wrote the Emperor on the second of October
Prince Michael Ilarionovich! Since the twenty-ninth of August I have
Prince Nicholas frowned, but said nothing.
Prince Nicholas grew more animated and expressed his views on the
Prince Nicholas had always ridiculed medicine, but latterly on
Prince Peter Mikhaylovich Volkonski occupied the position, as it were,
Prince Repnin named Lieutenant Sukhtelen.
Prince Repnin!" and he spurred his horse and galloped away.
Prince Saltykov, in which he insisted on the words being inserted that
Prince Vasili always spoke languidly, like an actor repeating a stale
Prince Vasili and Anatole had separate rooms assigned to them.
Prince Vasili and at her father with her beautiful eyes.
Prince Vasili and other Petersburg acquaintances speaking of his wife's
Prince Vasili and that son of his to me? Prince Vasili is a shallow
Prince Vasili and the princess passed out by a back door, but returned
Prince Vasili arrived that evening. He was met in the avenue by coachmen
Prince Vasili became thoughtful and frowned. Anna Mikhaylovna saw that
Prince Vasili bent his head and spread out his hands.
Prince Vasili came next. He staggered to the sofa on which Pierre was
Prince Vasili continued, forgetting for a moment that though at Helene's
Prince Vasili continued.
Prince Vasili did everything to get Pierre to marry his daughter. Had he
Prince Vasili did not reply, though, with the quickness of memory and
Prince Vasili drew back with obvious impatience, while the princess
Prince Vasili frowned, twisting his mouth, his cheeks quivered and his
Prince Vasili gave Pierre a significant look.
Prince Vasili had come to the conclusion that it was necessary to throw
Prince Vasili had to settle matters with Pierre, who, it is true, had
Prince Vasili kept the promise he had given to Princess Drubetskaya who
Prince Vasili looked questioningly at the princess, but could not make
Prince Vasili passed by, seeming not to hear the ladies, and sat down on
Prince Vasili pronounced these last words in a tearful voice.
Prince Vasili rose.
Prince Vasili rose. "Oh!" said he with reproach and surprise, "this is
Prince Vasili said no more and his cheeks began to twitch nervously, now
Prince Vasili saw the princess off. She held a handkerchief to her eyes
Prince Vasili smiled, and Pierre noticed that everyone was smiling at
Prince Vasili smiled.
Prince Vasili stared at her and at Boris questioningly and perplexed.
Prince Vasili was not a man who deliberately thought out his plans.
Prince Vasili was seated in an easy chair in his familiar attitude, with
Prince Vasili wished to obtain this post for his son, but others were
Prince Vasili's daughter, the beautiful Helene, came to take her father
Prince Vasili's last words. Then rising, he suddenly went up to his
Prince Vasili's two valets were busy dressing him, and he looked round
Prince Vasili, as he entered. "I know all about it, and I can tell you
Prince Vasili, who of late very often forgot what he had said and
Prince Vasili, who still occupied his former important posts, formed a
Prince Vasili, with one leg thrown high over the other and a snuffbox in
Prince Vasili.
Prince Vasili.
Prince Vasili.
Prince Volkonski, who was in the chair, called on him to give his
Prince of Baden, but not to me!" Napoleon almost screamed, quite to his
Prince! May God support you..."
Prince, one would like to take Peter the Great's old cudgel out of the
Prince. And God only knows where your man Peter is," said the other
Prince? How priceless are those last moments! It can make things no
Princess Anna Mikhaylovna intervened in the conversation, evidently
Princess Drubetskaya's case he felt, after her second appeal, something
Princess Irina Vasilevna came to see me; she was an awful sight--looked
Princess Kuragina, a portly imposing woman who had once been handsome,
Princess Mary admitted to one another that the angel's face reminded
Princess Mary again shook her head disapprovingly.
Princess Mary and Julie Karagina.
Princess Mary and Natasha met as usual in the bedroom. They talked of
Princess Mary and Natasha were evidently glad to see their visitor and
Princess Mary and Natasha, who did not leave him, felt this. They did
Princess Mary and kissed her.
Princess Mary as she sat listening to the old men's talk and
Princess Mary asked Mademoiselle Bourienne's pardon, and also her
Princess Mary asked the countess to let Natasha go with her to Moscow,
Princess Mary begged him to stay one day more, saying that she knew how
Princess Mary but were looking within... into herself... at something
Princess Mary call it, are the chief source of all error and evil. Le
Princess Mary could not lift her head, she was weeping.
Princess Mary could not understand the boldness of her brother's
Princess Mary did not answer. She did not understand who was to go or
Princess Mary did not listen to the end, but continuing her train of
Princess Mary did not understand what he wanted of her or why he was
Princess Mary entered her father's room and went up to his bed. He was
Princess Mary feel shy but happy by this demonstration of her feelings.
Princess Mary flushed and ran out of the room. A few minutes later
Princess Mary gazed intently into his eyes with her own luminous ones
Princess Mary grew quite unconscious of her face and coiffure. The
Princess Mary had given to his words. "I heard of it in Orel and you
Princess Mary had greatly changed since 1805.
Princess Mary had long since put aside her book: she sat silent, her
Princess Mary had made an agreeable impression on him when he had met
Princess Mary heard him and did not understand how he could say such a
Princess Mary heard his words but they had no meaning for her, except as
Princess Mary interrupted him.
Princess Mary knelt down before her and hid her face in the folds of her
Princess Mary listened attentively to what he told her.
Princess Mary looked at her brother in surprise. She did not understand
Princess Mary looked at her companion without understanding what she was
Princess Mary looked at him silently and smiled affectionately.
Princess Mary looked at him with astonishment. She did not understand
Princess Mary looked at him with frightened inquiry, not understanding
Princess Mary looked inquiringly at her father. He was examining the
Princess Mary mentioned him a long-extinguished light once more kindled
Princess Mary merely to offend her, shown special endearments to
Princess Mary nodded her head, weeping.
Princess Mary noticed to her surprise that during this illness the
Princess Mary paused, uncertain whether the time had not already come to
Princess Mary postponed her departure. Sonya and the count tried to
Princess Mary pressed her head against his hand, trying to hide her sobs
Princess Mary pressed his hand. The pressure made him wince just
Princess Mary raised her head, dried her eyes, and turned to Natasha.
Princess Mary ran out to the porch, down the flower-bordered path, and
Princess Mary read the paper, and her face began to quiver with stifled
Princess Mary really was disconcerted and red patches came on her face
Princess Mary rose and moved to the door, then stopped and said:
Princess Mary roused him from his abstraction by drawing his attention
Princess Mary sat alone in her room listening to the sounds in the
Princess Mary saw Dessalles' embarrassed and astonished look fixed on
Princess Mary shook her head.
Princess Mary shrugged her shoulders but took the glass submissively
Princess Mary shuddered; her nurse, putting down the stocking she was
Princess Mary sighed deeply and thereby acknowledged the justice of
Princess Mary sighed, and the expression on her face said: "Yes, that's
Princess Mary spent half of every day with little Nicholas, watching
Princess Mary stayed on the veranda. The day had cleared, it was hot and
Princess Mary stood with downcast eyes not daring to look either at her
Princess Mary stopped. She was going to say that to speak of love was
Princess Mary that he loved her.
Princess Mary threw a shawl over her head and ran to meet the newcomer.
Princess Mary told Pierre of her plan to become intimate with her future
Princess Mary took Pierre into the drawing room.
Princess Mary turned to Sonya and, trying to stifle the hostile
Princess Mary turned with absent-minded questioning look to Pierre, who
Princess Mary understood his story and sympathized with him, but she
Princess Mary understood this and appreciated his delicacy.
Princess Mary understood.
Princess Mary vividly pictured to herself the position of Mademoiselle
Princess Mary walked up and down the room and stopped in front of him.
Princess Mary was first surprised and then aghast at this question.
Princess Mary was going to vespers and Pierre left the house with her.
Princess Mary was in Moscow. The death, sufferings, and last days of
Princess Mary was left alone. She did not comply with Lise's request,
Princess Mary was not in Moscow and out of danger as Prince Andrew
Princess Mary was sitting helpless and bewildered in the large sitting
Princess Mary was sitting on the sofa in her room, holding the weeping
Princess Mary was still standing by the cot, gently rocking the baby.
Princess Mary went back to her room with the sad, scared expression that
Princess Mary went on to ask Natasha to fix a time when she could see
Princess Mary went to the door of the study with special trepidation.
Princess Mary went up and kissed his hand. His left hand pressed hers
Princess Mary with a gaily mocking smile: "He looks just, yes, just as
Princess Mary with a gay smile, as if inviting her to join in a laugh at
Princess Mary with a gentle smile looked now at Pierre and now at
Princess Mary wrote that she was in despair at the misunderstanding that
Princess Mary's embarrassment on her people's account was quite
Princess Mary's face.
Princess Mary's heart beat so violently at this news that she grew pale
Princess Mary's joys and consolations; but besides that, since everyone
Princess Mary's letter.
Princess Mary's presence how she liked our village priests and icons and
Princess Mary's questions and especially by Natasha's into giving a
Princess Mary's self-esteem would be wounded and his point (not to
Princess Mary's servants were astonished at her energy and firmness of
Princess Mary's wish from the cupboard where he had been confined, was
Princess Mary, Dessalles, little Nicholas, and all the old nurses and
Princess Mary, and went in to see the prince. It happened that on that
Princess Mary, despite the dissuasions of Alpatych, her nurse, and the
Princess Mary, evidently intimidated and confused that her opinion had
Princess Mary, foreseeing no end to this, rose first, and complaining of
Princess Mary, frowning in her effort to hold back her tears, sat beside
Princess Mary, in her position as absolute and independent arbiter of
Princess Mary, listening to Natasha's tales of childhood and early
Princess Mary, little as he seemed to value her, was unthinkable to
Princess Mary, still thinking of that morning's conversation with her
Princess Mary, then sat thinking for a while with that expression of
Princess Mary, though he had scarcely known them, Pierre at once felt
Princess Mary, who knew his face so well, saw with horror that he did
Princess Mary, who was attractive to him and had an enormous fortune,
Princess Mary, with her acute sensibility, understood all this at the
Princess Mary, with the paper in her hand, rose from the window and with
Princess Mary--reluctantly as is usual in such cases--began telling of
Princess Mary.
Princess Mary.
Princess Mary.
Princess Mary. "Call Dronushka."
Princess, I hold to the principle that a maiden has a full right to
Princesses Gorchakov met suitors there and were married and so further
Probably a word of command was given and was followed by the reports of
Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.
Providence compelled all these men, striving to attain personal aims, to
Provinces--and I can live in Petersburg on my pay, and with her fortune
Provincial life in 1812 went on very much as usual, but with this
Prusse!"
Prussia's consent by assault. You are so eloquent. Will you give me a
Prussia, and had just returned from there as a special messenger. He had
Prussian army and was aide-de-camp to a very important personage.
Prussian army, Helene had suddenly found it necessary to see him. She
Prussian generals pride themselves on being polite to the French and lay
Prussians. The Prussians are our faithful allies who have only betrayed
Przebyszewski and his corps had laid down their arms. Other columns
Przebyszewski's and Langeron's columns which had already gone down into
Przebyszewski, with respectful but dignified politeness, held his
Public Baths if I may say so. Ah, when one looks at our young people,
Puckering up his face though smiling, and showing his short strong
Pursued by the French army of a hundred thousand men under the command
Pushing back Natasha who looked at her with astonished but tearless
Pyramids," of the sacrifices he offered for the fatherland, or of
Quartermaster General Prince Volkonski, as well as generals, imperial
Questions and answers were heard. The publican, taking advantage of the
Quite a new, sweet face with black eyebrows and mustaches peeped up at
Quite beside himself, Petya, clinching his teeth and rolling his eyes
Quos vult perdere dementat. *
Raevski had led his two sons onto the dam under terrific fire and had
Raevski reported that the troops were firmly holding their ground and
Raevski's tender paternal feelings when their own skins were in danger?
Raevski, twitching forward the black hair on his temples as was his
Rakes, those male Magdalenes, have a secret feeling of innocence
Rapp made no reply.
Rapp replied that he had given the Emperor's order about the rice, but
Rarely had Natasha experienced so joyful a feeling as now, sitting in
Rays of gentle light shone from her large, timid eyes. Those eyes lit
Reaching the large house near the Horse Guards' barracks, in which
Reading these letters, Nicholas felt a dread of their wanting to
Reason gives expression to the laws of inevitability. Consciousness
Reason says: (1) space with all the forms of matter that give it
Recent as that mental picture was, Rostopchin already felt that it had
Recognizing the falsity of this view of history, another set of
Red patches appeared on Princess Mary's face and she was silent as if
Redoubt opposite, which had been ours the day before and where several
Registrar's Department, "that he should remain to guard his documents.
Regulations and--what he had not at all expected--was chairman of a
Reinstating the first condition omitted, that of time, we see that no
Release Date: April, 2001
Religion, the common sense of mankind, the science of jurisprudence,
Repnin.
Returning from his journey through South Russia in the happiest state
Revelation of St. John.
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
Reveries about Sonya had had something merry and playful in them, but to
Revolution was a grand thing!" continued Monsieur Pierre, betraying by
Revolution, and so on. Without each of these causes nothing could have
Revolution, general progress, or anything else--then it is impossible
Revolution. The words that had struck him in the Emperor's appeal--that
Rhetor said, "to bring yourself to regard it not as a dreaded foe, but
Rhetor went away, leaving him to solitary meditation. "It must be so,
Rhetor's instructions. The Mason drew the shirt back from Pierre's left
Rhetor, "is an emblem of something not cognizable by the senses but
Rhetor, though it aroused his curiosity, did not seem to him essential,
Rhetor. I feel myself weak and unworthy. Then our talk turned to the
River and the timber yards by the Dorogomilov Bridge, were all ablaze.
Roman nose emitted sounds of rhythmic snoring. Little Nicholas, who had
Rome, the son and heir of their adored monarch.
Rostopchin angrily.
Rostopchin felt this, and it was this which exasperated him.
Rostopchin had replied that he could not come:
Rostopchin had returned to Moscow. After supper he lay down on a sofa
Rostopchin had scared them by his accounts of horrors Napoleon had
Rostopchin now knew it.
Rostopchin shouted angrily at the governor:
Rostopchin was sacrificing himself for the public good) but himself as
Rostopchin went again to the balcony door.
Rostopchin's actions appear irreproachable. "Why were the holy relics,
Rostopchin's broadsheet had said that he would sound a call two or three
Rostopchin's broadsheets, headed by woodcuts of a drink shop, a potman,
Rostopchin's orders to burn the barges and had in connection with that
Rostopchin, repeating a phrase he had uttered several times before. "One
Rostopchin, shouting something in a hoarse voice and making signs to him
Rostopchin, that French soldiers have to be incited to battle by
Rostopchin, though he had patriotic sentiments, was a sanguine and
Rostopchin, who is usually represented as being the instigator of that
Rostopchin. He had known that Moscow would be abandoned not merely since
Rostopchin:
Rostopchine, * the Russians to the barbarity of the French. In reality,
Rostov and Denisov drove away with the wounded Dolokhov.
Rostov and Ilyin gave rein to their horses for a last race along the
Rostov and Ilyin hastened to find a corner where they could change into
Rostov and Ilyin were in the merriest of moods. On the way to
Rostov and Ilyin, helped by Lavrushka who had brought their kits,
Rostov and Ilyin, on entering the room, were welcomed with merry shouts
Rostov and most of the officers after the review.
Rostov and the assistant went into the dark corridor. The smell was so
Rostov anticipated his horse's movements and became more and more
Rostov at a gliding gait and continued to impart his views. He said
Rostov became thoughtful.
Rostov by his title, as if in recognition of his confession. "Go and
Rostov coming upstairs.
Rostov considered, and then went in the direction where they said he
Rostov could already see their faces and heard the command: "Charge!"
Rostov described Denisov's appearance.
Rostov did not know or remember how he ran to his place and mounted.
Rostov did not listen to the soldier. He looked at the snowflakes
Rostov did not speak.
Rostov did not think what this call for stretchers meant; he ran on,
Rostov dismounted, gave his horse to the orderly, and followed Alpatych
Rostov entered the soldiers' ward. The foul air, to which he had already
Rostov even noticed that Denisov did not like to be reminded of the
Rostov explained that he wanted to see Major Denisov of the hussars, who
Rostov family was absorbed in various activities. The head of the
Rostov family, many fears that the invitation would not arrive, that the
Rostov felt Denisov's gaze fixed on him, raised his eyes, and instantly
Rostov felt as in a dream that he continued to be carried forward
Rostov felt ill at ease. He tried, but failed, to find some joke
Rostov felt so ill at ease and uncomfortable with Boris that, when the
Rostov felt that, under the influence of the warm rays of love, that
Rostov flushed up on noticing this, but he did not care, this was a mere
Rostov for his friendship to her Fedya, often talked to him about her
Rostov from a distance saw with envy and remorse how von Toll spoke
Rostov from returning home as he had promised and marrying Sonya. The
Rostov gazed at what was happening before him as at a hunt. He felt
Rostov glanced angrily at Ilyin and without replying strode off with
Rostov had argued that if Napoleon were taken prisoner he would be
Rostov had become a bluff, good-natured fellow, whom his Moscow
Rostov had been ordered to look for Kutuzov and the Emperor near the
Rostov had been out of humor from the moment he noticed the look of
Rostov had come to Tilsit the day least suitable for a petition on
Rostov had just prepared a card, by bending the corner of which he meant
Rostov had no idea that the village he was entering was the property of
Rostov had not the courage to persuade Denisov, though he instinctively
Rostov himself, his legs well back and his stomach drawn in and feeling
Rostov hurriedly put something on his feet, drew on his dressing gown,
Rostov in an imploring voice, "but I can't apologize, by God I can't,
Rostov kept asking as he came up to Russian and Austrian soldiers
Rostov laughed so loud and merrily that Denisov, in his bedroom, felt
Rostov lay down again on his bed and thought complacently: "Let him fuss
Rostov learned later that Russian and Austrian soldiers had been firing
Rostov let go of the horse and was about to ride on, when a wounded
Rostov lived, as before, with Denisov, and since their furlough they had
Rostov looked at and listened listlessly to what passed before and
Rostov looked at him, trying to remember where he had seen him before.
Rostov looked at the tipsy peasants and smiled.
Rostov met Sonya in the drawing room, he reddened. He did not know how
Rostov noticed something new in Dolokhov's relations with Sonya, but
Rostov passed through the anteroom.
Rostov pictured to himself an enemy or a deceitful German, whom he would
Rostov re-entered that world of home and childhood which had no meaning
Rostov recalled at that moment a strange conversation he had once had
Rostov reined in his horse, and his eyes sought his foe to see whom he
Rostov riding in front gave the order "Forward!" and the hussars, with
Rostov rode on at a footpace not knowing why or to whom he was now
Rostov saw all this as clearly as if he had known her whole life. He
Rostov saw tears filling the Emperor's eyes and heard him, as he was
Rostov saw that it had been well considered by them. Sonya had already
Rostov saw the prisoners being led away and galloped after them to have
Rostov shrugged his shoulders as much as to say: "Nor do I, but what's
Rostov smiled.
Rostov smilingly reassured the dragoon and gave him money.
Rostov spurred his horse, called to Sergeant Fedchenko and two other
Rostov staked five rubles on a card and lost, staked again, and again
Rostov still had the same indefinite feeling, as of shame.
Rostov stood at that corner for a long time, watching the feast from a
Rostov stopped and, clenching his fists, suddenly and sternly turned on
Rostov stopped his horse for a moment on a hillock to see what was going
Rostov stopped.
Rostov submitted. He let the eight hundred remain and laid down a seven
Rostov threw his cloak over his shoulders, shouted to Lavrushka to
Rostov thrust the purse under the pillow and shook the damp little hand
Rostov too, bending over his saddle, shouted "Hurrah!" with all his
Rostov took the letter and, throwing the money on the sofa, put both
Rostov took the money and, mechanically arranging the old and new coins
Rostov took the money, avoiding Telyanin's eyes, and went out of the
Rostov took the purse in his hand, examined it and the money in it, and
Rostov turned and was about to go, but the man in the braces stopped
Rostov turned his horse and galloped back. Four more reports followed
Rostov was always thinking about that brilliant exploit of his, which to
Rostov was not far from the trumpeters, and with his keen sight had
Rostov was particularly in need of money now that the troops, after
Rostov was particularly struck by the beauty of a small, pure-bred,
Rostov was riding in the act of falling asleep. Rostov lifted his
Rostov was smothered by arrangements for the journey, anxiety about her
Rostov was very happy in the love they showed him; but the first
Rostov waved his cap above his head like the German and cried laughing,
Rostov went back into the hall and noticed that in the porch there were
Rostov went close to the porch, together with some inquisitive
Rostov went off to his squadron without waiting for tea. Day was
Rostov went on ahead to do what was asked, and to his great surprise
Rostov went to Telyanin's quarters.
Rostov went to meet them.
Rostov when the animal was handed over to the hussar.
Rostov wiping his muddy hands on his breeches looked at his enemy and
Rostov with shrinking terror. His pale and mud-stained face--fair and
Rostov with the same expression of hope, of relief, reproach, and envy
Rostov's deferential tone seemed to indicate that though he would
Rostov's feeling, there was a deathly stillness amid which was heard the
Rostov's horse was also getting restive: it pawed the frozen ground,
Rostov's inquiry as to how the matter stood, he at once produced from
Rostov's rapid, firm steps and resolute, frowning face.
Rostov's share in Dolokhov's duel with Bezukhov was hushed up by the
Rostov's soul (it seemed to Rostov that he understood everything), at
Rostov's thought.
Rostov's thoughts, as is usual in such cases, were behind him, with the
Rostov, "you'll win it back all the sooner. I lose to the others but win
Rostov, absorbed by his relations with Bogdanich, had paused on the
Rostov, blushing.
Rostov, fearing to be crushed or swept into the attack on the French,
Rostov, flushing, drew Dolokhov into the next room.
Rostov, he stopped short and frowned.
Rostov, his eyes avoiding Denisov, began buttoning his coat, buckled on
Rostov, in common with the whole army from which he came, was far
Rostov, in dismay, began justifying himself, but seeing the kindly,
Rostov, knitting his brows, left the room with another low bow.
Rostov, rubbing his eyes that seemed glued together, raised his
Rostov, smoking his pipe and turning his head about as the water
Rostov, standing in the front lines of Kutuzov's army which the Tsar
Rostov, still looking round toward the fires and the shouts, rode with
Rostov, who had completely forgotten Denisov, not wishing anyone to
Rostov, who had unconsciously returned to the house where Alexander
Rostov, with a contemptuous smile.
Rostov, with his keen sportsman's eye, was one of the first to catch
Rostov, without returning home, took a horse and rode there. There was
Rostov, without waiting to hear him out, touched his horse, galloped to
Rostov.
Rostov.
Rostov.
Rostov.
Rostov. "I should die of happiness!"
Rostov. At that moment Alexander turned his head and Rostov saw the
Rostov. He knew what a shock he would inflict on his father and mother
Rostov; the other on a beautiful chestnut horse (which Rostov fancied he
Rostova's carriage in which they were seated drove over the straw
Rostovs and spent the rest of the day there.
Rostovs at Yaroslavl she at once prepared to go there, in spite of her
Rostovs remained, but he did not go to see them.
Rostovs requesting them to stand farther back, though as it was they
Rostovs since the day of his departure for the army. To be in Anna
Rostovs were staying in Yaroslavl, and in what condition Prince Andrew
Rostovs! Well, Mr. Hussar, and what regiment do you serve in?" she asked
Rostovs' box--her whole bosom completely exposed--beckoned the old count
Rostovs' house was littered with wisps of hay and with dung from the
Rostovs' yard. Many of the wounded asked them not to unload the carts
Rostovs' yard. Mavra Kuzminichna concluded that he was a very important
Rostovs, and that it was impossible in their presence even to mention
Rostovs, and the party became unquestionably exactly like all other
Rostovs. He had been in Moscow several times, and had passed near
Rostovs. Not by a single word had Nicholas alluded to the fact that
Round the peasant's deal table, on which lay maps, plans, pencils, and
Rugay, his back still muddy, came into the room and lay down on the
Rumyantsev, or Talleyrand, between a levee and an evening party, to have
Running into Sonya's room and not finding her there, Natasha ran to the
Russia and Austria in 1809 had not been sufficiently well concealed
Russia and zat ze safety and dignity of ze Empire as vell as ze sanctity
Russia can and as long as there are men able to stand...
Russia in which millions participated, but even in the simplest event,
Russia the less did he realize their significance. In Petersburg and
Russia were settling near the fortress of Braunau and burdening the
Russia!"
Russia's ancient and sacred capital without a struggle, or are we to
Russia's triumph in so far as it was produced by the Tsar's personal
Russia, and arrived too late to take part in the first actions of the
Russia, and not let the army get discouraged.
Russia, for the Orthodox Greek faith! All that is beautiful, but what
Russia, he would have said that it was not his business to think about
Russia, say to our being so frightened, and why are we abandoning our
Russia, to desecrate the tombs of our fathers, to carry off our wives
Russia. Alexander I gives a command and the French submit to the
Russia. It was said that the Emperor was leaving the army because it was
Russian Embassy, do not feel any need in token of my joy to give my
Russian and the Austrian. The Guards, just arrived from Russia, spent
Russian arms.
Russian army found vent in anger at Zherkov's untimely jest.
Russian army had been destroyed. Some talked about the Moscow militia
Russian army loots terribly--her army is destroyed, her capital
Russian army the three days' truce. Bagration replied that he was not
Russian army were convinced that the battle of Borodino was a victory.
Russian army will be fully equipped, and shall then, in conjunction with
Russian army) are nothing compared to what this man has been doing among
Russian army, expecting Napoleon to take the road to the right
Russian army, we picture that army without any leaders, it could not
Russian army.
Russian bath. The movement of these wrinkles formed the principal play
Russian commanders was the one naturally suggesting itself, namely, a
Russian commanders, those favorable to the French--and even the
Russian commanders. Here besides the law of retrospection, which regards
Russian envoy, Balashev began a speech he had prepared long before:
Russian expedition actually cost France less than fifty thousand men;
Russian forces had been similarly drawn. On the twelfth of June, 1812,
Russian frontier, as was the case in 1807!"
Russian general. The general shouted a demand that the cavalry should be
Russian in a low voice.
Russian line shone through the smoke. The weather was calm, and the
Russian money which he had prepared: "Raising the use of these means
Russian musketeer who had gone up to the picket line with an officer and
Russian officers and generals after the Tarutino battle, letting it be
Russian on which he wished to put a contemptuous emphasis.
Russian position--at the Shevardino Redoubt--and unexpectedly for the
Russian prisoners, who had come running from both sides of the road,
Russian side merely because in Petersburg--far from the seat of war--a
Russian side things did not appear in so gloomy a light. Napoleon was
Russian soil.
Russian troops and their commander of the laurels they have been
Russian troops moving down the valley to their left.
Russian troops were crossing the river Enns. At midday the Russian
Russian voice.
Russian with his heir the Tsarevich, and the Austrian with the Archduke,
Russian!"
Russian, "because I have a detestation for all the French, and the
Russian, are advanced only because they fit in with the event. Had that
Russian.
Russian. Prince Andrew listened and observed in silence.
Russian. To the noncommissioned officer's excuse that the prisoner was
Russians and salutary for the French. If the position of the Russian
Russians at Borodino. The French invaders, like an infuriated animal
Russians fought, the only consequence of these actions was a yet more
Russians from Krems to Znaim.
Russians had put their whole strength must have been mortal. But in any
Russians moved his army across the Kolocha. And the Russians, not having
Russians possessed would have been required.
Russians still holding their ground--a terrible feeling like a nightmare
Russians surrounded Pierre.
Russians thought they would beat Bonaparte or not, Lavrushka screwed up
Russians to make an idol of this useless old man, but that he knew whom
Russians to stop this movement, to which the French were directing all
Russians with anxious and timid faces, and Frenchmen with an air not of
Russians, and of disorganization among his own troops.
Russians, but when he looked again with the naked eye, he could not tell
Russians, have of seeing and believing in the possibility of goodness
Russians. Napoleon stopped his horse and again fell into the reverie
Ryazan estate or to the one near Moscow."
Ryazan provinces, and that if they retreated on Nizhni the army would
Ryazan, Vladimir, and Shuya was very long and, as post horses were not
SECOND EPILOGUE
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
Saddled horses were standing before the house and the suite were
Saltykov, Arakcheev, Vyazmitinov, Lopukhin, and Kochubey met to consider
Satisfied on these great points and with tranquility everywhere, I
Savelich's old face, "and what a pleasant smile he has!"
Saviour's words, that it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of
Saying this he again turned round, dropped his hands, took the bottle
Scarcely any impression was left on Pierre's mind by all that happened
Scarcely had Pierre laid his head on the pillow before he felt himself
Scherer, maid of honor and favorite of the Empress Marya Fedorovna. With
Scherer. At the other end sat the younger and less important guests, and
Scherer."
Schon Grabern, what shall we not do now when he is at the front? We will
Schon Grabern--and he would have found that easier. The committeemen
Schonbrunn, 25th Brumaire, 1805,
Schoss who asked her what she was saying, she went out of the room.
Scoundrels!" yelled Kutuzov in a hoarse voice, waving his arms and
Secondly it was impossible, because to paralyze the momentum with which
Secondly, it is assumed that the goal toward which humanity is being led
Secondly, it would have been senseless to block the passage of men whose
Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm
Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
Seeing Anna Mikhaylovna and her son, Prince Vasili dismissed the doctor
Seeing his gloomy face as he frowned at his wife, the officers grew
Seeing that his most gracious ruler was calm once more, Michaud also
Seeing that smile, Rostov involuntarily smiled himself and felt a still
Seeing them he kept thinking, "That may be the very standard with which
Seeing, on the other side, some Cossacks (les Cosaques) and the
Self-sacrifice was her most cherished idea but in this case she could
Selfish, vain, stupid, trivial in everything--that's what women are
Semenovna, it's quite near in the Dogs' Square, and then I'll come back
Semenovsk had reaped their harvests and pastured their cattle. At the
Semenovsk--his adjutant came back from him and told Kutuzov that the
September 2 Moscow has been in the hands of the enemy. Your last reports
September, 6, 1812.
September, and except for a mob in the governor's courtyard, assembled
Serene Highness. He knew Kutuzov's attention would be caught by those
Sergeevich? Those are his quarters," and he pointed to the third house
Servants with lanterns were bustling about in the porch. The immense
Service before everything. Thanks, thanks!" And he went on writing, so
Seslavin.
Seven days had passed since Prince Andrew found himself in the
Seven years had passed. The storm-tossed sea of European history had
Several men joined the first two.
Several of the field galloped to the spot where the fight was going on.
Several of the men, with bright kindly faces, stopped beside Pierre.
Several of those present smiled at Zherkov's words, expecting one of his
Several shopkeepers crowded round the officer.
Several soldiers gathered by the wall of the trench, looking out to see
Several tens of thousands of the slain lay in diverse postures and
Several times during the march false alarms had been given and the
Several times in the course of the morning Princess Mary began trying to
Several times the countess, with tears in her eyes, told her son that
Several wounded men passed along the road, and words of abuse, screams,
Shall I go with some of my hussars to see?" replied Rostov.
Shamshevo."
Shcherbaty was the only man who dealt with such matters. Denisov had
Shcherbaty--the gap-toothed). Denisov smiled, and Petya burst into a
She already had power over him, and between them there was no longer any
She always addressed him with a radiantly confiding smile meant for him
She approached him, saw his face, and something gave way within her.
She assumed her dolefully submissive manner and said to her husband:
She began blinking rapidly and moved away from the looking glasses.
She began to cry and a still greater sense of pity, tenderness, and love
She brought into Princess Mary's strenuous, mournful, and gloomy world a
She came in to dinner with red eyes. Marya Dmitrievna, who knew how
She caught the young officer by his cuffs, and a look of solemnity and
She could not have read the letter as she did not even know it had
She could not lie either on her face or on her side. Every position was
She could not pray, could not weep, and worldly cares took possession of
She crossed herself, kissed the icon, and handed it to Andrew.
She did not answer.
She did not herself know how or why the exclamation escaped her when she
She did not know and would not have believed it, but beneath the layer
She did not let go of her mother but struggled tenderly with her,
She did not talk about her brother, diverting the conversation as soon
She did the right thing with such precision, such complete precision,
She drew near to him and stopped. He took her hand and kissed it.
She exhaled happiness and love from the time Nicholas returned, and the
She felt agitated and tormented, and the cause of this was Kuragin whom
She felt all the time as if she might at any moment penetrate that
She felt that from her she would be able to understand and learn
She felt that it was impossible to ask, or to answer, in words.
She finished her game of patience and only then examined the presents.
She forgot all fear of her father, went up to him, took his hand, and
She gave her companion an angry glance.
She got up quickly just as Nicholas entered, almost ran to the door
She grew confused, glanced round, and, seeing the doll she had thrown
She had a fan in her hand that one of the ladies had given her to hold.
She had already married off her daughter, and her sons were all in the
She had determined not to tell her and persuaded her father to hide the
She had fallen ill unexpectedly a few days previously, had missed
She had in fact seen nothing then but had mentioned the first thing that
She had not yet gone to bed when the Rostovs arrived and the pulley of
She had noticed with what dissatisfaction he turned from the look she
She had said she did not want to sing, but it was long since she had
She had wanted to conceal what she was writing from him, but at the same
She has no one, no one. To tell the truth, I don't need her, and she's
She heard the sound of quick footsteps in the quiet street. Someone
She heard, or thought she heard, the names of Kuragin and Bolkonski. But
She held herself as erect, told everyone her opinion as candidly,
She hesitated for an instant whether to speak or not.
She hummed a scrap from her favorite opera by Cherubini, threw herself
She invited them to take the wounded man into the house.
She is so affected. Ask her in," she said to the footman in a sad voice,
She is so... you know?... Unpleasant... But my fiancee!... Well, you
She knew of the duel and had come to speak about it. She waited till the
She lay for a long time in that position.
She led him into the dark drawing room and Pierre was glad no one could
She looked at him in dismay trying to guess what he wanted of her. When
She looked at him inquiringly and with childlike reproach.
She looked round and seeing that her friend was not in the room ran to
She looked timidly at her brother.
She loved Prince Andrew--she remembered distinctly how deeply she loved
She never was abashed and is not abashed now, so she cannot be a bad
She nodded to the dressmaker, whom she knew and who had curtsied
She now saw him from the commencement of that scene and relived what she
She only really took part when they recalled Sonya's first arrival. She
She opened the door and stepped across the threshold and onto the cold,
She opened the door and the bright daylight in that previously darkened
She passed into the sitting room, stood there thinking awhile, and then
She passed the valet, the snuff fell from the candle wick, and she saw
She paused, as women always do, expecting something after they have
She paused, feeling that she was not telling the truth. Natasha noticed
She paused. She so wanted a word from him that would explain to her what
She pointed to a lady who was crossing the room followed by a very plain
She praised the Rostovs' toilets. They praised her taste and toilet, and
She provoked the jealousy of the elderly magnate and told him what she
She pulled up her muslin sleeve and showed him a red scar on her long,
She pushed the little dog off her lap and smoothed her dress.
She put her large hand under Natasha's face and turned it toward her.
She ran across the street, turned down a side street to the left, and,
She ran to her father, but he feebly waved his arm, pointing to her
She ran to meet her, embraced her, and began to cry on her shoulder.
She rang for her maid and asked her to sleep in her room.
She read this in Tikhon's face and in that of Prince Vasili's valet, who
She returned to the garden and sat down on the grass at the foot of the
She rose and smoothed her hair, which was as usual so extremely smooth
She roused herself, and felt appalled at what she had been thinking, and
She rushed to Sonya, hugged her, and began to cry.
She sang her praises, insisted that her son must call on her, expressed
She sat awhile, wondering what the meaning of it all having happened
She sat down at the table and listened to the conversation between the
She saw his face, heard his voice, repeated his words and her own, and
She says it's very fine."
She seemed that day to be more than ever kind and affectionate to
She seemed to be fond not so much of individuals as of the family as a
She smiled as she uttered his pet name, "Andrusha." It was obviously
She spent the night of the fourteenth as usual, without undressing, in
She spoke rapidly and did not notice how Pierre flushed at her words. "I
She spoke, mingling most trifling details with the intimate secrets of
She started, flushed, and sighed deeply.
She stood with her slender arms hanging down, her scarcely defined bosom
She stopped, seeing in the forward thrust of her husband's head, in his
She suddenly paused, smiling at her own impetuosity.
She told him about her romance with Prince Andrew and of his visit to
She took a pair of pear-shaped ruby earrings from her huge reticule and,
She took his arm and with a happy face went with him into the adjoining
She took the liberty of inquiring whether it was long since Anatole
She trembled all over and sat down on a chair.
She tried to pass Anna Mikhaylovna, but the latter sprang so as to bar
She turned away and gave her hand to the count, who could hardly keep
She turned round. For a few seconds they gazed silently into one
She turned to go, but he stopped her with a gesture and took an uncut
She understood that he meant what were their parents quarreling about.
She understood that when speaking of "trash" he referred not only to
She vividly recalled the moment when he had his first stroke and was
She was as he had known her almost as a child and later on as Prince
She was evidently unable to speak and made a sign with her hands that
She was expecting Prince Andrew any moment and twice that day sent a
She was gazing in the direction in which he had gone--to the other side
She was gazing where she knew him to be; but she could not imagine him
She was much altered. She was now plain rather than pretty. Her cheeks
She was no longer in the loose gown she generally wore in the morning,
She was nursing her boy when the sound of Pierre's sleigh was heard
She was overcome by sweet sorrow and tears were already rising in her
She was right," he thought, remembering what the governor's wife had
She was the Countess Bezukhova, Pierre's wife, and the count, who knew
She was twenty-seven. After the death of her brothers she had become
She washed, dressed, said her prayers, and went out to the porch. In
She went in and sat down by her husband.
She wished to help him, to bestow on him the superabundance of her own
She woke late. That sincerity which often comes with waking showed her
She would begin to say something to her in a low tone from the other end
She would like to be married to all three at the same time," thought he.
Shevardino Redoubt was the left flank of the position, and that Kutuzov
Shevardino Redoubt, the Russians fought the battle of Borodino on an
Shevardino knoll, where he sat on his campstool, his sallow face
Shinshin, a cousin of the countess', a man with "a sharp tongue" as they
Shinshin, laughing ironically and mixing the most ordinary Russian
Shinshin, lowering his voice, began to tell the count of some intrigue
Shinshin. Countess Bezukhova turned smiling to the newcomer, and
Shishkov, the Secretary of State and one of the chief representatives of
Shortly after nine o'clock that evening, Weyrother drove with his plans
Siberia!'" said Berg with a sagacious smile. "I knew I was in the right
Sidorov, turning to the French, winked, and began to jabber meaningless
Sidorov, you have a try!"
Sidorych..." Simon did not finish, for on the still air he had
Sila Andreevich (Kochubey spoke of Arakcheev by that nickname with the
Silence ensued. The countess looked at her callers, smiling affably,
Simon sighed and stooped to straighten the leash a young borzoi had
Simon were looking at him.
Since Bennigsen, who corresponded with the Emperor and had more
Since Boris left Moscow in 1805 to join the army he had not seen the
Since Prince Andrew had last seen him Kutuzov had grown still more
Since early morning--despite an injunction not to approach the picket
Since his appointment as general on duty he had always slept with his
Since she had begun looking after him, he had always experienced this
Since the ball he had felt the approach of a fit of nervous depression
Since their marriage Natasha and her husband had lived in Moscow, in
Since then Pierre had not been disturbed and had spent the whole time in
Since they are my foes they cannot be my friends, whatever may have been
Sitting at table with the officers and tearing the fat savory mutton
Sitting on the sofa with the little cushions on its arms, in what used
Sitting silent and motionless on a heap of straw against the wall,
Six weeks after Anna Pavlovna's "At Home" and after the sleepless night
Six weeks later he was married, and settled in Count Bezukhov's large,
Smolensk and thought only of how to advance farther, though as we now
Smolensk and were drawing nearer and nearer to Moscow. Napoleon's
Smolensk had looted provisions instead of storing them--how could that
Smolensk road they ran holding the clapper of their bell tight--and
Smolensk was abandoned contrary to the wishes of the Emperor and of the
Smolensk which were in nobody's way, because despite the unfortunate
Smolensk, 1812.)
Smolensk--a calculation he had begun before the marshal went by. And
Smolensk.
Smolensk. A general was sent to survey the position. This general,
Smolensk. Fortune is frankly a courtesan, Rapp. I have always said so
Smolyaninov, and it mortified him to think that the newcomer was an
So according to history it has been found from the most ancient times,
So also in history what is known to us we call laws of inevitability,
So and-So,' and then I take a cab and go myself two, three, or four
So he comes up to the old man like this, and falls down at his feet!
So he considered it necessary to ask for leave of absence for family and
So he lay now on his bed, supporting his large, heavy, scarred head on
So he rattled on, telling all the gossip he had heard among the
So in the same way Moscow was empty when Napoleon, weary, uneasy, and
So it came about that at the council at Malo-Yaroslavets, when the
So it has been with Barclay. While Russia was well, a foreigner could
So it was at Krasnoe, where they expected to find one of the three
So long as histories are written of separate individuals, whether
So naturally, simply, and gradually--just as he had come from Turkey to
So she decided that it was necessary to prepare the opinion of society.
So that examining the relation in time of the commands to the events,
So that if we examine the case of a man whose connection with the
So the countess remained in the country, and the count, taking Sonya and
So the histories say, and it is all quite wrong, as anyone who cares to
So the swishing sound of the strokes, and the desperate but unnatural
So they went through their memories, smiling with pleasure: not the sad
So thought Prince Andrew as he listened to the talking, and he roused
So thought the Emperor, and the Russian commanders and people were still
So too, like Voltaire in his time, uninvited defenders of the law of
Sobbing, she kissed and comforted Natasha. "If only he lives!" she
Society. Once or twice Pierre was carried away and began to speak of
Softened by memories of Princess Mary he began to pray as he had not
Sokolniki field, no longer thinking of what had occurred but considering
Sokolniki forest and found Dolokhov, Denisov, and Rostov already there.
Sokolniki.
Sokolnitz, November 30, 1805."
Soldiers and militiamen ran bareheaded past Pierre toward the
Soldiers ordered to advance ran back on meeting grapeshot; soldiers
Soldiers were passing in a constant stream along the street blocking
Soldiers! The Russian army is advancing against you to avenge the
Soldiers! This is the battle you have so longed for. Victory depends on
Solomon. Pierre respected this class of Brothers to which the elder ones
Some beat and tore at Vereshchagin, others at the tall youth. And the
Some days after Anatole's departure Pierre received a note from Prince
Some fifteen men with merry shouts were shaking down the high wattle
Some five male domestic serfs, big and little, rushed out to the front
Some flash as of an electric spark shot from Telyanin's eyes to Rostov's
Some forty Uhlans were drowned in the river, though boats were sent to
Some historians--those biographical and specialist historians already
Some hussars who galloped up disengaged his foot and helped him into the
Some of the generals, in low tones and in a strain very different from
Some of the men bared their heads, others stared at the new arrivals
Some of the nearest relatives had not yet left. They were sitting in
Some of the peasants said that these new arrivals were Russians and
Some of the soldiers were frightened and ran away, others went on
Some of them were digging, others were wheeling barrowloads of earth
Some said there had been another battle after Borodino at which the
Some swarthy men and women were really entering from the cold outside
Some thirty years ago Ferapontov, by Alpatych's advice, had bought a
Some twenty men of the Sixth Company who were on their way into the
Somebody after all must see to things. One misses Mitenka at such times.
Someday I will tell you about our parting and all that was said then.
Someone mentioned that Captain Tushin was bivouacking close to the
Someone spoke her name in a soft and tender voice from the garden and
Someone was snoring under them, and around them stood saddled horses
Someone, a very important personage judging by the haste with which way
Someone? There is the future life. The Someone is--God."
Something cracked in the flames. The fire died down for a moment and
Something was boiling in a small cauldron at the edge of the fire and
Sometimes Pierre, struck by the meaning of his words, would ask him to
Sometimes he consoled himself with the thought that he was only living
Sometimes he remembered how he had heard that soldiers in war when
Sometimes it occurred to Natasha that he did not wish to see her, and
Sometimes it seemed to her that this difference arose from the
Sometimes the best of the pupils, of whom Natasha, who was exceptionally
Sometimes the old count would come up, kiss Prince Andrew, and ask his
Sometimes they were silent for hours; sometimes after they were already
Sometimes when she recalled his looks, his sympathy, and his words,
Sometimes when, trying to understand him, she spoke of the good work he
Sometimes, as she looked at the strange but amusing capers cut by the
Sonya again interrupted. She gave him an imploring, frightened look.
Sonya and Boris, and Vera with a subtle smile was saying something to
Sonya and Dolokhov before dinner, and with the kindly sensitiveness
Sonya and Natasha slept in the sitting room without undressing.
Sonya and fat little Petya doubled up with laughter.
Sonya became thoughtful. The question of how to write to Nicholas, and
Sonya began watching her friend still more attentively and noticed that
Sonya burst into hysterical tears and replied through her sobs that
Sonya came along, wrapped in her cloak. She was only a couple of paces
Sonya could not continue, and again hid her face in her hands and in the
Sonya did not pull it away, and left off crying. Natasha, not stirring
Sonya did not succumb to the tender tone Natasha used toward her. The
Sonya entered the room with an agitated face.
Sonya felt that this was true: that the only possibility of retrieving
Sonya had not seen anything, she was just wanting to blink and to get
Sonya heard this and Natasha's whisper:
Sonya in any way and tried to be fond of her, but often felt ill-will
Sonya interrupted him.
Sonya jumped out of the coach and ran to the countess. The countess,
Sonya kept house, attended on her aunt, read to her, put up with her
Sonya made some reluctant reply.
Sonya nodded.
Sonya passed to the pantry with a glass in her hand. Natasha glanced at
Sonya pushed away the glass she was holding and covered her eyes with
Sonya read all that the countess meant to convey with these words. Those
Sonya read painstakingly in her high-pitched voice. The count listened
Sonya said that Natasha was in her bedroom. Natasha was sitting on
Sonya sat down and Natasha pinned the ribbon on differently.
Sonya sat down before the glasses, got the right position, and began
Sonya sat up. The little kitten brightened, its eyes shone, and it
Sonya sighed and made no reply. The count, Petya, Madame Schoss, Mavra
Sonya sighed and shook her head incredulously.
Sonya sighed sorrowfully.
Sonya slammed the door to. A minute later they let the count in. He was
Sonya smiled.
Sonya smiled.
Sonya stared open-eyed at Natasha, unable to believe her ears.
Sonya struck the first chord of the prelude.
Sonya too was busy all this time, but the aim of her efforts was quite
Sonya too, all rosy red, clung to his arm and, radiant with bliss,
Sonya trembled all over and blushed to her ears and behind them and down
Sonya tried to lift her head to answer but could not, and hid her face
Sonya was afraid to leave Natasha and afraid of being in the way when
Sonya was always the first excuse Countess Mary found for feeling
Sonya was more tender and devoted to him than ever. It was as if she
Sonya was not less agitated than her friend by the latter's fear and
Sonya was not," continued Natasha. "Now I am so glad! Well, run back to
Sonya was right, and for that very reason flushed and with evident
Sonya was sitting at the clavichord, playing the prelude to Denisov's
Sonya was sitting sobbing in the corridor. "Marya Dmitrievna, for God's
Sonya was softened, excited, and touched by all that had occurred that
Sonya was there too, tormented by curiosity as to what Prince Andrew and
Sonya was unhappy at the separation from Nicholas and still more so on
Sonya went out into the passage to go to the barn. Nicholas went hastily
Sonya went up to the countess and, kneeling down, kissed her hand.
Sonya while the china was being packed and tried to help, but soon gave
Sonya wiped away her tears and went up to Natasha, again scanning her
Sonya!" she said almost with tears in her voice. "There never, never was
Sonya's costume was the best of all. Her mustache and eyebrows were
Sonya's first. He had read only a few lines when he turned pale and his
Sonya's letter written from Troitsa, which had come as an answer to
Sonya, "that when one goes on and on recalling memories, one at last
Sonya, Natasha, Petya, Anna Mikhaylovna, Vera, and the old count were
Sonya, as always, did not quite keep pace with them, though they shared
Sonya, blaming himself and commending her. He had asked Princess Mary to
Sonya, during this stay in Moscow, he said to himself, "Ah, there will
Sonya, feeling unusually excited and touched, remained at the window
Sonya, for there is nothing but good in her."
Sonya, or for Nicholas himself.
Sonya, realizing for the first time how wrongly she had acted toward
Sonya, scrutinized her, and then ran to her mother. Turning her mother's
Sonya, shaking off some down which clung to her and tucking away the
Sonya, she did not cease dancing all the evening. She noticed and saw
Sonya, who had a tear-stained face, but he could not see Natasha.
Sonya, with a quiver in her voice due chiefly to the attention that was
Sonya. The countess was still unwell and unable to travel but it was
Sonya. You absolutely must, tonight! Do it for me.... Today I feel so
Sonya.) Princess Mary ran up the steps. "This way, this way!" said the
Sonya..."
Soon after "Uncle's" reappearance the door was opened, evidently from
Soon after Prince Andrew had gone, Princess Mary wrote to her friend
Soon after Prince Andrew's return the old prince made over to him a
Soon after Prince Bagration had left him, Tushin had succeeded in
Soon after his admission to the Masonic Brotherhood, Pierre went to the
Soon after that Natasha heard her mother's even breathing. Natasha did
Soon after that a report was received from Dorokhov's guerrilla
Soon after the Christmas holidays Nicholas told his mother of his love
Soon after the Emperor's return Prince Vasili in a conversation about
Soon after the duke's departure--before he could possibly have reached
Soon after the migration to the "warm rivers," in which he had taken
Soon after their arrival in Petersburg Berg proposed to Vera and was
Soon after this the children came in to say good night. They kissed
Soon after this there came into the dark chamber to fetch Pierre, not
Soon after this, Ermolov moved up to Kutuzov and respectfully remarked:
Soon he really shut his eyes and fell asleep. He did not sleep long and
Sophie, the rosy, laughter-loving, youngest princess with the mole,
Sophie--I can't repeat them--that it made the count quite ill and he
Sorrow, it seems, is our common lot, my dear, tender friend Julie.
Sounds of crying and screaming came from somewhere in the distance
Souza's novels."
Speaking of the interaction of heat and electricity and of atoms, we
Speaking of the position of Prussia, Anna Pavlovna very naturally asked
Specialist historians describing the campaign of 1813 or the restoration
Speranski and he took them to his study. As soon as he had left the room
Speranski but someone else. Everything that had formerly appeared
Speranski did not shift his eyes from one face to another as people
Speranski he had found this ideal of a perfectly rational and virtuous
Speranski told Kochubey he was sorry he had been unable to come sooner
Speranski was doing. That precise, mirthless laughter rang in Prince
Speranski went on to say that honor, l'honeur, cannot be upheld by
Speranski which was still going on between the two old men.
Speranski, indicating by a smile that he wished to finish amiably an
Speranski--was distinctly ejaculating ha-ha-ha. Prince Andrew had never
Speranski. He manages everything. I'll speak to him. He has promised to
Speranski. He was too much absorbed in observing the famous man's
St. Bartholomew was not due to Charles IX's will, though he gave the
Stael, read novels, liked the society of pretty women, jested with
Staff, the presence of confidential representatives of the Emperor, and
Staggering amid the crush, Pierre looked about him.
State, which he had so impatiently awaited and to which he had attached
States.
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
Steady!" he cried to his fidgeting horse.
Stein, a former Prussian minister; Armfeldt, a Swedish general; Pfuel,
Stepanovich Adraksin. Adraksin was in uniform, and whether as a result
Still alive... tenacious... serves him right! Torture serves a thief
Still greater coherence and inevitability is seen in the life of
Still laughing, Speranski held out his soft white hand to Prince Andrew.
Still less did he think of injuring anyone for his own advantage. He
Still less did she understand why he, kindhearted and always ready to
Still less does the history of authors and reformers explain to us the
Still no one moved. The troops of the left flank, infantry and hussars
Still smiling, she gracefully moved away, turning and glancing at her
Still smiling, the French officer spread out his hands before Gerasim's
Still the cannon balls continued regularly to whistle and flop onto the
Stone Bridge, were Ney's troops and transport.
Stone, Moskva, and Yauza bridges.
Stop, stop!" she cried to the coachman.
Stopping in front of the Pavlograds, the Tsar said something in French
Stories were whispered of how differently the two Empresses behaved
Straining all her faculties Princess Mary looked at him. The comic
Strange as at first glance it may seem to suppose that the Massacre of
Strange as it was to her to acknowledge this feeling in herself, yet
Strange as may be the historical account of how some king or emperor,
Street, talking. A third officer galloped up to them.
Street.
Street.
Streets. No masters of the houses being found anywhere, the French were
Striking his horse with his long muscular legs as if it were to blame
Strong as was her inward grief, this wound to her vanity intensified her
Such is the fate not of great men (grands hommes) whom the Russian mind
Suddenly Natasha bent her head, covered her face with her hands, and
Suddenly Pierre heaved a deep sigh and dumped his heavy person down on
Suddenly Prince Hippolyte started up making signs to everyone to attend,
Suddenly a fresh sound, a piercing feminine scream, reverberated from
Suddenly a gust of wind beat violently against the casement of the
Suddenly a terrible concussion threw him backwards to the ground. At the
Suddenly an electric shock seemed to run through Natasha's whole being.
Suddenly and simultaneously a crowd of memories awoke in his fancy--of
Suddenly everybody stirred, began talking, and pressed forward and then
Suddenly he heard Denisov shouting in a vibrating voice behind the hut,
Suddenly he heard a familiar voice repeating something to him a second
Suddenly he seemed to remember; a scarcely perceptible smile flashed
Suddenly he sniffed and put his face closer to the window.
Suddenly she jumped up onto a tub to be higher than he, embraced him so
Suddenly something happened: the young officer gave a gasp and bending
Suddenly the angry, squirrel-like expression of the princess' pretty
Suddenly the sound of a firing of cannon was heard from the embankment,
Suddenly, he did not know why, he felt a pang. The day was so beautiful,
Sukharev tower accompanied by a small, sallow-faced, beardless old man
Sukharev tower, do you remember?"
Sundays. Nobody seemed yet to realize what awaited the city.
Supper was over, and Pierre who at first declined to speak about his
Supposing that by these words Anna Pavlovna was somewhat lifting the
Suvorov's time, now passing so gallantly before the Emperors, that
Suvorov-like, in a kibitka, and is received with acclamations of joy and
Suvorovs now? Je vous demande un peu,"*(4) said he, continually changing
Suvorovs, and Orlovs Germans? No, lad, either you fellows have all lost
Sventsyani, because on the first day of their arrival at that small town
Swaying from side to side on his long, thin legs in his fluttering
Swaying his head and smiling as if amused at himself, the officer ran
Sweden is practically an island: but Napoleon gave an angry exclamation
System, the ambition of Napoleon, the firmness of Alexander, the
THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
Take her to your room and I'll go to Father. How is he? Just the same?"
Taking his hand and drawing him downwards, Kutuzov offered his cheek to
Taking the colonel's outburst as a challenge to his courage, the general
Talk in general centered round three melancholy facts: the Emperor's
Taras the gardener, but no one replied. Having gone round the corner
Tarutino and Vyazma, to hastening it on while easing the movement of our
Tarutino battle and of the day before it, which Kutuzov remembered with
Tarutino) to the place where the attacking columns were to meet. He sat
Tarutino. The news of that battle of Tarutino, unexpectedly received
Tattered, blue-purple clouds, reddening in the east, were scudding
Tears of vexation showed themselves in Princess Mary's eyes. She turned
Tears suddenly rose in her eyes, she turned away, lifted her music
Tell me what I am to do, dear princess!" he added after a pause, and
Tell the Cossack to fetch my kit. I have two French uniforms in it.
Telling the groom to follow him with the horses, Pierre went down the
Telyanin was sitting in the same indolent pose in which Rostov had left
Telyanin, and he went out to give the order.
Ten men, battalions, or divisions, fighting fifteen men, battalions, or
Ten minutes later Lavrushka brought the coffee. "He's coming!" said
Terrible anguish struck her heart, she felt a dreadful ache as if
Testament and a skull. Round it stood seven large candlesticks like
Thank God!..."
Thanks to Anna Mikhaylovna's efforts, his own tastes, and the
Thanks to Denisov the conversation at table soon became general and
Thanks to the delay caused by this crossing of the wolf's path, the old
That I do not... understand. Has he not thought that I may do the same?"
That Napoleon agreed with Mouton, and that the army retreated, does
That Sunday, the Rostovs went to Mass at the Razumovskis' private chapel
That act is performed.
That army could not recover anywhere. Since the battle of Borodino
That army, like a herd of cattle run wild and trampling underfoot the
That arousing of the people by their sovereign and his call to them to
That assumption would destroy the possibility of the existence of laws,
That couch was dreadful to him, probably because of the oppressive
That day Countess Helene had a reception at her house. The French
That day Nicholas Rostov received a letter from Boris, telling him that
That day he dined with the marshal, at the same board on the barrels.
That evening Marya Dmitrievna was going to the Akharovs' and proposed to
That evening Nicholas did not go out, but stayed at home to settle some
That evening he learned that all these prisoners (he, probably, among
That evening the Rostovs went to the Opera, for which Marya Dmitrievna
That evening, between issuing one order that the forged Russian paper
That feeling akin to temptation which had tormented her during her
That feeling of alertness and of readiness for anything was still
That flank march might not only have failed to give any advantage to
That hesitation lasted only an instant. The Tsar's foot, in the narrow
That impulse was reasonable. The condition of fugitives and of pursuers
That instant, when Nicholas saw the wolf struggling in the gully
That is still too fresh. Ah, dear friend, you are happy not to know
That is what you have gained by alienating me!" And he walked silently
That is why it is a sin for men like you, Prince, not to serve in these
That movement from the Nizhni to the Ryazan, Tula, and Kaluga roads was
That never does any harm," thought Anatole.
That night another wounded man was driven down the Povarskaya, and Mavra
That night, alone in new surroundings, he was long unable to sleep. He
That one also passed. Then followed a cart unlike any that had gone
That reply is the expression of a consciousness that is not subject to
That same day a council of war had been held in which all the members of
That same evening Pierre went to the Rostovs' to fulfill the commission
That same evening there was an animated discussion among the squadron's
That same night, Rostov was with a platoon on skirmishing duty in front
That same night, having taken leave of the Minister of War, Bolkonski
That shoulder rose and fell rhythmically and convulsively, but spadefuls
That simple, modest, and therefore truly great, figure could not be cast
That smile was immediately reflected on Pierre's face.
That soldier passed on, and after him came another sitting on a cart.
That unknown quantity is the spirit of the army, that is to say, the
That was all done by the soldiers. Therefore it was not he who killed
That was the only doubt often troubling Pierre. He did not now make any
That was what had happened to him two days before Princess Mary's
That was what the officers desired. But it was impossible to make the
That was why he asked for a copy of them. The uncomfortable position in
That winter the Karagins' house was the most agreeable and hospitable
That year two marriages had come of these balls. The two pretty young
That's a thing I hate! Everything is possible."
That's enough, please leave off!" Prince Andrew painfully entreated
That's the way he was brought up, and everybody does it. But what a
That's the way."
That's what I'm up to."
The "man of great merit," despite his desire to obtain the post of
The "man of great merit," who was still a novice in court circles,
The Austrian general looked dissatisfied, but had no option but to reply
The Austro-Prussian war appears to us undoubtedly the result of the
The Battle of Borodino, with the occupation of Moscow that followed it
The Bible legend tells us that the absence of labor--idleness--was a
The Comte de Turenne showed him into a big reception room where many
The Cossack bent forward from under the wagon to get a closer look at
The Cossack raised his arm and a shot rang out. In an instant the tramp
The Cossack was sent for and questioned. The Cossack officers wished
The Cossack's report, confirmed by horse patrols who were sent out, was
The Cossacks sold the horse for two gold pieces, and Rostov, being the
The Council of War began to assemble at two in the afternoon in the
The Emperor Napoleon had not yet left his bedroom and was finishing his
The Emperor at once received this messenger in his study at the palace
The Emperor began to breathe heavily and rapidly, his lower lip
The Emperor ceased speaking, the crowd began pressing round him, and
The Emperor drew level with Rostov and halted. Alexander's face was
The Emperor entered the Cathedral of the Assumption. The crowd spread
The Emperor entered the hall through a broad path between two lines of
The Emperor gave his consent. The aides-de-camp collected money by
The Emperor greeted the officers and the Semenov guard, and again
The Emperor interrupted him.
The Emperor is gracious, and I shan't forget you if you deserve well."
The Emperor knit his brows with dissatisfaction and, glancing back,
The Emperor listened in silence, not looking at Michaud.
The Emperor of Russia had, meanwhile, been in Vilna for more than a
The Emperor rode to the square where, facing one another, a battalion
The Emperor said a few words to him and took a step toward his horse.
The Emperor thanked Prince Andrew and bowed. Prince Andrew withdrew and
The Emperor turned with a smile to one of his followers and made a
The Emperor was in very good spirits after his ride through Vilna, where
The Emperor was with the army to encourage it, but his presence and
The Emperor went in, and after that the greater part of the crowd began
The Emperor went into the study. He was followed by Prince Peter
The Emperor with a rapid glance scanned Kutuzov from head to foot,
The Emperor without waiting for an answer turned away and said to one of
The Emperor's displeasure with Kutuzov was specially increased at Vilna
The Emperor's horse started at the sudden cry. This horse that had
The Emperor's manifesto was read, evoking enthusiasm, and then all moved
The Emperor, frowning slightly, bent his ear forward as if he had not
The Emperor, with the agitation of one who has been personally
The Emperors remounted and rode away. The Preobrazhensk battalion,
The English will come off badly, you know, if Napoleon gets across the
The Englishman looked on sideways, pursing up his lips. The man who had
The Englishman nodded, but gave no indication whether he intended to
The Englishman took out his purse and began counting out the money.
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
The French alphabet, written out with the same numerical values as the
The French army melted away at the uniform rate of a mathematical
The French attributed the Fire of Moscow au patriotisme feroce de
The French colonel with difficulty repressed a yawn, but was polite and
The French dragoon was a young Alsatian who spoke French with a German
The French evacuation began on the night between the sixth and seventh
The French found Moscow abandoned but with all the organizations of
The French guns were hastily reloaded. The infantry in their blue
The French had attacked the battery and, seeing Kutuzov, were firing
The French had been repulsed for the last time. And again and again in
The French had time to fire three rounds of grapeshot before the hussars
The French historians, describing the condition of the French army
The French onlookers and listeners laughed.
The French patrol was one of those sent out through the various
The French perished from the conditions to which the Russian army was
The French soldiers went to kill and be killed at the battle of Borodino
The French were already near. Prince Andrew, walking beside Bagration,
The French who had been pursuing him stopped.
The French who had occupied the battery fled, and our troops shouting
The French, not being farther pursued, began to recover themselves: they
The French, retreating in 1812--though according to tactics they should
The French, the spy reported, having crossed the Vienna bridge, were
The French, who had ceased firing at this field strewn with dead and
The French, with the memory of all their former victories during
The Frenchman expanded his chest and made a majestic gesture with his
The Frenchman glanced around uneasily and then, as if overcoming his
The Frenchman looked at his guilty face and smiled.
The Frenchman's chatter which had previously amused Pierre now repelled
The Frenchman, having pushed his head and hands through, without raising
The German closed his eyes, signifying that he did not understand.
The German laughed, came out of the cowshed, pulled off his cap, and
The Grand Master began reading the statutes. They were very long, and
The Grand Master proposed that the last duty should be performed, and
The Grand Master rapped with his mallet. All the Masons sat down in
The Guards had gone to the front; Dolokhov had been reduced to the
The Guards had made their whole march as if on a pleasure trip, parading
The Horse Guards were galloping, but still holding in their horses.
The Imperial Camp near Mozhaysk,
The Italian seemed happy only when he could come to see Pierre, talk
The Mason cleared his throat huskily, as old men do, and called his
The Mason did not move and for a long time said nothing after this
The Mason looked intently at Pierre and smiled as a rich man with
The Mason remained silent for a long time, evidently considering.
The Mason smiled with his gentle fatherly smile.
The Minister of War came up and congratulated him on the Maria Theresa
The Pavlograd Hussars were stationed two miles from Braunau. The
The Pavlograd regiment had had only two men wounded in action, but had
The Pavlograd regiment, belonging to that part of the army which had
The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
The Prussians are up in arms now. The Austrians, you see, are putting
The Rhetor cleared his throat, crossed his gloved hands on his breast,
The Rostov party spent the night at Mytishchi, fourteen miles from
The Rostovs knew everybody in Moscow. The old count had money enough
The Rostovs lived in the same hospitable way in Petersburg as in Moscow,
The Rostovs remained in Moscow till the first of September, that is,
The Rostovs' monetary affairs had not improved during the two years they
The Russian Emperor's aide-de-camp is an impostor. Officers are nothing
The Russian army had to act like a whip to a running animal. And the
The Russian army was commanded by Kutuzov and his staff, and also by the
The Russian army, they say, in its retreat from Smolensk sought out
The Russian military historians in so far as they submit to claims
The Russian officer in charge of the transport lolled back in the front
The Russian troops were passing through Moscow from two o'clock at night
The Russian war should have been the most popular war of modern times:
The Russians did not make that effort because they were not attacking
The Russians did not seek out the best position but, on the contrary,
The Russians retreated eighty miles--to beyond Moscow--and the French
The Russians stood in serried ranks behind Semenovsk village and its
The Russians, half of whom died, did all that could and should have been
The Russians, they say, fortified this position in advance on the left
The Sokolniki field was deserted. Only at the end of it, in front of the
The Torzhok peddler woman, in a whining voice, went on offering her
The Tsar addressed the officers also: "I thank you all, gentlemen, I
The Tsar heard but obviously did not like the reply; he shrugged his
The Tsar looked intently and observantly into Kutuzov's eye waiting to
The Tsar said something more which Rostov did not hear, and the
The Tsar stopped a few minutes in front of the hussars as if undecided.
The absorption of the French by Moscow, radiating starwise as it did,
The actions of Napoleon and Alexander, on whose words the event seemed
The actions of men are subject to general immutable laws expressed in
The activity of Alexander or of Napoleon cannot be called useful or
The actors of 1812 have long since left the stage, their personal
The adjutant bent his head affirmatively and began to report, but the
The adjutant came out to the porch and asked Prince Andrew to lunch with
The adjutant galloped to Claparede's division and a few minutes later
The adjutant in attendance came into the tent.
The adjutant looked at Pierre as if puzzled what to do with him now.
The adjutant on duty, meeting Prince Andrew, asked him to wait, and went
The adjutant, having obeyed this instruction, approached Prince Andrew.
The affianced couple, no longer alluding to trees that shed gloom and
The aide-de-camp was sent to confirm the order which had not been
The aim of cutting off Napoleon and his army never existed except in
The aim of the Russian army was to pursue the French. The road the
The air was full of smoke and the smell of burning. Now and then he met
The ancient historians all employed one and the same method to describe
The ancients have left us model heroic poems in which the heroes furnish
The angry borzois whined and getting free of the leash rushed past the
The approaching riders having descended a decline were no longer
The army was moving from west to east, and relays of six horses carried
The arrangement adopted when they started, that the officer prisoners
The arrangements for Natasha's marriage occupied him for a while. He
The arrival of Dolokhov diverted Petya's attention from the drummer boy,
The assistant asked some further questions.
The assistant looked fagged out. He was evidently vexed and impatient
The assistant, however, did not confirm the doctor's words.
The attack of the Sixth Chasseurs secured the retreat of our right
The attendant made a hopeless gesture.
The battalion commander perceived the jovial irony and laughed.
The battle began on both sides with a cannonade from several hundred
The battle had begun! Prince Andrew turned his horse and galloped back
The battle of Tarutino obviously did not attain the aim Toll had in
The beast wounded at Borodino was lying where the fleeing hunter had
The beautiful Armenian still sat motionless and in the same attitude,
The beauty went to the aunt, but Anna Pavlovna detained Pierre, looking
The beekeeper opens the upper part of the hive and examines the super.
The bees circle round a queenless hive in the hot beams of the midday
The bells in the Kremlin were ringing for vespers, and this sound
The better we are acquainted with the physiological, psychological, and
The black figure of a sentinel stood on the bridge.
The black, hairy, snub-nosed face of Vaska Denisov, and his whole short
The blood rushed to Natasha's face and her feet involuntarily moved, but
The blood rushed to Petya's face and he grasped his pistol.
The bloodstained smith went beside them. The factory hands and others
The booming cannonade and the fusillade of musketry were growing more
The bottle of rum was brought. The window frame which prevented anyone
The boy with the thin neck stretching out from the turn-down
The brightness of the morning was magical. Moscow seen from the Poklonny
The buildings, begun under straitened circumstances, were more than
The bustle and terror of the Rostovs' last days in Moscow stifled the
The cadet was Rostov. With one hand he supported the other; he was pale
The caleche in which Prince Andrew was being taken attracted Sonya's
The campaign began, the regiment was moved into Poland on double pay,
The campfires crackled and the soldiers' songs resounded even more
The cannonade on the left flank will begin as soon as the guns of the
The captain gazed intently at him as he had done when he learned that
The captain had their senior sergeant called in, and in a stern voice
The captain looked at Pierre. He had a habit of stopping short in the
The captain made a gesture signifying that even if he did not understand
The captain returned to the room, limping slightly and whistling a tune.
The captain was so naively and good-humoredly gay, so real, and so
The captain, on the other hand, seemed very cheerful. He paced up and
The card tables were drawn out, sets made up for boston, and the count's
The carpets yielded and the lid closed; Natasha, clapping her hands,
The carriage door was opened. On the left there was water--a great
The cart in which the officer lay was turned into the Rostovs' yard,
The cart was loaded high, and at the very top, beside a child's chair
The case was evidently this: a position was selected along the river
The case, as represented by the offended parties, was that, after
The cause of the confusion was that while the Austrian cavalry was
The cause of the delay was Natasha's skirt, which was too long. Two
The cause of the destruction of the French army in 1812 is clear to us
The change that took place in Natasha at first surprised Princess Mary;
The chanting of the service ceased, and the voice of the priest was
The cheerful mood of their officers after the inspection infected the
The chief action of the battle of Borodino was fought within the seven
The chief reason Princess Mary did not realize the full significance of
The chief steward expressed great sympathy with Pierre's intentions, but
The chief steward, a very stupid but cunning man who saw perfectly
The chief steward, who considered the young count's attempts almost
The chief thing is that the Emperor is here. How he looked at me and
The child moved slightly in his sleep, smiled, and rubbed his forehead
The children and their governesses were glad of Pierre's return because
The children were playing at "going to Moscow" in a carriage made of
The chill that had been running down Pierre's back now seized his head
The church bells everywhere were ringing for service, just as usual on
The city police is established on its former footing, and better order
The clear blue eyes looked at the commander in chief just as boldly as
The clerk glanced round, evidently hoping that his joke would be
The club cook and the steward listened to the count's orders with
The coach with six horses was waiting at the porch. It was an autumn
The coin was a new one. Rostov rose and went up to Telyanin.
The cold, austere tone of this man, whom he had almost always before met
The colonel deliberately stopped the regiment and turned to Nesvitski.
The colonel looked silently at the officer of the suite, at the stout
The colonel rode to the front, angrily gave some reply to questions put
The colonel was a stout, tall, plethoric German, evidently devoted to
The combatants advanced along the trodden tracks, nearer and nearer to
The command of the left flank belonged by seniority to the commander of
The commander of the artillery of the 3rd Corps, General Fouche, will
The commander of the company, with his eyes fixed on his superior,
The commander of the militia was a civilian general, an old man who was
The commander of the regiment turned to Prince Bagration, entreating him
The commander of the regiment was an elderly, choleric, stout, and
The commander of the regiment, a thin, feeble-looking old man with a
The commander rode up to his hut. The regiment passed through the
The commencement of his speech had obviously been made with the
The commencement of that movement was the movement from west to east.
The concentrated activity which had begun at the Emperor's headquarters
The conflagration, at which he had looked with so much indifference the
The consciousness that this would be so and would always be so was and
The conversation at supper was not about politics or societies, but
The conversation did not flag all evening and turned chiefly on the
The conversation ended by the count, who wished to be generous and to
The conversation flagged, and the soldiers began settling down to sleep.
The conversation turned on the contemporary gossip about those in power,
The conversation was cold and disconnected and continually broke off.
The conversation was hushed.
The cook and a shop assistant came to the gate. With lively curiosity
The corporal came, according to orders, to shut the door. The prisoners
The council of war was just over when Prince Andrew accompanied by Boris
The council of war, at which Prince Andrew had not been able to
The count and Simon galloped out of the wood and saw on their left a
The count burst out laughing. The other guests seeing that Shinshin was
The count came waddling in to see his wife with a rather guilty look as
The count considered.
The count danced well and knew it. But his partner could not and did not
The count frowned and coughed.
The count frowned.
The count had devised this diplomatic ruse (as he afterwards told his
The count jumped up and, swaying from side to side, spread his arms wide
The count moved in his affairs as in a huge net, trying not to believe
The count nodded affirmatively, and Natasha, at the rapid pace at which
The count ordered his carriage that he might drive to Sokolniki, and sat
The count put his ear to the keyhole and listened.
The count remembered the wolf he had let slip and his encounter with
The count returned and lay down behind the partition. The countess went
The count sat on the sofa between two guests who were smoking and
The count sobbed yet more.
The count spoke timidly, as he always did when talking of money matters.
The count stood by the window and listened without turning round.
The count turned and saw on his right Mitka staring at him with eyes
The count walked up and down the hall in his dressing gown, giving
The count was about to say something, but evidently restrained himself.
The count was delighted at Anna Mikhaylovna's taking upon herself one of
The count was the first to rise, and with a loud sigh crossed himself
The count went in first with Marya Dmitrievna, the countess followed
The count went into the house with him, repeating his order not to
The count wished to go home, but Helene entreated him not to spoil her
The count, forgetting to smooth out the smile on his face, looked into
The count, holding his cards fanwise, kept himself with difficulty from
The count, laughing, nudged the blushing Sonya and pointed to her former
The countess and Sonya cried from pity for Natasha and because he was
The countess began to soothe Natasha, who after first listening to her
The countess did not believe her ears. Denisov had proposed. To whom? To
The countess exchanged glances with Anna Mikhaylovna. The latter
The countess glanced at her daughter, saw her face full of shame for her
The countess glanced at her silent son.
The countess had been prepared by Anna Mikhaylovna's hints at dinner.
The countess had written direct to Julie's mother in Moscow suggesting a
The countess lifted her head and looked attentively at her daughter.
The countess looked round several times at her daughter's softened face
The countess looked with timid horror at her son's eager, excited face
The countess lowered her eyes, sighing deeply.
The countess opened her eyes in dismay and, seizing Sonya's arm, glanced
The countess pressed her daughter's hand, closed her eyes, and became
The countess put her arms around Sonya and began to cry.
The countess shrugged her shoulders.
The countess took Princess Mary into the drawing room, where Sonya was
The countess tried to frown, but could not. Marya Dmitrievna shook her
The countess was a woman of about forty-five, with a thin Oriental type
The countess was accustomed to this tone as a precursor of news of
The countess was lying in an armchair in a strange and awkward position,
The countess was now over sixty, was quite gray, and wore a cap with a
The countess was pleased with Natasha's zeal; after the poor results of
The countess was sitting with her companion Belova, playing
The countess was upset by her friend's sorrow and humiliating poverty,
The countess watched the things being packed, was dissatisfied with
The countess' eyes filled with tears and she pondered in silence.
The countess' face flushed hotly, but she said nothing.
The countess, Madame Schoss, and Sonya undressed hastily and lay down.
The countess, in dismay, looked up to heaven, clasped her hands, and
The countess, on hearing that Moscow was on fire, began to cry. Natasha,
The countess, sobbing heavily, hid her face on her daughter's breast,
The countess, when she had identified them and laughed at their
The countess, who heard at once from the maids what had happened at the
The countess, with a cheerful expression on her face, looked down at her
The countess, with a coldness her son had never seen in her before,
The country seat at Bald Hills had been rebuilt, though not on the same
The coup de theatre had not come off.
The courier who had been sent on in advance to find out where the
The course of the Father Confessor's arguments ran as follows: "Ignorant
The creditors who had so long been silent, restrained by a vague
The crowd drew up to the large table, at which sat gray-haired or bald
The crowd halted, pressing around those who had heard what the
The crowd moved on again. Nesvitski realized that it was a cannon ball.
The crowd ran after the Emperor, followed him to the palace, and began
The crowd remained silent and only pressed closer and closer to
The crowd round the icon suddenly parted and pressed against Pierre.
The crowd, pushing forward desperately, squeezed together, moved a few
The curtain rose again. Anatole left the box, serene and gay. Natasha
The dancer stopped, pulled off the loose piece of leather, and threw it
The day after Rostov had been to see Boris, a review was held of the
The day after he had been received into the Lodge, Pierre was sitting at
The day after her party the governor's wife came to see Malvintseva
The day after his interview with Count Arakcheev, Prince Andrew spent
The day after his son had left, Prince Nicholas sent for Princess Mary
The day after the council at Malo-Yaroslavets Napoleon rode out early in
The day after the opera the Rostovs went nowhere and nobody came to see
The day after the review, Boris, in his best uniform and with his
The day after this conversation Natasha put on the old dress which
The day before the count was to return, Sonya noticed that Natasha sat
The day was clear and frosty. Kutuzov rode to Dobroe on his plump little
The deacon came out onto the raised space before the altar screen and,
The defense of Vienna was no longer to be thought of. Instead of an
The degree of our conception of freedom or inevitability depends in this
The demands of life, which had seemed to her annihilated by her father's
The dinner was nearly over, and the Emperor, munching a biscuit, rose
The diplomatic career now lies open before you."
The director of her conscience was astounded at having the case
The dirty maidservant stepped from behind the trunk, put up her plait,
The discovery of these laws is only possible when we have quite
The discussion began. Bennigsen did not yet consider his game lost.
The discussion recommenced, but pauses frequently occurred and they all
The discussions continued a long time, and the longer they lasted
The dispositions cited above are not at all worse, but are even
The dispositions drawn up by Toll were very good. As in the Austerlitz
The dispositions drawn up by Weyrother for the battle of Austerlitz were
The dispositions were very complicated and difficult. They began as
The distinction between the poor teachings of mundane science and our
The doctor advised him to apply direct to Kutuzov.
The doctor came every day, felt her pulse, looked at her tongue, and
The doctor cast a rapid glance upwards and silently shrugged his
The doctor entered. Prince Andrew went out and, meeting Princess Mary,
The doctor glanced at his watch.
The doctor insisted on the necessity of moving the prince; the
The doctor promised to procure it for him and began to ask how he
The doctor said this restlessness did not mean anything and was due
The doctor seemed tired and in a hurry.
The doctor tried to stop her. She pushed him aside and ran to her
The doctor went into the passage to wash his hands.
The doctor who attended Pierre and visited him every day, though he
The doctor who came to see her that day ordered her to continue the
The doctor who had been standing beside him, preventing Prince Andrew
The doctor, who was fetched that same night, bled him and said that the
The doctors pronounced recovery impossible. After a mute confession,
The doctors were busily engaged with the wounded man the shape of whose
The door at the end of the passage led to the huntsmen's room, as they
The door opened and the old prince, in a dressing gown and a white
The dreadful news of the battle of Borodino, of our losses in killed and
The driver's eyes sparkled at the sight of the wine. After refusing
The duel between Pierre and Dolokhov was hushed up and, in spite of the
The dull, sleepy expression was no longer there, nor the affectation
The eighth and largest group, which in its enormous numbers was to the
The elderly lady was a Princess Drubetskaya, belonging to one of the
The elders began talking about Bonaparte. Julie Karagina turned to young
The enemy is beaten, and tomorrow we shall drive him from the sacred
The enormous study was full of things evidently in constant use.
The entire household was governed according to Pierre's supposed orders,
The esaul looked in the direction Denisov indicated.
The esaul, screwing up his light-colored eyes, nodded approvingly.
The events of the previous year: the burning of Moscow and the flight
The exhausted French officer was Ramballe and the man with his head
The explanation of this strange fact given by Russian military
The eyes of the general and the soldier met. The general became silent,
The face of the little princess changed. She sighed and said: "Yes,
The faces of officers and men brightened up at the sound. Everyone got
The fact was accordingly conveyed to Lavrushka.
The factory hands followed him. These men, who under the leadership of
The facts clearly show that Napoleon did not foresee the danger of the
The facts were that Ilagin, with whom the Rostovs had a quarrel and were
The famous flank movement merely consisted in this: after the advance
The farther forward and nearer the enemy he went, the more orderly and
The farther they fled the more wretched became the plight of the
The father and mother came into the room and gave the betrothed couple
The father and mother did not speak of the matter to their son again,
The faults he had--if he had any--were not of his making. So he did
The feeling, "It has begun! Here it is!" was seen even on Prince
The fencer who demanded a contest according to the rules of fencing was
The few inhabitants who had remained invited commanding officers to
The fifth company was bivouacking at the very edge of the forest. A huge
The fifth of November was the first day of what is called the battle of
The fifth party consisted of those who were adherents of Barclay de
The fires and shouting in the enemy's army were occasioned by the fact
The first Russians to enter Moscow were the Cossacks of Wintzingerode's
The first act was over. In the stalls everyone began moving about, going
The first column marches... The second column marches... The third
The first consideration is the clearness of our perception of the man's
The first declared that the report that Count Rostopchin had forbidden
The first fifteen years of the nineteenth century in Europe present an
The first night after they left Moscow had been fairly warm and he had
The first party consisted of Pfuel and his adherents--military theorists
The first person he saw in the house was Natasha. Even before he saw
The first shots had not yet ceased to reverberate before others rang out
The first time Prince Andrew understood where he was and what was the
The first time the young foreigner allowed himself to reproach her, she
The first to come into view was Milka, with her black markings and
The first to speak was General Armfeldt who, to meet the difficulty that
The first troops started at once, and during the night they marched
The first was a feeling of the necessity of sacrifice and suffering in
The first words he heard on coming to his senses were those of a French
The flood of nations begins to subside into its normal channels. The
The floor of the stage consisted of smooth boards, at the sides was
The fog had begun to clear and enemy troops were already dimly visible
The fog had grown so dense that though it was growing light they could
The following day he saw Princess Mary off on her journey to Yaroslavl,
The forces of a dozen European nations burst into Russia. The Russian
The foreboding of evil that had suddenly come over Rostov was more and
The foremost, wearing a Cossack cloak and lambskin cap and riding a
The former housekeeper, old Mavra Kuzminichna, had stepped out of the
The fourth order was: The vice-King will occupy the village (Borodino)
The friends were silent. Neither cared to begin talking. Pierre
The fundamental and essential significance of the European events of the
The game continued; a waiter kept handing round champagne.
The general bowed his head respectfully, and the monarch mounted and
The general frowned, turned away, and went on.
The general frowned. Though there was no definite news of an Austrian
The general had a fit of coughing as a result of shouting and of the
The general had so wished to do this and was so sorry he had not managed
The general in charge of the stores galloped after the carriage with a
The general mounted a horse a Cossack had brought him. Pierre went to
The general trend of the campaign was rarely spoken of, partly because
The general's face clouded, his lips quivered and trembled. He took out
The generals seemed to listen reluctantly to the difficult dispositions.
The generals were passing by, looking as if they wished to avoid
The gentlemen assembled at Bilibin's were young, wealthy, gay society
The girl smiled and took it. Nesvitski like the rest of the men on the
The girls sprang aside. Denisov hid his hairy legs under the blanket,
The glow of the first fire that began on the second of September was
The goal is reached. After the final war of 1815 Alexander possesses all
The governor's wife led him up to a tall and very stout old lady with
The governor's wife pressed his elbow gratefully.
The grandee's well-known mansion on the English Quay glittered with
The gray-haired valet was sitting drowsily listening to the snoring of
The great halls were full. In the first were the nobility and gentry in
The great natural forces lie outside us and we are not conscious of
The great thing is to live in harmony...."
The greatest crush during the movement of the troops took place at the
The groom, the coachman, and the innkeeper told Pierre that an officer
The group of prisoners had melted away most of all. Of the three hundred
The grown-up members of the family, not to mention his wife, were
The guests got up and took their leave, promising to return to dinner.
The guests welcomed Pierre because he always helped to enliven and unite
The guns emerged at a trot from the column following Murat and advanced
The hall porter sullenly pulled a bell that rang upstairs, and turned
The handsome Vera smiled contemptuously but did not seem at all hurt.
The handsome Vera, who produced such an irritating and unpleasant effect
The handsome boy adjutant with the long hair sighed deeply without
The handsome young Emperor Alexander, in the uniform of the Horse
The handsome young soldier who had brought the wood, setting his arms
The head of the column had already descended into the hollow. The clash
The headquarters were situated two miles away from Salzeneck, and
The heaviness of his head and chest reminded him of the possibility
The high-shouldered figure of Zherkov, familiar to the Pavlograds as he
The higher authorities and the police organized the distribution of
The historians call this activity of the historical figures "the
The historians consider that, next to the battle of Borodino and the
The historians of culture are quite consistent in regard to their
The historians quite falsely represent Napoleon's faculties as having
The historians, in accord with the old habit of acknowledging divine
The historians, replying to this question, lay before us the sayings and
The history of culture explains to us the impulses and conditions of
The homestead consisted of a threshing floor, outhouses, stables, a
The horses also had been fed for a fortnight on straw from the thatched
The horses stepped over the field as over a thick carpet, now and then
The horses that had previously been invisible could now be seen to their
The horses were brought.
The horses were brought. Denisov was angry with the Cossack because the
The horses' croups began to sway in the front line. Rook pulled at the
The hospital was in a brick building with some of the window frames and
The hospital was in a small Prussian town that had been twice devastated
The hounds were joined into one pack, and "Uncle" and Nicholas rode on
The house had escaped the fire; it showed signs of damage but its
The housekeeper, the old nurse, the cooks, coachmen, maids, footmen,
The huge, endless bivouac that had previously resounded with the
The huntsman standing in the hollow moved and loosed his borzois, and
The huntsman stood halfway up the knoll holding up his whip and the
The huntsmen got the fox, but stayed there a long time without strapping
The husband came up and sullenly asked his wife what she was talking
The husband smiled gloomily, the wife gaily. The governor's good-natured
The hussar did not reply.
The hussar only sighed without replying and coughed angrily. The sound
The hussar took the cup.
The hussars and Cossacks crowded round the prisoners; one offered them
The hussars crowded round and responded heartily with loud shouts.
The hussars ran back to the men who held their horses; their voices
The hussars remained in the same place for about an hour. A cannonade
The ice bore him but it swayed and creaked, and it was plain that it
The ice gave way under one of the foremost soldiers, and one leg slipped
The icon was carried further, accompanied by the throng. Pierre stopped
The idea of being made a fool of and of having thrown away that whole
The idea of defeat and flight could not enter Rostov's head. Though he
The ignorance of his colleagues, the weakness and insignificance of
The imposing figure of Nesvitski followed by his Cossack, and
The impression the princess made on Rostov was a very agreeable one. To
The infantry in front of them parted into platoons to allow the cavalry
The infantry regiments that had been caught unawares in the outskirts
The infantry who had been stopped crowded near the bridge in the
The inhabitants are totally ruined, the hospitals overflow with
The instant he had done this, all Rostov's animation vanished. The
The instructions to Alpatych took over two hours and still the prince
The intention was to make a stand at the Drissa camp, but Paulucci,
The interpreter translated these words without the last phrase, and
The intrusion of Pierre's nonmilitary figure in a white hat made an
The invaders flee, turn back, flee again, and all the chances are now
The invasion pushes eastward and reaches its final goal--Moscow. That
The irregulars destroyed the great army piecemeal. They gathered the
The knoll to which Pierre ascended was that famous one afterwards known
The lad looked down and seemed now for the first time to notice what he
The lad with the turned-up sleeve gave the smith a blow in the face and
The landowner to whom Nicholas went was a bachelor, an old cavalryman, a
The large table covered with books and plans, the tall glass-fronted
The larger bell was muffled and the little bells on the harness stuffed
The last days of her stay in Voronezh had been the happiest of her life.
The last of the Horse Guards, a huge pockmarked fellow, frowned angrily
The last of the infantry hurriedly crossed the bridge, squeezing
The last role is played. The actor is bidden to disrobe and wash off his
The last words were read out in the midst of complete silence. The tall
The latter began to feel that it was in bad taste to speak of his
The latter bowed his head respectfully.
The latter in Pierre's presence had ceased to be caustic, and his face
The latter lay silent in the sleigh with closed eyes and did not answer
The latter was riding with a sullen expression on his face.
The latter, a fresh, rosy officer of the Guards, irreproachably washed,
The leaders, these historians tell us, express the will of the people:
The letter taken by Balashev was the last Napoleon sent to Alexander.
The letter was old, having been written before the battle at
The lieutenant colonel of hussars smiled beneath his mustache at the
The lieutenant never looked the man he was speaking to straight in the
The life of the nations is not contained in the lives of a few men, for
The little kitten, feasting her eyes on him, seemed ready at any moment
The little princess did not, or did not wish to, hear his words. She was
The little princess during the whole discussion and the rest of
The little princess entered the room. The passage broke off in the
The little princess got up, rang for the maid, and hurriedly and merrily
The little princess grumbled to her maid that her bed was badly made.
The little princess had also left the tea table and followed Helene.
The little princess had grown stouter during this time, but her eyes
The little princess lay in the armchair, Mademoiselle Bourienne chafing
The little princess lay supported by pillows, with a white cap on her
The little princess talked incessantly, her short, downy upper lip
The little princess went round the table with quick, short, swaying
The little princess, like an old war horse that hears the trumpet,
The little princess, taking the dress from the maid, came up to Princess
The lively song gave a special flavor to the tone of free and easy
The longer the Emperor remained in Vilna the less did everybody--tired
The look of annoyance had already disappeared from Boris' face: having
The looks of the plain Countess Mary always improved when she was in
The lower jaw of an old Frenchman with a thick mustache trembled as he
The magnificent reception room was crowded. Everyone stood up
The major raised his hand to his cap with a smile.
The major-domo stood at the porch talking to an elderly orderly and to
The man answered the question.
The man in the frieze coat raised his arms and shouted:
The man in the frieze coat was reading the broadsheet of August 31 When
The man told him that arms were being distributed today at the Kremlin
The man who had been ordered to go for ammunition stumbled against
The man who had devastated France returns to France alone, without any
The man who had wakened yawned and stretched himself.
The man whom they called Tikhon, having run to the stream, plunged in
The manager having brought the drama to a close and stripped the actor
The manly voice again interrupted the artillery officer.
The marshals and generals, who were nearer to the field of battle
The meeting was at an end, and on reaching home Pierre felt as if he had
The melancholy silence that followed was broken by the sounds of the
The member of the Hofkriegsrath looked at him severely but, seeing
The members and guests of the Club wandered hither and thither, sat,
The members of this party, chiefly civilians and to whom Arakcheev
The members of what had once been an army--Napoleon himself and all his
The men became silent. The soldier who had been struck groaned and wiped
The men crowded closer together, stirred, and rapidly took off their
The men in the Russian army were so worn out by this continuous marching
The men of this party said and thought that what was wrong resulted
The men rapidly picked out their horses in the semidarkness, tightened
The men remained at table over their port--English fashion. In the midst
The mere thought of her father's look filled her with terror. The little
The midwife was already on her way to meet her, rubbing her small, plump
The militiamen carried Prince Andrew to the dressing station by the
The militiamen with stretchers who were called up stood behind the
The militiamen, both those who had been in the village and those who had
The moan of that wounded beast (the French army) which betrayed its
The moment Nicholas took her hand she could no longer restrain herself
The moment he heard the firing and the cry from behind, the general
The more closely a man was engaged in the events then taking place in
The more the Russian army retreated the more fiercely a spirit of hatred
The more the plundering by the French continued, the more both the
The more this field of motion spreads out before our eyes, the more
The morning after little Nicholas had left, the old prince donned his
The most cunning man could not have crept into her confidence more
The mother smoothed the folds of her dyed silk dress before a large
The mother's wounded spirit could not heal. Petya's death had torn from
The motives of those who thronged from all sides to Moscow after it had
The movement of humanity, arising as it does from innumerable arbitrary
The movement of peoples from west to east was to be succeeded by a
The movements of the Russian and French armies during the campaign
The mummers (some of the house serfs) dressed up as bears, Turks,
The naturalists and their followers, thinking they can solve this
The nearest soldiers shrank back, the gun driver stopped his horse, but
The newcomer was a short, large-boned, yellow-faced, wrinkled old
The news of Count Bezukhov's death reached us before your letter and
The news of the day in Petersburg was the illness of Countess Bezukhova.
The news that the Russians were attacking the left flank of the French
The next day the Emperor stopped at Wischau, and Villier, his physician,
The next day the regimental commander sent for Denisov, and holding his
The night he received the news, Kutuzov sent Bagration's vanguard, four
The night was dark but starry, the road showed black in the snow that
The night was foggy and through the fog the moonlight gleamed
The nobility don't gwudge theah lives--evewy one of us will go and bwing
The noncommissioned officer frowned and, muttering words of abuse,
The novelty Anna Pavlovna was setting before her guests that evening was
The nurse lit the gilt candles before the icons and sat down by the door
The oasis of the Otradnoe covert came in sight a few hundred yards off,
The offer was too tempting to be refused. Everyone volunteered to go and
The officer and soldiers who had arrested Pierre treated him with
The officer appeared abashed, as though he understood that one might
The officer came nearer and suddenly his face flushed crimson.
The officer felt that by arriving with important orders at such a moment
The officer flourished his arm and hastily rode away.
The officer glanced at him, and without replying turned again to the
The officer in the scarf dismounted, called up a drummer, and went with
The officer mounted his horse and rode after him. When he reached the
The officer of the Horse Guards went to a general with whom Ermolov was
The officer pointed with his hand to the smoke visible on the left
The officer prisoners were separated from the soldiers and told to march
The officer rode out beyond our lines to Echkino. While still at a
The officer stood perplexed and his face showed indecision.
The officer was Petya Rostov.
The officer went up to Makar Alexeevich and took him by the collar.
The officer who had been sent to inquire met Denisov on the way with the
The officer's face was red and perspiring and his eyes glittered under
The officer, evidently glad of an opportunity for a talk, moved up to
The officer, mounting his horse, rode off to someone else.
The officer, without answering him, strode across to the opposite side.
The officers gathered round Denisov's canteen, eating and talking.
The officers got up and stood round the Cossacks and their prisoner.
The officers laughed.
The officers were about to take leave, but Prince Andrew, apparently
The officers, as usual, lived in twos and threes in the roofless,
The officers, who had come from the other sheds, were all strangers to
The old aunt received the two young people in her corner, but seemed
The old count cast down his eyes on hearing his son's words and began
The old count pretended to be angry.
The old count went home, and Natasha and Petya promised to return very
The old count's horse, a sorrel gelding called Viflyanka, was led by the
The old count's troyka, with Dimmler and his party, started forward,
The old count, knowing his son's ardor in the hunt, hurried so as not
The old count, who had always kept up an enormous hunting establishment
The old countess, not letting go of his hand and kissing it every
The old ladies were pleased with the presents he brought them, and
The old lady's condition was understood by the whole household though no
The old man at first stared fixedly at his son, and an unnatural smile
The old man made a departure from his usual routine in honor of his
The old man seemed livelier than usual. Princess Mary was the same as
The old man was already sitting barefoot. The little Frenchman had
The old man was in a good temper after his nap before dinner. (He used
The old man was saying something in a voice broken by sobs, but Pierre
The old man was silent.
The old man was still sitting in the ornamental garden, like a fly
The old man, experienced in court as well as in military affairs--this
The old prince came in to supper; this was evidently on Pierre's
The old prince did not sleep either. Tikhon, half asleep, heard him
The old prince dressed leisurely in his study, frowning and considering
The old prince had gone to the town and was expected back any minute.
The old prince knew that if he told his daughter she was making a
The old prince said that if he was ill it was only because of Princess
The old prince stopped writing and, as if not understanding, fixed his
The old prince was in a good temper and very gracious to Pierre.
The old prince was very affectionate and careful in his treatment of
The old princess came in and also wept. The elderly lady was using
The old princess did not reply, she was tormented by jealousy of her
The old princess rose respectfully and curtsied. The young man who had
The old servant returned to the caleche, looked into it, shook his
The older men, who thought it undignified to amuse themselves with such
The one thing he now desired with his whole soul was to get away quickly
The one thing that was at first hard to bear was his feet.
The only conception that can explain the movement of the locomotive is
The only conception that can explain the movement of the peoples is that
The only motion in the air was that of the dripping, microscopic
The only question is, has it been destroyed or not? If not, then as soon
The only young people remaining in the drawing room, not counting the
The order was given to halt and down knapsacks.
The order was to find a ford and to cross the river. The colonel of the
The orderly had gone in before him and began waking somebody.
The orderly was striking a light and Shcherbinin was fumbling for
The orders were not to let them in. So we're in force, it seems....
The original line of the Russian forces along the river Kolocha had
The other was that vague and quite Russian feeling of contempt for
The partisan warfare flamed up most fiercely in the latter days of
The party of the old and dissatisfied, who censured the innovations,
The party was very successful and quite like other parties he had seen.
The patches grew deeper on her forehead, neck, and cheeks. She tried to
The peasant is irrefutable. He has devised a complete explanation. To
The peasants in the crowd were similarly impressed when they saw
The peasants say that a cold wind blows in late spring because the oaks
The peasants went up and took him by his shoulders and legs, but he
The peasants, adjusting the stretcher to their shoulders, started
The peasants--even they have to go," said the soldier behind the cart,
The people had a single aim: to free their land from invasion. That aim
The people of the west moved eastwards to slay their fellow men, and
The period of the campaign of 1812 from the battle of Borodino to the
The phaeton was full of people and there was a doubt as to where Count
The pilgrim woman was appeased and, being encouraged to talk, gave a
The plight of the whole army resembled that of a wounded animal which
The position was the more awkward because the Emperor, meditating upon
The postilion started, the carriage wheels rattled. Prince Hippolyte
The postmaster came in and began obsequiously to beg his excellency to
The postmaster, his wife, the valet, and a peasant woman selling Torzhok
The posts left vacant by Bagration, who had been killed, and by
The presence of the problem of man's free will, though unexpressed, is
The priest's wife, flushing rosy red, caught up the dish she had after
The prince again laughed his frigid laugh.
The prince answered nothing, but she looked at him significantly,
The prince bowed his head and went up to the porch. "God be thanked,"
The prince bowed to signify his respect and gratitude.
The prince had a list of things to be bought in Smolensk and, walking
The prince had aged very much that year. He showed marked signs of
The prince looked at his daughter's frightened face and snorted.
The prince shook his head, again repeated the same sounds.
The prince stopped. He saw the effect these words had produced on his
The prince tried to comfort her, but Helene, as if quite distraught,
The prince turned round to the overseer and fixed his eyes on him,
The prince was silent and looked indifferent. But, with the womanly and
The prince was surprised that so simple an idea had not occurred to him,
The prince's house did not belong to what is known as fashionable
The prince's tone was so calm and confident that Princess Mary
The princess bent over the exercise book on the table.
The princess blushed, and raised her arms with a gesture of despair.
The princess came in. She had changed her gown for a house dress as
The princess continued to look at him without moving, and with the same
The princess decided to leave on the fifteenth. The cares of preparation
The princess did not fall down or faint. She was already pale, but on
The princess did not reply. Their efforts in the struggle for the
The princess gave a wrong answer.
The princess gave no reply and did not even smile, but left the room as
The princess glanced at her watch and, seeing that she was five minutes
The princess let go.
The princess listened, smiling.
The princess looked at him, not grasping what he was saying, but cheered
The princess looked in a scared way at her father's eyes glittering
The princess pondered awhile with a thoughtful smile and her luminous
The princess rested her bare round arm on a little table and considered
The princess rose quickly to meet him and held out her hand.
The princess said nothing, but suddenly her short downy lip quivered.
The princess sank helplessly into an armchair beside her father and
The princess saw that her father regarded the matter with disapproval,
The princess seemed to see nothing more extraordinary in that than if he
The princess smiled as people do who think they know more about the
The princess smiled. She rose with the same unchanging smile with which
The princess started. Evidently Pierre's words touched her to the quick.
The princess stopped. Sighs were the only sound heard in the crowd.
The princess too had prepared provisions for Pierre's journey.
The princess understood what Natasha had meant by the words: "two days
The princess was about to reply, but her father would not let her speak
The princess was apparently vexed at not having anyone to be angry with.
The princess went up to the door, passed by it with a dignified and
The princess wished to rise, but the prince held her by the hand. She
The princess, holding her little dog on her lap with her thin bony
The princess, picking up her dress, was taking her seat in the dark
The princess, who had a straight, rigid body, abnormally long for her
The princess, who had never liked Pierre and had been particularly
The prisoners were brought down from the battery and among them was
The prisoners were placed in a certain order, according to the list
The problem is that regarding man as a subject of observation
The promised land for the French during their advance had been Moscow,
The proportion of freedom to inevitability decreases and increases
The publican was fighting one of the smiths at the door, and when the
The question is that of saving Russia. Is it better to give up Moscow
The question that had perturbed Pierre on the Mozhaysk hill and all
The question was no longer whether this was possible, but only which was
The question: how did individuals make nations act as they wished and by
The quiet home life and peaceful happiness of Bald Hills presented
The rain had stopped, and only the mist was falling and drops from
The ranks of the infantry disappeared amid the smoke but their
The rapidity of the Russian pursuit was just as destructive to our army
The recognition of man's free will as something capable of influencing
The red-nosed Captain Timokhin, formerly Dolokhov's squadron commander,
The reddish Lyubim rushed forward from behind Milka, sprang impetuously
The regiment broke up into companies, which went to their appointed
The regiment was also a home, and as unalterably dear and precious as
The regimental adjutant came in and confirmed the news brought by
The regimental commander sought out Dolokhov in the ranks and, reining
The regimental commander was afraid he might be blamed for this and did
The regimental commander, flushing, ran to his horse, seized the stirrup
The regimental commander, going up to the line himself, ordered the
The regimental doctor, when he came, said it was absolutely necessary to
The remains of Langeron's and Dokhturov's mingled forces were crowding
The remains of our regiment which had been in action rapidly formed up
The replies this theory gives to historical questions are like the
The report which had been circulated that the Austrians had been beaten
The result was a compromise which was inevitable: a small detachment was
The retreat from Malo-Yaroslavets when he had a free road into a
The right thing now was, if not to retire from the service, at any rate
The road along which they moved was bordered on both sides by dead
The road was clear again; Pierre descended the hill and drove on.
The room was crowded with small pieces of furniture, whatnots,
The room was in black darkness, only a small lamp was burning inside
The rustle of a woman's dress was heard in the next room. Prince Andrew
The sagacious Barclay de Tolly, seeing crowds of wounded men running
The same conversation was repeated next day and the day after, and the
The same evening that the prince gave his instructions to Alpatych,
The same faces, the same talk, Papa holding his cup and blowing in the
The same happy, rapturous faces turned to the shaggy figure of Denisov.
The same thing that took place in Moscow had happened in all the towns
The same thought was meanwhile tormenting Princess Mary. She knew what
The scantily clad Helene smiled at everyone in the same way, and Natasha
The scene of the third act represented a palace in which many candles
The scent of flowers came in at the window. Helene was wearing a white
The science of jurisprudence regards the state and power as the ancients
The score against him reached the fateful sum of forty-three thousand.
The sea of history was not driven spasmodically from shore to shore as
The search for these laws has long been begun and the new methods of
The second consideration is the more or less evident time relation of
The second method is to consider the actions of some one man--a king or
The second order was that Poniatowski, moving to the village through the
The second party was directly opposed to the first; one extreme, as
The second princess had just come from the sickroom with her eyes red
The secretary was told to write down the resolution of the Moscow
The serfs all dispersed. "Uncle" lifted Natasha off her horse and taking
The sergeant ran up to the officer and in a frightened whisper informed
The servant brought back his tumbler turned upside down, * with an
The servant handed him a book which Pierre took to be a devotional work,
The servants gathered round Natasha, but could not believe the strange
The servants--the most reliable judges of their masters because they
The seventh party consisted of the sort of people who are always to
The sick man was so surrounded by doctors, princesses, and servants
The sight of the discomposure of that old man of the world touched
The sight of them reminded him of all he had experienced and learned
The silence began to oppress the princess and she tried to catch
The silence lasted some time. Prince Bagration, apparently not wishing
The singing did not sound loud under the open sky. An immense crowd
The sixth party, the Bennigsenites, said, on the contrary, that at any
The small group that assembled before dinner in the lofty old-fashioned
The small lamp in front of the icons was the only light left in
The smell of the food the Preobrazhenskis were eating and a sense of
The smile vanished from Speranski's white face, which was much improved
The so-called partisan war began with the entry of the French into
The society gathered together at the governor's was the best in
The soldier fell, got up, and ran away. But his comrade, throwing down
The soldier said no more and the talk went on.
The soldier to whom the laughers referred was Dolokhov. Prince Andrew
The soldier with the swollen cheek looked angrily at the cavalry
The soldiers crowded against one another with terrified faces, and
The soldiers in the yard, hearing the shot, came into the passage asking
The soldiers laughed. A moment later, an adjutant arrived with the same
The soldiers of Dessaix's division advancing against the fleches could
The soldiers shook their heads disapprovingly as they looked at Pierre.
The soldiers simply held their sides as they watched him.
The soldiers stopped.
The soldiers went out again, and the orderly, who had meanwhile had time
The soldiers who had carried Prince Andrew had noticed and taken the
The soldiers, of whom there are the most, form the lower section of
The soldiers, who threw sidelong glances at Pierre, got the fire to burn
The sole importance of the crossing of the Berezina lies in the fact
The son sighed, thus admitting that his father had understood him. The
The son, lowering his eyes, followed her quietly.
The sound of bare feet splashing through the mud was heard in the
The sound of three more shots came from the gate.
The sounds of crackling and the din of falling walls and ceilings, the
The sounds, which he had not heard for so long, had an even more
The source of that extraordinary power of penetrating the meaning of the
The source of this contradiction lies in the fact that the historians
The southern spring, the comfortable rapid traveling in a Vienna
The spirit of an army is the factor which multiplied by the mass gives
The spot chosen for the duel was some eighty paces from the road,
The squadron crossed the bridge and drew out of range of fire without
The squadron in which Rostov was serving had scarcely time to mount
The squadron overtook and passed the infantry and the battery--which
The staff captain, Kirsten, had twice been reduced to the ranks for
The staff officer and Prince Andrew mounted their horses and rode on.
The staff officer remained behind and Prince Andrew rode on alone.
The steward did not say it was quite impossible, but suggested selling
The stores, the prisoners, and the marshal's baggage train stopped at
The stormcloud had come upon them, and in every face the fire which
The story was very pretty and interesting, especially at the point
The strains of the polonaise, which had continued for a considerable
The strange thought that of the thousands of men, young and old, who
The strangeness and absurdity of these replies arise from the fact that
The stranger's face was not genial, it was even cold and severe, but
The stretchers moved on. At every jolt he again felt unendurable pain;
The struggle between the old views and the new was long and stubbornly
The stupid smile, which had left his face while he was speaking,
The subject for history is not man's will itself but our presentation of
The subject which wholly engrossed Natasha's attention was her family:
The sun had by now risen and shone gaily on the bright verdure.
The sun had reached the other side of the house, and its slanting rays
The sun had risen brightly and its slanting rays struck straight into
The sun had set long since. Bright stars shone out here and there in the
The sun was only just appearing from behind the clouds, the air was
The superintendent of police turned round at that moment with a scared
The superintendent of police, who had gone that morning by Count
The superintendent of police, whom the crowd had stopped, went in to
The swarm of Bronnitskis and Wintzingerodes and their like still further
The symptoms of Natasha's illness were that she ate little, slept
The tactical rule that an army should act in masses when attacking, and
The talking instantly ceased, hats and caps were doffed, and all eyes
The tall lad, standing in the porch, turned his bleared eyes from the
The tall youth, not noticing the disappearance of his foe, waved his
The tall, fair-haired General Buxhowden stood, leaning his back against
The tears flowed faster still from the countess' eyes. She took his hand
The temperature shown by the political thermometer to the company that
The terrible spectacle of the battlefield covered with dead and wounded,
The theory of the transference of the collective will of the people to
The theory of the transference of the will of the people to historic
The theory seems irrefutable just because the act of transference of the
The theory that this connection is based on the transference of the
The thin, hollow-cheeked Chekmar, having got everything ready, kept
The third and most incomprehensible thing is that people studying
The third company was the last, and Kutuzov pondered, apparently trying
The third consideration is the degree to which we apprehend that
The third interruption came when Prince Andrew was finishing his
The third order was: General Campan will move through the wood to seize
The third thing--what else was it you talked about?" and Prince Andrew
The third time the Rhetor came back more quickly and asked Pierre
The three voices, hers, Mademoiselle Bourienne's, and Katie's, who was
The traveler was Joseph Alexeevich Bazdeev, as Pierre saw from the
The trees were dripping. Quiet talking was heard. The horses neighed and
The troops again began to move, and two battalions of the Novgorod and
The troops of the vanguard were stationed before Wischau, within sight
The troops retired from Vilna for various complicated reasons of state,
The troops were moving on, leaving about ten thousand wounded behind
The troops were running in such a dense mass that once surrounded by
The two Pavlograd squadrons were bivouacking on a field of rye, which
The two Pavlograd squadrons, having crossed the bridge, retired up the
The two borzois of the huntsman who had sighted him, having been the
The two bound men were led off to the master's house. The two drunken
The two first were convicts with shaven heads. One was tall and thin,
The two generals and the adjutant took hold of the field glass, trying
The two girls in their white dresses, each with a rose in her black
The two remarkably pretty girls, Natasha and Sonya, with Count Rostov
The two tall peasants had their say. As soon as Rostov, followed by
The two young men, the student and the officer, friends from childhood,
The undecided question as to whether the wound inflicted at Borodino was
The unexpected news of the French having crossed the Niemen was
The uninterested and perplexed faces of the marshals showed that they
The universal experience of ages, showing that children do grow
The unknown general looked disdainfully down at Kozlovski, who was
The unsolved problem that tormented him was caused by hints given by the
The usual route through Moscow could not be thought of, and the
The valet brought a woman's fox-lined cloak.
The valet sat up and whispered something. Timokhin, kept awake by the
The valet's sleepy, frightened exclamation, "What do you want? What's
The valet, returning to the cottage, informed the count that Moscow was
The very day that Napoleon issued the order to cross the Niemen, and
The very question that had formerly tormented him, the thing he had
The vestibule was filled with the discordant sounds of a struggle and of
The vice-King will occupy the village and cross by its three bridges,
The vicomte appreciated this silent praise and smiling gratefully
The vicomte bowed and smiled courteously in token of his willingness to
The vicomte merely shrugged his shoulders. Pierre looked solemnly at his
The vicomte told his tale very neatly. It was an anecdote, then current,
The vicomte was a nice-looking young man with soft features and polished
The vicomte who was meeting him for the first time saw clearly that
The vicomte wished to begin his story and gave a subtle smile.
The victorious huntsman rode off to join the field, and there,
The victory gained did not bring the usual results because the peasants
The victory is complete and Russia will not forget you! Honor to you
The view of the strange city with its peculiar architecture, such as
The visitor made a gesture with her hand.
The visitor was Bitski, who served on various committees, frequented all
The visitor, compelled to look on at this family scene, thought it
The visitor, not knowing what to say, shook her head.
The voices and footsteps of the many servants and of the peasants who
The wagons that had reached the hussars had been consigned to an
The war of 1812, besides its national significance dear to every Russian
The war was flaming up and nearing the Russian frontier. Everywhere
The wattle wall the men had brought was set up in a semicircle by the
The way to Iligin's upland was across the fields. The hunt servants fell
The weather was already growing wintry and morning frosts congealed
The whistling sound of the runners on the snow and the voices of girls
The whole battle consisted in what Orlov-Denisov's Cossacks had done:
The whole consultation passed more than quietly. After all the preceding
The whole day had been hot. Somewhere a storm was gathering, but only
The whole household, as if to atone for not having done it sooner, set
The whole interest was concentrated on Rostov. Instead of sixteen
The whole letter breathed loving rapture for his betrothed and tender
The whole purport of his remarks now was evidently to exalt himself and
The whole world was divided into two unequal parts: one, our Pavlograd
The wind had fallen and black clouds, merging with the powder smoke,
The windows of the room in which she was lying looked westward. She
The wolf paused, turned its heavy forehead toward the dogs awkwardly,
The women's vehicles drove by. Behind them came more carts, soldiers,
The word of command rang out, and again the regiment quivered, as with a
The words chance and genius do not denote any really existing thing and
The worse everything became, especially his own affairs, the better
The wounded man was shown his amputated leg stained with clotted blood
The writers of universal histories and of the history of culture are
The young Princess Bolkonskaya had brought some work in a
The young count paid no heed to them, but, breathing hard, passed by
The young fellow on the box jumped down to hold the horses and Anatole
The young man in his clattering chains stepped clumsily to the spot
The young man in the fur-lined coat, stooping a little, stood in a
The young man, flattered, sat down nearer to her with a coquettish
The young officer standing in the gateway, as if hesitating whether to
The young officer was evidently exercising his duties for the first or
The young people, at the countess' instigation, gathered round the
The younger Emperor could not restrain his wish to be present at the
Their conversation was interrupted by the cries of several voices at
Their conversation was very simple and unimportant. They spoke of the
Their faces glowed, they were hungry and very cheerful. They looked
Their necks, with their wet, close-clinging manes, looked strangely
Their sabers catching in the bridles and their spurs jingling, the
Their ships had been burned, there was no salvation save in collective
Their theory, suitable for primitive and peaceful periods of history,
Then Denisov's voice was heard shouting farther and farther away.
Then Louis XVIII, who till then had been the laughingstock both of the
Then a general rode past shouting something angrily, not in Russian.
Then a thin, pale soldier, his neck bandaged with a bloodstained leg
Then all at once she remembered the tortures of suspense she had
Then for three days separate portions of the French army--first Murat's
Then having satisfied himself that all eyes were fixed on him, he raised
Then he again opened his eyes and said something none of them could
Then he recalled the coarseness and bluntness of her thoughts and the
Then he remained silent for a while, and all at once looked cheerfully
Then she slipped down among the flowerpots on the other side of the tubs
Then suddenly he realized the joyful significance of that wail; tears
Then suddenly it became clear to Sonya that Natasha had some dreadful
Then suddenly, dismayed lest he had said too much, Petya stopped and
Then the voice said something more, Demyan replied, and the steps in the
Then two pairs of Frenchmen approached the criminals and at the
Then we are told of the greatness of soul of the marshals, especially
Then when the whole field was covered with smoke, two divisions,
Then with no less fear and delight they saw how the young count, red in
Then with the unerring official memory that characterized him he
Then, evidently remembering what he wanted, he beckoned to Andrew
Then, noticing that Denisov was asleep, he rose and went out of doors.
Then, sighing, he added: "My son's fate is in your hands. Decide, my
Then, unexpectedly, as often happens, the sound of the hunt suddenly
Then, vexed at his own weakness, he turned away and began to report
Theodore Vasilyevich Rostopchin (he fancied that Theodore Vasilyevich
Theodore had gone.
Theodore, and she helped him by asking how his affairs with Prince
Theodosia's side, dressed in coarse rags, walking with a staff, a wallet
Theodosia, who for over thirty years had gone about barefoot and worn
There Platon Karataev was sitting covered up--head and all--with
There are two sides to the life of every man, his individual life, which
There followed a momentary pause, which seemed very long to them all.
There had been actions at Lambach, Amstetten, and Melk; but despite the
There had been many discussions and preparations for this ball in the
There has been an encounter with Mortier? A victory? It was high time!"
There he found so many people, among them officers who, like himself,
There he is lying back in an armchair in his velvet cloak, leaning
There he remained about ten minutes. Pierre was among those who saw him
There in Moscow she was deprived of her greatest pleasures--talks with
There is a rumor that you are thinking of peace. God forbid that you
There is no one in Russian literature now, from schoolboy essayist to
There is only Mademoiselle Bourienne...."
There never was or could have been such an aim, for it would have been
There was a bridge ahead of him, where other soldiers stood firing.
There was a general movement as the princess, smiling and talking
There was a momentary pause in the conversation; the old general cleared
There was a new feature in Pierre's relations with Willarski, with the
There was a rapid patter of bare feet, and an unseen hand opened the
There was a rustling among the crowd and it again subsided, so that
There was a stir among the officers in the shadow beyond the fire,
There was a stir among the throng of officers and in the ranks of the
There was a stir in the next room and he heard the steps of Toll,
There was never a dinner or soiree at the Club without him. As soon as
There was no answer to any of these questions, except one, and that not
There was no insult on either side. Allow me to convey...."
There was no laughter in the maids' large hall. In the men servants'
There was no need to say more: Julie's face shone with triumph and
There was no one in the passage. He went along the whole length of this
There was not a room to be had at the inn, they were all occupied.
There was not a trace of agitation on his face. With delicate irony he
There was nothing for him to do and no orders to be given. Everything
There was nothing in Pierre's soul now at all like what had troubled it
There was nothing left for them to do but cry "Vive l'Empereur!" and go
There was nothing terrible in the one small, distant fire in the immense
There was nothing terrible or violent in this comparatively slow
There was nothing wrong or unseemly in what they said, it was witty and
There was now no one in the reception room except Prince Vasili and the
There was one pilgrim, a quiet pockmarked little woman of fifty called
There was only one expression on her agitated face when she ran into the
There was only one spoon, sugar was more plentiful than anything
There was really nothing to be seen in front except a barren descent
There was room enough in the wide corridor for the generals to pass the
There was running to and fro and whispering; another troyka flew
There was so much good nature and nobility (in the French sense of the
There was something peculiar about it, quite unsoldierly, rather comic,
There was still hope. A long, yellowish young borzoi, one Nicholas did
There was still no improvement in the countess' health, but it was
There were a great many ladies and some of Nicholas' Moscow
There were in the room a child's cot, two boxes, two armchairs, a
There were many things Petya wanted to say to the drummer boy, but did
There were masses of wealth and there seemed no end to it. All around
There were only thoughts clearly expressed in words, thoughts that
There were only three tumblers, the water was so muddy that one could
There were several prisoners from the French army in Orel, and the
There were then as now conversations and discussions about women's
There were three operating tables in the tent. Two were occupied, and
There were troops to be seen everywhere, in front and to the right and
There were two of them. One was an officer--a tall, soldierly, handsome
There were very many of these, as one could easily believe, looking
There will soon be a battalion of us aides-de-camp and adjutants! But
There won't be any end to it."
There's Lise, married to Andrew--a better husband one would think could
There's a gentleman for you!"
Thermopylae. So why should he have made such a sacrifice? And why expose
These bells reminded Pierre that it was Sunday and the feast of the
These conditions of life had been the same before, but then they were
These dispositions, of which the French historians write with enthusiasm
These dispositions, which are very obscure and confused if one allows
These first days, before the eighth of September when the prisoners were
These guests--the famous Count Rostopchin, Prince Lopukhin with his
These historians resemble a botanist who, having noticed that some
These justifications release those who produce the events from moral
These men, carried away by their passions, were but blind tools of the
These puffs of smoke and (strange to say) the sound of the firing
These questions, like questions put at trials generally, left the
These questions, then as now, existed only for those who see nothing in
These three groups traveling together--the cavalry stores, the convoy of
These visits of Natasha's at night before the count returned from his
These were temptations of the devil and Princess Mary knew it. She knew
These were two Frenchmen who had been hiding in the forest. They came up
They again took him by the shoulders and laid him on the stretcher.
They all grew silent. The stars, as if knowing that no one was looking
They all had business with Pierre and wanted decisions from him. Pierre
They all had but one wish: to advance as soon as possible against the
They all knew very well that the enchanting countess' illness arose from
They all plainly and certainly knew that they were criminals who must
They all raised their heads to listen, and out of the forest into the
They all seemed dissatisfied and uneasy. Pierre went up to a group of
They all separated, but, except Anatole who fell asleep as soon as he
They all stood despondent and silent. The tall youth moved his lips and
They all went without knowing whither or why they were going. Still less
They are neither fit for war nor peace! Barclay is said to be the
They both sat silent, with an occasional glance at one another.
They both saw that he was sinking slowly and quietly, deeper and deeper,
They called him in to decide family disputes, chose him as executor,
They can't understand that all those feelings they prize so--all our
They consisted of a box for cards, of splendid workmanship, a
They could not understand that I have not the necessary qualifications
They crossed the ferry where he had talked with Pierre the year before.
They did not answer but began to laugh. Dimmler from the sleigh behind
They dismounted and entered the tent. Several officers, with flushed and
They drove up to the gloomy old house on the Vozdvizhenka and entered
They entered the elegant, newly decorated, and luxurious dining room.
They entered the large hall, from which one of the doors led to the
They gave Prince Andrew some tea. He drank it eagerly, looking with
They gave him some more porridge and Morel with a laugh set to work on
They got into the carriage and drove for a few minutes in silence.
They had an opportunity that day to send letters to the army, and the
They had decided to be at the ball by half past ten, and Natasha had
They had hardly begun to play before the doctor's disheveled head
They had hardly ridden up a hill, past a tavern, before they saw a group
They had not met for nearly half a year and, being at the age when young
They have torn my body. The kingdom of God will be overthrown... Thrice
They heard the sound of voices behind them.
They knew their Natasha, and alarm as to what would happen if she heard
They looked at each other with dismayed and embarrassed faces. He tried
They marched very quickly, without resting, and halted only when the sun
They named the colonel, Prince Repnin.
They reached a river that had overflowed its banks and which they had to
They received Pierre in their small, new drawing-room, where it was
They rode at a footpace to the barn, where a large crowd of peasants was
They rode through the village of Rykonty, past tethered French hussar
They rode up the opposite hill. From there the French could already be
They rose from the table and sat down in the entrance porch which served
They said no more. Prince Andrew looked closely into those mirrorlike,
They said: "Nothing but sorrow, shame, and ruin will come of all this!
They sat a little while downstairs near his room till they had left off
They say and write and print that the soul and freedom do not exist,
They say he blushed like a girl to whom Joconde is read, when he said to
They say the other day Matthew Ivanych Platov drove them into the river
They seemed not to have expected him to talk like anybody else, and the
They seized Makar Alexeevich by the arms and dragged him to the door.
They seized him by his arms; but he was so strong that everyone who
They shut the door and all sat down.
They spin him a thousand gasconades, saying that the war is over, that
They split up the wood, pressed it down on the fire, blew at it with
They spoke little even to one another, and when they did it was of very
They spoke of the countess' health, of their mutual friends, of the
They stood or lay not seeing the wolf or understanding the situation.
They stood silent, facing one another. The old man's sharp eyes were
They surrounded Ramballe, lifted him on the crossed arms of two
They then crossed the hollow to Semenovsk, where the soldiers were
They threatened and questioned him, but he stuck to that: 'I made it
They told her where the barn was and how she should stand and listen,
They unloaded the wardrobe cart and sent it to take wounded men from a
They waited a long time for Natasha to come to dinner that day. She sat
They want the whole nation to fall on them--in a word, it's Moscow! They
They went away because for Russians there could be no question as to
They went into the little room where Boris slept. Rostov, without
They went out and walked about till dinnertime, talking of the political
They went through the muddy village, past threshing floors and green
They went through the porch and into the stable. The lieutenant
They went up to the door of the sitting room from which came the sound
They were again silent.
They were all waiting for Bennigsen, who on the pretext of inspecting
They were bivouacking. Denisov and Rostov were living in an earth hut,
They were fond of asking one another that question.
They were silent awhile.
They were silent for a few seconds. Then suddenly turning to one
They were silent for a while.
They were silent for a while.
They were sitting in the twilight by a window in the drawing room.
They were taken to the entrance and led into the house one by one.
They were taking fifty-four hounds, with six hunt attendants and
They were to call for her at her house in the Taurida Gardens at ten
They'll ransack that castle," he remarked with evident approval.
They're fighting."
They've killed a man, lads!"
They, in Pierre's mind, were the soldiers, those who had been at the
Thiers eloquently recounts, he ordered his soldiers to be paid in forged
Thine almighty hand, and give him victory over his enemy, even as Thou
Things were not cheerful in the Rostovs' home.
Think that he is your father... perhaps in the agony of death." She
Thinking he could have been received in such a manner only because
Thirdly it was impossible, because the military term "to cut off" has no
Thirdly, it would have been senseless to sacrifice one's own troops in
Thirty-second Military Division, of Bremen, of Hamburg, and so on: it
This Guardsman would certainly have bowled Rostov and his Bedouin over
This Kutuzov knew well.
This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
This action was so unlike her usual composure and the fear depicted
This active old servant was unpacking the traveler's canteen and
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
This assumption is all the more natural and inevitable because, watching
This battle, which consisted in the capture of a French squadron, was
This being the field marshal's frame of mind he was naturally regarded
This black-eyed, wide-mouthed girl, not pretty but full of life--with
This campaign consisted in a flight of the French during which they did
This conception is the one handle by means of which the material of
This consciousness is a source of self-cognition quite apart from and
This contradiction arises from the fact that military science assumes
This curious contradiction is not accidental. Not only does it occur at
This door led into a back anteroom. An old man, a servant of the
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
This family gathering seemed humiliating to Natasha--as if there were
This first long conversation with Speranski only strengthened in Prince
This hussar, with a grave face and without a smile or a change in the
This ideal of glory and grandeur--which consists not merely in
This is outrageous! Half the men have dispersed."
This is what the army authorities were reporting:
This letter had not yet been presented to the Emperor when Barclay, one
This letter touched Nicholas. He had that common sense of a
This letter was brought to Pierre's house when he was on the field of
This longing to distinguish themselves, to maneuver, to overthrow, and
This man is still needed to justify the final collective act.
This man, bent double, rushed past the tradesman and the officer. The
This meant that Tikhon was not handing him the waistcoat he wanted.
This meant two stockings, which by a secret process known only to
This modern branch of mathematics, unknown to the ancients, when dealing
This officer began visiting Pierre, and the princess used to make fun of
This problem is only solvable if we cease arbitrarily to substitute
This procrastinator Kutuzov, whose motto was "Patience and Time,"
This red-haired man was neither a sergeant nor a corporal, but being
This redoubt consisted of a knoll, on three sides of which trenches had
This relation of the commander to those he commands is just what is
This relation of the men who command to those they command is what
This reply is quite satisfactory if we believe that the power was given
This reply of Balashev's, which hinted at the recent defeats of the
This short man had on a white leather apron which covered his chest and
This silence was broken by one of the brethren, who led Pierre up to the
This speech not only made a strong impression, but created excitement in
This spite increased still more when, on calling over the roll of
This unexpected and, as it seemed to Nicholas, quite voluntary letter
This unpleasant impression merely flitted over the young and happy face
This unshakable, irrefutable consciousness of freedom, uncontrolled by
This very sentence about Countess Zubova and this same laugh Prince
This view was very general in the upper army circles and found support
This was Konovnitsyn.
This was Raevski, who had spent the whole day at the most important part
This was quite correct on the twenty-fourth of July. But on the
This was quite true, but the count, the countess, and Natasha looked
This was said by the undersized Napoleon, looking up straight into
This was the count's favorite dance, which he had danced in his youth.
This was the redoubt, as yet unnamed, which afterwards became known as
This was true. The architect had told him that it was necessary, and
This wounded man was Prince Andrew Bolkonski.
Those dreadful moments he had lived through at the executions had as it
Those eyes, filled with happy tears, gazed at him timidly,
Those standing behind noticed what a speaker omitted to say and hastened
Those who tried to understand the general course of events and to take
Those who were able to get away were going of their own accord, those
Those who were in the dimly lit reception room spoke in nervous
Though Balashev was used to imperial pomp, he was amazed at the luxury
Though Countess Mary told Natasha that those words in the Gospel must be
Though Kutuzov had dismissed all unnecessary men from the staff, Boris
Though Mademoiselle Bourienne had been so unsuccessful in her choice
Though Napoleon at that time, in 1812, was more convinced than ever that
Though Nicholas Rostov had kept firmly to his resolution and was still
Though Pierre, Natasha, Nicholas, Countess Mary, and Denisov had much to
Though Prince Andrew knew that Kutuzov's tears came easily, and that he
Though Rostov told the governor's wife that he would not make any
Though at one time, in Petersburg, she had been annoyed with Natasha for
Though by the twentieth of August nearly all the Rostovs' acquaintances
Though five minutes before, Prince Andrew had been able to say a few
Though he expected that the story of his escapade would be already known
Though he heard and saw nothing around him he found his way by instinct
Though in Moscow the Rostovs belonged to the best society without
Though it was not clear what the artist meant to express by depicting
Though no words had passed between Anatole and Mademoiselle Bourienne,
Though none of the column commanders rode up to the ranks or talked to
Though not much time had passed since Prince Andrew had left Russia, he
Though people were afraid of Marya Dmitrievna she was regarded in
Though shells and bullets did not whistle over the road along which he
Though some skeptics smiled when told of Berg's merits, it could not be
Though tattered, hungry, worn out, and reduced to a third of their
Though the most absent-minded and forgetful of men, Pierre, with the aid
Though the position was now altered by his decision to pay his wife's
Though the source of M. Michaud's chagrin must have been different from
Though the surface of the sea of history seemed motionless, the movement
Though there was no advantage in sending Friant's division instead of
Though they were all going with him, Anatole evidently wished to make
Though what she said was quite just, perhaps for that very reason no one
Three days later the little princess was buried, and Prince Andrew went
Three large rooms were assigned to them in the monastery hostelry, one
Three weeks after the last evening he had spent with the Rostovs, Prince
Three weeks passed in this way. Natasha had no desire to go out anywhere
Through that door was heard a noise of things being moved about, and at
Through the closed doors the music was already audible.
Through the cross streets of the Khamovniki quarter the prisoners
Through the door came the regular hum of a lathe. The princess timidly
Through the door came the sounds of Kutuzov's voice, excited and
Through the first door came the sound of voices conversing in German
Through the hard century-old bark, even where there were no twigs,
Through the smoke, as he approached the gate, Petya saw Dolokhov, whose
Through the study door came the sound of slippered feet and the cry:
Thuerassa forest, avoiding the defiles of Schlappanitz and Bellowitz
Thuerassa, he merely saves us a great deal of trouble and all our
Thursday--sold flour to the army at nine rubles a sack. Will you have
Thus in a time of trouble ever memorable to him after the birth of their
Thus in the morning--especially if she had eaten anything rich the day
Thus our conception of free will and inevitability gradually diminishes
Thus the captain touchingly recounted the story of his love for a
Thy will?" And scarcely had she put that question than God gave her the
Tikhon Shcherbaty was one of the most indispensable men in their band.
Tikhon called and, having praised him for his activity, said a few words
Tikhon did not like riding, and always went on foot, never lagging
Tikhon followed behind and Petya heard the Cossacks laughing with him
Tikhon knew his master's habit of sometimes thinking aloud, and
Tikhon knew that neither the son's arrival nor any other unusual event
Tikhon readily joined.
Tikhon scratched his back with one hand and his head with the other,
Tikhon to ask Mary Bogdanovna what news.--"Say only that 'the prince
Tikhon went and told the prince.
Tikhon, but asked several times whether his son had gone. Next day,
Tikhon, like all good valets, instinctively knew the direction of his
Tikhon, speaking of the Crimea and its warm nights and of the Empress.
Tikhon, understanding him, wiped away the tears.
Tikhon, who at first did rough work, laying campfires, fetching water,
Till midday on the nineteenth, the activity--the eager talk, running
Till the Tsar reached it, each regiment in its silence and immobility
Tilsit to see the Emperor.
Tilsit.
Tilsit. Boris Drubetskoy had asked the important personage on whom he
Timokhin crept along the bench to him.
Timokhin looked about in confusion, not knowing what or how to answer
Timokhin to the subaltern beside him.
Timokhin, who had not slept at all because of the pain in his leg, had
Timokhin. "Who would spare himself now? The soldiers in my battalion,
Title: War and Peace
To Bolkonski so many people appeared contemptible and insignificant
To Boris, Julie was particularly gracious: she regretted his early
To PRINCE MURAT,
To Pierre he said nothing, merely giving his arm a sympathetic squeeze
To Pierre that smile said plainly: "I am well, but my health is now of
To Princess Mary it was strange that now, at a moment when such sorrow
To a herd of rams, the ram the herdsman drives each evening into a
To a lackey no man can be great, for a lackey has his own conception of
To a man not swayed by passion that welfare is never certain, but he
To all the other prisoners Platon Karataev seemed a most ordinary
To all these inquiries he gave brief and angry replies indicating that
To anyone who looks at the field of Borodino without thinking of how
To avoid unpleasant encounters with the old man, the natural method was
To clear up this last point for himself, Prince Andrew, utilizing his
To console Pierre for these losses the head steward gave him an estimate
To distract his thoughts he drove that day to the village of Vorontsovo
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate
To each new arrival Anna Pavlovna said, "You have not yet seen my aunt,"
To each of them he made some careless and agreeable remark except to
To expiate his huntsman's offense, Ilagin pressed the Rostovs to come to
To explain the conditions of that relationship we must first establish a
To find component forces equal to the composite or resultant force, the
To fluff out her curls, put on fashionable dresses, and sing romantic
To get a better view, several officer prisoners climbed onto the wall of
To have one's ear pulled by the Emperor was considered the greatest
To her impatience and pining for him were now added the unpleasant
To her own surprise a power of life and hope of happiness rose to the
To her remarks about his mother's health he made no reply. "What's that
To imagine a man perfectly free and not subject to the law of
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
To realize the degree of exhaustion of the Russian army it is only
To say "tomorrow" and keep up a dignified tone was not difficult, but to
To solve the question of how freedom and necessity are combined and
To study the laws of history we must completely change the subject of
To such an extent had Natasha let herself go that the way she dressed
To tell them that she felt ashamed for herself and for them would be to
To that question, "What for?" a simple answer was now always ready in
To the left down below in the mist, the musketry fire of unseen forces
To the left the horizon bounded by the adjacent wood. Prince Bagration
To the men of both sides alike, worn out by want of food and rest,
To the men who fought against the rising truths of physical philosophy,
To the third party--in which the Emperor had most confidence--belonged
To them the words of Miloradovich seem very interesting, and so do their
To these questions three answers are possible:
To understand in what this dependence consists it is necessary to
To understand the laws of this continuous movement is the aim of
To understand, observe, and draw conclusions, man must first of all be
To us it is incomprehensible that millions of Christian men killed and
To us, their descendants, who are not historians and are not carried
Today was a great day for him--the anniversary of his coronation. Before
Toll read them to Ermolov, asking him to attend to the further
Toll wrote a disposition: "The first column will march to so and so,"
Tolly, not so much as a man but as minister of war and commander in
Tolstoy, Prince Volkonski, Arakcheev, and others--the Emperor reached
Tolstoy, who had ridden out to the battlefield with others in the
Tomorrow you'll go with your father to see her. Be very nice and
Torzhok estate with the children, your excellency."
Torzhok post station, either there were no horses or the postmaster
Toward dawn, Count Orlov-Denisov, who had dozed off, was awakened by a
Toward dusk the cannonade began to subside. Alpatych left the cellar
Toward evening Dolgorukov came back, went straight to the Tsar, and
Toward evening Ilagin took leave of Nicholas, who found that they were
Toward evening a noncommissioned officer entered with two soldiers and
Toward evening he ceased moaning and became quite still. He did not know
Toward four o'clock in the afternoon Murat's troops were entering
Toward nine o'clock in the morning, when the troops were already moving
Toward ten o'clock the men servants rushed to the front door, hearing
Toward the end of 1806, when all the sad details of Napoleon's
Toward the end of the battle of Borodino, Pierre, having run down
Toward three o'clock the French attacks ceased. On the faces of all
Traitors!" he thought, without clearly defining who the villains and
Tranquillity is returning to this capital and order is being restored in
Transmoskva ward and the Kaluga road converge, and the prisoners jammed
Treasury, cautiously ventured to suggest that Kutuzov would be the man
Troitsa.
Troops were still crowding at the Yauza bridge. It was hot. Kutuzov,
Tsar about it too. Anyone who stays is a traitor to the Tsar. Do you
Tsar with another glance at the Emperor Francis, as if inviting him if
Tsar's and of an oath to the Tsar Paul in 1797 (in connection with which
Tsar's beautiful relay horses covered with embroidered cloths.
Tsarevich Constantine Pavlovich; Count Rumyantsev, the Chancellor;
Tsarevich should not be with the army. Do you know what he said to the
Tsarevich, who could not forget his disillusionment at Austerlitz, where
Tsarevo-Zaymishche--as he had listened to Denisov, and seven years
Tuesday.
Tugendbund was, and what I am proposing."
Turkey by means of restless, plodding, and rather vainglorious and
Turks eat horseflesh!" He swayed his head. "And the French shall too,
Turks--the crowd outside spread out and hawkers appeared, selling kvas,
Tushin did not say that there were no covering troops, though that
Tushin led him into the next room, from whence came sounds of several
Tushin rose and, buttoning his greatcoat and pulling it straight, walked
Tushin told them to give the man some water. Then a cheerful soldier ran
Tushin turned round in dismay. It was the staff officer who had turned
Tushin's battery but had never reached it. Interrupting one another,
Tushin's battery had been forgotten and only at the very end of the
Tushin's large, kind, intelligent eyes were fixed with sympathy and
Tushin, and the cadet exchanged silent glances as they awaited their
Tushin, who silent and smiling, shifting from one stockinged foot to the
Tver, Kaluga, and Dorogomilov gates. Faster and faster, vying with
Twelve sharpshooters with muskets stepped out of the ranks with a firm
Twenty-one rubles," he said, pointing to the figure twenty-one by which
Twenty-three soldiers, three officers, and two officials were confined
Two days later, on the fifteenth of July, an immense number of carriages
Two dragoons took it by its distorted legs and dragged it along the
Two equally strong feelings drew Pierre irresistibly to this purpose.
Two footmen, the princess' and his own, stood holding a shawl and a
Two governesses were sitting with the Vogels at a table, on which were
Two hours later Prince Andrew, stepping softly, went into his father's
Two hours later the carts were standing in the courtyard of the
Two hours passed. Napoleon had lunched and was again standing in the
Two months had elapsed since the news of the battle of Austerlitz and
Two months previously when Pierre was already staying with the Rostovs
Two more prisoners were led up. In the same way and with similar looks,
Two of the enemy's shots had already flown across the bridge, where
Two of the gazers went round to the other side of the coach and sat down
Two of the troykas were the usual household sleighs, the third was
Two officers were standing on the knoll, directing the men. On seeing
Two officers with flushed faces, looking cheerful and happy, passed by
Two or three priests who were found in Moscow did try to carry out
Two orderlies, a courier and a major-domo, stood near by, some ten paces
Two steps from him, leaning against a branch and talking loudly and
Two troykas were standing before the porch and two young drivers were
Two valets rapidly dressed His Majesty, and wearing the blue uniform of
Two wise old dogs lay down unleashed. Some hundred paces farther along
Two witnesses for the mock marriage--Khvostikov, a retired petty
Two young citizens were joking with some serf girls who were cracking
Uhlans appeared from round the corner. The Uhlans came up at a trot to
Uhlans were galloping back, not to the place they had occupied but more
Uhlans, bullets came from the front, whining and whistling, but fell
Ukraine excellent horses which pleased him and earned him commendation
Unable to sit still he paced up and down the room holding the letter and
Uncle Pierre as he called him was the object of his rapturous and
Unconsciously imitating her father, she now tried to express herself as
Unconsciously she immediately invented a reason for going down, and
Under the date "5" was entered:
Under the influence of the wine he had drunk, and after the days he had
Understandable and touching as the look with which Natasha gazed at
Understanding at once to whom she alluded, Prince Vasili said in a
Undoubtedly some relation exists between all who live contemporaneously,
Unexpectedly, in the middle of the service, and not in the usual order
University, from the Foundling Hospital, the Suffragan has sent...
Until Prince Andrew settled in Bogucharovo its owners had always been
Unwilling to obtrude himself on the princess, Rostov did not go back to
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
Uvarka."
Uvarov, who had arrived with him, paused at the doorway to allow him,
Valuev was confidentially telling that Uvarov had been sent from
Valuevo with Colonel Fabvier, the former from Paris and the latter from
Vasilchikov and Platov had already seen the count and explained to him
Vasili Dmitrich Denisov was staying with the Rostovs this fifth of
Vasili Dmitrich doesn't want to. You know the auditor told you it was a
Vasili Dmitrich," and he also turned to Rostov. "One has to submit, and
Vasili a third time. "How absent-minded you are, my dear fellow."
Vasili and his son.
Vasili had aged and whether Countess Mary Alexeevna had sent greetings
Vasili had only acquired by imitating other parents.
Vasili interrupted, "but they did not listen to me. I told them his
Vasili saw that Pierre knew this. He suddenly muttered something and
Vasili the Beatified and under the Borovitski gate, back up the hill
Vasili to Anna Mikhaylovna. "Go and take something, my poor Anna
Vasili to the table and bringing him two candles and the manuscript
Vasili took the first opportunity to gain his confidence, flatter him,
Vasili's arm and led him to his study. As soon as they were alone
Vasili's son, he, and a certain Dolokhov have, it is said, been up to
Vasili, "but it is difficult for me to ask the Emperor. I should advise
Vasili, it is very sad for both. Ah, my dear friend, our divine
Vasili, who had grown thinner and paler during the last few days,
Vasili, who pretended to want to know this in order to settle a dispute.
Vasilich is worn out. Just you wait a bit!"
Vasilich's grandson who had stayed in Moscow with his grandfather.
Vaska!" he went on, turning to Denisov, whose head was again nodding.
Venetian mirror in the wall, and in her trodden-down shoes briskly
Vera's remark was correct, as her remarks always were, but, like most of
Vera, "because I know what interests each of them and what to say to
Vera, having decided in her own mind that Pierre ought to be entertained
Vera... And what for? What have I done to her? I am so grateful to you
Vereshchagin, is the scoundrel by whose doing Moscow is perishing."
Vereshchagin..."
Vereshchagin..."
Vesenny (vernal) and into Vesenya by the peasants and soldiers. In both
Vesenya!--Vesenny!" laughing voices were heard calling to one another in
Vewy well, so out comes their head chief--also took it into his head to
Vienna as I told you. Very well. Next day, which was yesterday, those
Vienna by the Austrian Hofkriegsrath, the sole and almost unattainable
Vienna is on the other side. No, the bridge has not yet been taken and I
Vienna. Kutuzov with his transport had still to march for some days
Vilna on the eleventh, and in his traveling sleigh drove straight to
Vilna, presented an example exceptional in history of self-sacrifice
Vilna--independently of the greater or lesser intensity of the cold,
Vilna. In that wealthy town, which had not been injured, he found old
Vilna; or remain in Moscow; in short, no special genius would seem to be
Vincent, the boy's name, had already been changed by the Cossacks into
Virgin's Field, to the left of the nunnery, as far as a kitchen garden
Vitebsk after the French had occupied that town, gave a brief account of
Vitebsk with orders to advance at a trot along the road.
Vitebsk...."
Vladimir road, and a fourth, rather considerable detachment is stationed
Vladimirovich Bezukhov's house. "My dear Boris," said the mother,
Vladimirovich Bezukhov, Countess Rostova sat for a long time all alone
Vladimirovich is my mother's second cousin. He's also my Bory's
Volkonski was called out of the church and received a dispatch from
Volkonski, to hear from you the situation of the army and the reasons
Voltaire for example, it seemed that the laws of astronomy destroyed
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
Voronezh in the middle of September. Princess Mary, having learned of
Voronezh.
Voronezh. When Rostov approached her she was standing settling up for
Vozdvizhenka Street, he drove that same evening to see her.
Vyazma and Tarutino.
WAR AND PEACE
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.
War, Count Arakcheev.
Warmed by the spring sunshine he sat in the caleche looking at the new
Warsaw, all the world's capitals.... We are feared, but we are loved.
Was he going to rebuild? When was he going to Petersburg and would he
Wasn't he my friend? Wasn't I fond of him? But it's not his fault.
We are forced to fall back on fatalism as an explanation of irrational
We are nice to know. And then the Emperor..." he began, but Pierre
We can understand that the matter seemed like that to contemporaries.
We cannot understand one another," and he remained silent.
We have abandoned Vilna and Vitebsk and shall abandon Drissa. The only
We have an excellent priest, he conducts the service decently and with
We have been summoned to reply to the appeal with which our sovereign
We have fully concentrated forces of nearly seventy thousand men with
We have not met for such a long time... not since we were children. You
We have still six hundred quarters left," he inquired.
We killed a score or so of 'more-orderers,' but we did no harm else..."
We know that man has the faculty of becoming completely absorbed in
We need only confess that we do not know the purpose of the European
We passed close to the park and saw two deer... and what a splendid
We say that Napoleon wished to invade Russia and invaded it. In
We see the same if we watch moment by moment the movement of historical
We seized the children. But not Katie! Ooh! O Lord!..." and again she
We should in fact have reached those two fundamentals of which man's
We will see how Taras distinguishes himself today. He says Count Orlov
Wearing a waistcoat over his cotton shirt, Ferapontov was standing
Wednesday. As for them"--and she pointed to the girls--"tomorrow I'll
Weimar relations out of Germany.... Yes. I'll drive them out. Let him
Well, I have asked you, and now I won't interfere any more since you
Well, are you coming with me?" he asked Petya.
Well, as I was saying," he continued, recovering his composure, "now
Well, come along now, quick, quick! It's time you two were parted," she
Well, good-by!" and she left the room.
Well, he took that icon home with him for a few days and what did he do?
Well, what of it... do what's necessary..." said the count, muttering
Well, you have cheered us up! Nikita and Vanya--clear away the tables!
Westphalians and Hessians whom Napoleon is leading would not follow
Westphalians. Behind the prisoners came a cavalry baggage train.
Weyrother again gave that smile which seemed to say that to him it was
Weyrother at Austerlitz, galloped assiduously from place to place,
Weyrother's name, or even the term "dispositions."
Weyrother, who was in full control of the proposed battle, by his
What "still the same" might mean Princess Mary did not ask, but with an
What I say is: 'Join hands, you who love the right, and let there be but
What I want is that our children should not have to go begging. I must
What Pierre did not know was that the place where they presented him
What Russian, reading the account of the last part of the campaign
What a calamity!"
What a delightful boy he was!"
What also conduced to Bagration's being selected as Moscow's hero was
What am I going to do?" And he immediately gave himself the answer:
What are you thinking about? You have quite turned his head, I can see
What causes historical events? Power. What is power? Power is the
What convinces is when one sees a being dear to one, bound up with one's
What did you commit by so acting? A venial, or a mortal, sin? A venial
What do these reproaches mean?
What does all this mean? Why did it happen? What made those people burn
What force made men act so? These are the instinctive, plain, and
What force moves the nations?
What he had just been praying for with confidence that God would hear
What if what he seeks in me is not there?" Sometimes she fell into one
What is bad? What is good? What should one love and what hate? What does
What is important are the rights of man, emancipation from prejudices,
What is sin, the conception of which arises from the consciousness of
What is wanted is not some Barclay or other, but a man like Bennigsen,
What produced this extraordinary occurrence? What were its causes? The
What she found hardest to bear was to know that on such occasions she
What sort of governors are they to do that? They ought to be hanged--the
What struck him was that Denisov did not seem glad to see him, and
What then?... Eh?"
What was needed for him who, overshadowing others, stood at the head of
What was needed was a sense of justice and a sympathy with European
What was passing in that receptive childlike soul that so eagerly caught
What would Sonya and the count and countess have done, how would they
What would Sonya have done without the glad consciousness that she had
What would have seemed difficult or even impossible to another woman did
What would it have cost him to hold out for another two days? They would
What you have just said is good, very good. Of course you don't know me.
What's he to do if he has such luck?... And it's not my fault either,"
What, me? Me? My immortal soul? Ha-ha-ha! Ha-ha-ha!..." and he laughed
Whatever happens and whoever may stand at the head of affairs, the
Whatever happens it always appears that just that event was foreseen
Whatever presentation of the activity of many men or of an individual
Whatever you tell me, I will do. Tell me...."
When Anna Mikhaylovna returned from Count Bezukhov's the money, all
When Balashev had ended, Napoleon again took out his snuffbox, sniffed
When Boris and Anna Pavlovna returned to the others Prince Hippolyte had
When Boris appeared at his door Pierre was pacing up and down his room,
When Boris, who was to be served up to the guests, entered the drawing
When Ermolov, having been sent by Kutuzov to inspect the position, told
When Gabriel came to inform her that the men who had come had run
When Germans start being accurate, there's no end to it!"
When I understood what he wanted--when I saw that he was preparing a bed
When Kochubey introduced Prince Andrew, Speranski slowly turned his eyes
When Kutuzov came out of the study and with lowered head was crossing
When Kutuzov was informed that at the French rear--where according to
When Marya Dmitrievna told Natasha that Anatole was married, Natasha
When Michael Ivanovich returned to the study with the letter, the old
When Michael Ivanovich went in there were tears in the prince's eyes
When Morel had drunk some vodka and finished his bowl of porridge he
When Napoleon, having finished speaking, looked inquiringly at the
When Natasha had been told that morning that Prince Andrew was seriously
When Natasha left the room Pierre's confusion and awkwardness
When Natasha opened Prince Andrew's door with a familiar movement and
When Natasha ran out of the drawing room she only went as far as the
When Nicholas and his wife came to look for Pierre he was in the nursery
When Nicholas had been led away, Princess Mary again went up to her
When Paris was mentioned, Mademoiselle Bourienne for her part seized the
When Pierre and his wife entered the drawing room the countess was in
When Pierre and his wife had left, he grew very quiet and began to
When Pierre came up the count was gazing straight at him, but with a
When Pierre had gone and the members of the household met together, they
When Pierre had left Kutuzov, Dolokhov came up to him and took his hand.
When Pierre remembered them afterwards they all seemed misty figures to
When Pierre returned home he was handed two of Rostopchin's broadsheets
When Pierre went up to them he noticed that Vera was being carried away
When Prince Andrew entered the study the old man in his old-age
When Prince Andrew left the palace he felt that all the interest
When Prince Andrew reached the room prepared for him and lay down in a
When Prince Meshcherski had left, Prince Andrew took Pierre's arm and
When Prince Vasili returned to the drawing room, the princess, his wife,
When Princess Mary began to cry, he understood that she was crying at
When Princess Mary came down, Prince Vasili and his son were already
When Princess Mary had left Prince Andrew she fully understood what
When Princess Mary heard from Nicholas that her brother was with the
When Princess Mary returned from her father, the little princess sat
When Princess Mary returned to her room after her nocturnal talk with
When Princess Mary went to him at the usual hour he was working at his
When Rostov entered the room, the princess dropped her eyes for an
When Rostov went back there was a bottle of vodka and a sausage on the
When Scherbinin came galloping from the left flank with news that the
When Telyanin had finished his lunch he took out of his pocket a double
When a man works alone he always has a certain set of reflections which
When a pause occurred during his short visit, Nicholas, as is usual when
When after a bachelor supper he rose with his amiable and kindly smile,
When all was ready, the sabers stuck in the snow to mark the barriers,
When alone with the field marshal the Emperor expressed his
When an apple has ripened and falls, why does it fall? Because of its
When an event is taking place people express their opinions and wishes
When campaigning, Rostov allowed himself the indulgence of riding not
When conversation turned on her husband Helene assumed a dignified
When dealing with the affairs and papers of his dead wife, her memory
When everybody rose to go, Helene who had spoken very little all
When halfway home Nicholas handed the reins to the coachman and ran for
When he awoke next morning the major-domo came to inform him that a
When he came level with the Foot Guards he noticed that about them and
When he came to himself he was sitting on the ground leaning on his
When he entered the private room Count Rostopchin, puckering his face,
When he entered, Prince Andrew, his eyes drooping contemptuously (with
When he got home he could not sleep for a long time for thinking of what
When he had ascended the hill and reached the little village street, he
When he had become a little quieter, he explained to Rostov that he was
When he had changed, poured water over his head, and scented himself,
When he had dismissed the generals Kutuzov sat a long time with his
When he had finished the Litany the deacon crossed the stole over his
When he had gone less than half a mile in the rear of the column he
When he had parted from Malvintseva Nicholas wished to return to the
When he had reached the fence, still without finding those he sought, he
When he had reached this point, Pierre asked the captain whether he
When he had reported himself to the commander of the regiment and had
When he heard these words and saw the expression of firm resolution
When he noticed in Balashev's face the disagreeable impression this
When he opened the ballroom door Pierre saw Natasha sitting at the
When he ran his mind over the whole of this strange Russian campaign in
When he reached Kiev he sent for all his stewards to the head office
When he reached home Prince Andrew began thinking of his life in
When he reached home it was already getting dark. Some eight people had
When he read that sentence, Pierre felt for the first time that some
When he received the news of the battle of Borodino and the abandonment
When he returned to Moscow Pierre was handed a letter from Marya
When he returned to the room Pierre was sitting in the same place as
When he woke up on the morning after his return to Moscow and his
When her hair was done, Natasha, in her short petticoat from under which
When her partner left her Natasha ran across the room to choose two
When it came to Natasha's turn to choose a partner, she rose and,
When it is impossible to stretch the very elastic threads of historical
When it was late at night they went out together into the street. The
When it was suggested to him that he should enter the civil service,
When later on in his memoirs Count Rostopchin explained his actions at
When les enfants du Don might so easily have taken the Emperor himself
When little Nicholas was brought into Prince Andrew's room he looked at
When on saying good-by he took her thin, slender hand, he could not help
When on the first day he got up early, went out of the shed at dawn, and
When on the following morning the Emperor said to the officers assembled
When on the twenty-first of October his general expressed a wish to send
When returning from his leave, Rostov felt, for the first time, how
When seeing a dying animal a man feels a sense of horror: substance
When she began to tell him that all this had happened the day after her
When she had completed the tour of the garden, which brought her again
When she had taken leave of him and remained alone she suddenly felt
When she had thrown off her dress and put on a dressing jacket, she sat
When she said this, he did not reply and only bowed, but again everybody
When she saw Natasha's fright, Sonya shed tears of shame and pity for
When she saw the count, she stretched out her arms to him, embraced his
When some larger concourse of men direct their activity to a common aim
When speaking to Chichagov, Kutuzov incidentally mentioned that the
When spring came on, the soldiers found a plant just showing out of the
When starting on a journey or changing their mode of life, men capable
When that door was opened and the prisoners, crowding against one
When the Emperor had passed nearly all the regiments, the troops began
When the French officer went into the room with Pierre the latter again
When the Military Governor had gone, Prince Vasili sat down all alone on
When the adjutant reminded him of the prisoner, he jerked his head in
When the body, washed and dressed, lay in the coffin on a table,
When the boy had entered the hut, Petya sat down at a distance from
When the cotillion was over the old count in his blue coat came up to
When the count came to see her she turned anxiously round at the sound
When the count returned, Natasha was impolitely pleased and hastened
When the eager but misrepeated words had reached their destination in a
When the fit of laughter that had seized him at Tikhon's words and smile
When the flame of the sulphur splinters kindled by the tinder burned
When the last convulsions of the body, which the spirit was leaving,
When the monotonous sound of Weyrother's voice ceased, Kutuzov opened
When the mutton and an omelet had been served and a samovar and vodka
When the necessary number of copies of the dispositions had been
When the officers had emptied and smashed their glasses, Kirsten filled
When the pit had been filled up a command was given. Pierre was taken
When the princess came out of the countess' room Nicholas met her again,
When the prisoners again went forward Pierre looked round. Karataev
When the reading of Denisov's virulent reply, which took more than an
When the reading which lasted more than an hour was over, Langeron again
When the review was over, the newly arrived officers, and also
When the second act was over Countess Bezukhova rose, turned to the
When the service was over the governor's wife beckoned him to her.
When the service was over, Kutuzov stepped up to the icon, sank heavily
When the ship moves in one direction there is one and the same wave
When the sun had entirely emerged from the fog, and fields and mist were
When the troops reached their night's halting place on the eighth of
When the twenty minutes had elapsed and the time had come for the old
When they all drove back from Pelageya Danilovna's, Natasha, who always
When they all got up to go in to supper, little Nicholas Bolkonski went
When they began to blindfold him he himself adjusted the knot which
When they came in to tea, having taken off their outdoor things and
When they came out onto the beaten highroad--polished by sleigh runners
When they had been announced a perturbation was noticeable among the
When they had come to the edge of the forest it was noticeably growing
When they had crossed the Crimean bridge the prisoners moved a few steps
When they had descended to the bridge Petya and Dolokhov rode past the
When they had emptied the samovar, Rostov took a pack of cards and
When they had gone a little less than a mile, five more riders with
When they heard Napoleon's proclamation offering them, as compensation
When they prayed for the warriors, she thought of her brother and
When they reached a gravel path behind the house the Frenchman pulled
When they reached home and had told their mother how they had spent the
When they reached the Myasnitski Street and could no longer hear
When they went into the drawing room where coffee was served, the old
When they were out of the village they began talking again as loud as
When two people quarrel they are always both in fault, and one's own
When we do not at all understand the cause of an action, whether a
When with due circumspection Napoleon was informed that Moscow was
When you stand expecting the overstrained string to snap at any moment,
When, awakened from his sleep, he received that cold, peremptory note
When, for instance, we say that Napoleon ordered armies to go to war,
When, having bought the coat merely with the object of taking part among
When, much later, "Uncle" rode up to Nicholas and began talking to him,
When, waking in a cold perspiration, he moved on the divan, Natasha went
Whenever I see the movement of a locomotive I hear the whistle and see
Whenever an event occurs a man appears or men appear, by whose will the
Where Willarski saw deadness Pierre saw an extraordinary strength
Where are the candles?... Tea!..."
Where are you traveling from?"
Where is it?" he asked, turning to Lavrushka.
Where's the victory?"
Where, how, and when had this young countess, educated by an emigree
Wherever she went and whomever she was speaking to, she felt his eyes
Whether Kutuzov was thinking of something entirely different when
Whether he understood that screaming was useless or whether he thought
Whether it was the wine he had drunk, or an impulse of frankness, or the
Whether they were playing the ring and string game or the ruble game or
Whether we speak of the migration of the peoples and the incursions
Which of the two?"
While Denisov was talking to the esaul, Petya--abashed by Denisov's
While Dolokhov had been disputing with Denisov what should be done with
While Kutuzov was talking to Raevski and dictating the order of the day,
While Mavra Kuzminichna was running to her room the officer walked about
While Natasha was fixing her gaze on her for the second time the lady
While Pierre was repeating what he had been told about the army leaving
While Pierre was running the few steps that separated him from the
While Pierre, standing in the middle of the room, was talking to himself
While Prince Andrew went to report about the purple-faced general, that
While Rostov was thus arguing with himself and riding sadly away,
While a footman was lighting a candle, Toll communicated the substance
While disputes and intrigues were going on about the future field of
While father and son were having their explanation, the mother and
While he was away Princess Mary, Dessalles, Mademoiselle Bourienne, and
While imprisoned in the shed Pierre had learned not with his intellect
While in the Rostovs' ballroom the sixth anglaise was being danced, to a
While listening to the officer's report Konovnitsyn broke the seal and
While saying this he never removed his smiling eyes from her face, her
While the Emperor had still been at Vilna, the forces had been divided
While the Emperor was dining, Valuev, looking out of the window, said:
While the count was being turned over, one of his arms fell back
While the couples were arranging themselves and the musicians tuning up,
While the guests were taking their leave Pierre remained for a long time
While the horses were being harnessed Alpatych and Ferapontov over their
While the marshal was passing, the prisoners had huddled together in a
While the service was proceeding in the Cathedral of the Assumption--it
While the soldiers were shouting Kutuzov leaned forward in his saddle
While the troops, dividing into two parts when passing around the
While these conversations were going on in the reception room and the
While they were strong we didn't spare ourselves, but now we may even
While they were talking a maid thrust her head in at the other door of
While they were talking in undertones the crack of a shot sounded
While this was being given, Prince Andrew heard the whisper of a woman's
While this was taking place in Petersburg the French had already passed
While waiting for the announcement of his appointment to the committee
While waiting for the young man to take his place on the step Rostopchin
While waiting in the reception room Pierre with weary eyes watched the
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
Who is right and who is wrong? No one! But if you are alive--live:
Who these men were nobody knew. "Clear that away!" was all that was said
Why and how were the battles of Shevardino and Borodino given and
Why are you like this?"
Why carry you off as if you were some gypsy singing girl?... Well, if he
Why did he not retire at once by the Kaluga road, abandoning Moscow? and
Why did it happen in this and not in some other way?
Why had such a splendid boy, so full of life, to die?"
Why not? He'll explain"... voices in the rear of the crowd were
Why speak, when words cannot express what one feels?"
Why was the Russian army--which with inferior forces had withstood the
Willarski bowed his head.
Willarski felt dull in Orel and was pleased to meet a man of his own
Willarski was a married man with a family, busy with his family affairs,
Willarski was going to Moscow and they agreed to travel together.
Willarski was silent throughout the drive. To Pierre's inquiries as to
Wintzingerodes! Stein, a traitor expelled from his own country;
Wischau and the capture of a whole French squadron. The day was bright
Wishing to find out where the commander in chief was, he rode up to
With Mademoiselle Bourienne's help the princess had maintained the
With Sonya's help and the maid's, Natasha got the glass she held into
With a long overcoat on his exceedingly stout, round-shouldered body,
With a merry, smiling face Pierre was sorting his purchases.
With a nod to Denisov he turned away and put out his hand for the papers
With a pale and frowning face Dron stepped out of the crowd.
With a rapid but careful movement Natasha drew nearer to him on her
With a slight inclination of her head, Natasha stepped back quickly to
With a solemn triumphal march there mingled a song, the drip from the
With an inclination of the head the Emperor dismissed him.
With courtly adroitness de Beausset half turned and without turning his
With drooping head Princess Mary left the crowd and went back to the
With each fresh blow less and less chance of life remained for those not
With great difficulty he managed to get to his horse, and shouting
With happy, exhausted faces, they laid the old wolf, alive, on a shying
With painful dejection he awaited the end of this action, in which he
With reference to army discipline, orders were continually being issued
With reference to commerce, the proclamation to industrious workmen and
With reference to diplomacy, all Napoleon's arguments as to his
With reference to the military side--the plan of campaign--that work of
With regard to administrative matters, Moscow was granted a
With regard to administrative matters, the establishment of a
With regard to commerce and to provisioning the army, the following was
With regard to diplomatic questions, Napoleon summoned Captain Yakovlev,
With regard to legal matters, after the execution of the supposed
With regard to legal matters, immediately after the fires he gave orders
With regard to military matters, Napoleon immediately on his entry into
With regard to religion, Napoleon ordered the priests to be brought back
With regard to religion, as to which in Egypt matters had so easily been
With regard to supplies for the army, Napoleon decreed that all the
With shifting eyes but eyebrows still raised, Telyanin handed him the
With tears in his eyes Dolokhov embraced Pierre and kissed him.
With the child in his arms his figure was now more conspicuous than
With the enemy's approach to Moscow, the Moscovites' view of their
With the help of a footman Tikhon brought in the bedstead and began
With the naive conviction of young men in a merry mood that other men's
With the naked eye Prince Andrew saw below them to the right, not more
With the natural capacity of an Italian for changing the expression of
With the object of raising the spirits of the troops and of the people,
With the precision and definiteness customary in addressing prisoners,
With the present complex forms of political and social life in Europe
With the self-satisfaction of a man on parade, he stepped lightly with
With the soldier, an infantry officer with a bandaged cheek came up to
With this object his staff was gradually reconstructed and its real
With trembling hands Natasha held that passionate love letter which
Within a week Moscow already had fifteen thousand inhabitants, in a
Within a week the peasants who came with empty carts to carry off
Within four years he had paid off all his remaining debts without
Within half an hour adjutants had been sent in various directions with
Without admitting divine intervention in the affairs of humanity we
Without answering, Rostov shook the soldier's Cross of St. George
Without considering what he would do he moved unconciously with quick,
Without going home, Pierre took a cab and drove to see the Moscow
Without haste or agitation he awaited what was coming. That inexorable,
Without heeding the end of the Italian's remarks, and as though
Without looking at anyone, "Uncle" blew the dust off it and, tapping the
Without moving from that spot or firing a single shot the regiment here
Without replying either to his wife or his mother-in-law, Pierre late
Without replying, the sergeant, with a resolute air, mounted and rode
Without saying a word Rostopchin rose and walked hastily to his light,
Without such justification there would be no reply to the simplest
Without taking leave of his new friend, Pierre left the gate with
Without waiting to hear him out, Prince Andrew asked:
Wolzogen and Clausewitz accompanied by a Cossack. They rode close by
Wolzogen came to the assistance of his chief, who spoke French badly,
Wolzogen returned from Barclay and said that General Barclay wished to
Wolzogen was about to make a rejoinder, but Kutuzov interrupted him.
Wolzogen, nonchalantly stretching his legs, approached Kutuzov with a
Wolzogen, shrugging his shoulders and curling his lips, stepped silently
Wonder-Worker on his breast, and his way of speaking and everything he
Wostov, now then!"
Wostov," he cried noticing the cadet's bright face, "you've got it at
Write an answer!" Natasha did not reply and went to her own room to read
Write and tell me how he receives you. If he is all right--serve
Writers of universal history who deal with all the nations seem to
Writing the words L'Empereur Napoleon in numbers, it appears that the
Wussians will get a look in. As it was, devil only knows what was
XIV and Ivan the Terrible end their reigns tranquilly, while Louis XVI
Yakov Alpatych heard without heeding. He asked for a samovar and for hay
Yes! Yes! Yes! Don't look at me with such surprise. If you marry
Yes, 'I shall look forward very much to your return.' Oh, how happy I
Yes, I dare say, that's the way they'll let you pass... Just look,
Yes, my opinion, and only my opinion," added Prince Bolkonski, turning
Yesterday I learned that, despite the loyalty with which I have kept
Yet he loved "our Russian peasants" and their way of life with his whole
Yet in spite of that, his relation to her--considerate, delicate, and
Yet it is only necessary to abandon the false view (adopted to gratify
Yet it was she, dressed in a new gown which he did not know, made since
Yet one need only discard the study of the reports and general plans and
Yet some fate constantly threw them together.
Yet the ladies themselves could not help laughing.
Yet to supply this conception various historians take forces of
You abandon Vienna, give up its defense--as much as to say: 'Heaven is
You ask whether we shall spend next winter in Moscow. In spite of my
You have brought your army corps to Pultusk, routed: here it is exposed,
You know that sort of tradesman's son, a dandy and lady-killer. He
You know the story of the handkerchief? It is delightful!"
You may be proud of it! And on my honor, in spite of the cough I caught
You must know. We will take it at once and show it to the count. He has,
You need only forget to ask how the will of heroes produces events, and
You positively must! Between eight and nine."
You say: I am not free. But I have lifted my hand and let it fall.
You say: join our brotherhood and we will show you the aim of life, the
You see a reign of goodness and truth on earth, but I don't see it."
You will have a pleasant journey."
You'd be only too glad, of course." Perhaps he did not really think this
You'll see--we shall retire."
You're awfully like me, just such another giggler.... Wait..." and she
You've disgraced yourself like the lowest of hussies. I'd treat you
You, peaceful inhabitants of Moscow, artisans and workmen whom
Young Nicholas, now a slim lad of fifteen, delicate and intelligent,
Young Rostov's ecstatic voice could be heard above the three hundred
Your Majesty at every opportunity, with the affectation unavoidable in
Your Majesty has considered yourself to be in a state of war with me
Your Majesty, in the goodness of your heart, should allow yourself to be
Your Sonya
Your father, or brother, or your betrothed? And he's a scoundrel, a
Your loss is so terrible that I can only explain it to myself as a
Your misfortunes are cruel, but His Majesty the Emperor and King
Your son bids fair to become an officer distinguished by his industry,
Zakhar held back his horses and turned his face, which was already
Zavarzinsk thicket the other day! Leaped a fearful place; what a sight
Zdrzhinski, the officer with the long mustache, spoke grandiloquently of
Zherkov touched his horse with the spurs; it pranced excitedly from foot
Zherkov was followed by an officer of the suite who rode up to the
Zherkov, looking uneasily around. He had not seen the hussars all that
Zherkov, not removing his hand from his cap, turned his horse about
Zherkov.
Zherkov. They were under orders to advance next day.
Zhilinski evidently did not receive this new Russian person very
Zhilinski, a Pole brought up in Paris, was rich, and passionately
Zinaida Dmitrievna's health, and so on.
Zubovski rampart, but rose through the pure air in columns. No flames
[Last updated: August 22, 2012]
a Catherine serve to express the life of the nation, which is evident
a French sharpshooter hit him in the fleshy part of his leg. Perhaps at
a French soldier tugged at the other. He could distinctly see the
a Frenchman beat a Russian soldier cruelly for straying too far from
a Jesuit a robe courte * was presented to her, and in the garden by the
a Knight of St. George like his uncle Nicholas; he wanted to be learned,
a Persian costume, had now the appearance of a most correct officer of
a Polish count in the Vilkavisski forest.
a Russian bath; do you understand? Out of a moral bath. Isn't it true?"
a backward movement with his spine, and his arm trembled nervously; this
a ball. On first receiving the news, under the influence of indignation
a banister post stood a tallow candle which guttered in the draft. On
a batiste shirt that he had evidently only just put on, standing in that
a battalion of the French Guards to the Preobrazhensk battalion. The
a battery to their left. The smoke above it had not yet dispersed. Two
a battle not gained by the attacking side in eight hours, after all
a battle, where it is a question of life and death) influence the course
a beaver cap came riding toward him on a handsome raven-black horse,
a bird in his hands and flies away. And there's no way of killing him
a bit! I must have singers too. I shall have my own orchestra, but
a bit, a member of the Moscow English Club, and a universal favorite in
a blue headdress, who had just finished her game of cards with the most
a blue-eyed soldier involuntarily attracted notice. It was Dolokhov
a boston player who had always been well disposed toward him, Stepan
a box for cards my son has brought us!"
a brilliant position in the service thanks to the patronage of an
a capacity to select and absorb the very best a man shows of himself.
a capitulation, he detected a ruse and wrote the following letter to
a careless, merry smile. "What am I? An illegitimate son!" He suddenly
a cavalryman. Prince Andrew felt that an invisible power was leading him
a ceremonial march past him, and Rostov on Bedouin, recently purchased
a chain of such contradictions. This contradiction occurs because after
a chair in the ballroom, crossing one leg high over the other, leaning
a charm palpable to those senses. It is impossible to eradicate the
a cheerful one, Dunyasha, who went with her in the carriage, more than
a chef-d'oeuvre of tactical science which would ensure Napoleon's
a chicken anywhere. Anisya Fedorovna left the room.
a child does with naively pouting lips, and again bowed till he touched
a child, he fell into a deep, youthful slumber.
a chosen man, and guided the will of that chosen man so as to accomplish
a church who, availing themselves of the absence of the chief
a closely written letter of two sheets from Bilibin. He folded it up
a collection of snuffboxes that had belonged to Pierre's father, Count
a commander in chief. As it was considered that the Austerlitz success
a commander--as equivalent to the sum of many individual wills; whereas
a company commander, a fine round-faced man, with a stupid and happy
a company smile but was evidently tormented by jealousy; now she turned
a complex and difficult process of internal development was taking place
a complicated interplay of interests, arguments, and passions at
a comrade's, and rode again to the vanguard to find Miloradovich.
a comrade. The canteenkeeper gave one credit, one's pay came every four
a conclusion: (1) that history is written by learned men, and so it is
a cone and of the ranks of an army, or the ranks and positions in
a confirmation of his thoughts, and after a few minutes' reflection
a consciousness is communicated is very difficult to define, but it
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
a convoy of Croats. Beside Kutuzov sat an Austrian general, in a white
a convoy wagon became restive at the end of the bridge, and the whole
a convoy. Directly opposite to him came a strange one-horse vehicle,
a convoy? Release them, that's all about it!"
a cook, two old women, a little pageboy, the coachman, and various
a coronet) entered the room, calm and majestic, except that there was
a couple of times a year--when he knew from their valets that they had
a court of justice. All were silent or talked in low tones. Prince
a coward, dense, dilatory, and has all bad qualities. The whole army
a crash.
a crying child. It was not because Pierre was a married man, but because
a dark noncommissioned officer who was always shaggy, stood up to his
a dark passage.
a dark-green dress coat, knee breeches of the color of cuisse de nymphe
a daughter's future married happiness, "he writes that he won't come
a decision had to be taken regarding a domestic serf, especially if one
a deserted and ruined village to which he had come in search of
a desire to enter into conversation, but speaking so quietly and
a devastated road--is explained to us as being due to profound
a diary, avoided the company of the Brothers, began going to the Club
a dinner in honor of Prince Bagration at the English Club.
a dinner where there was no place for him. In the next hut there was a
a diplomatist. That's why I joined the hussars, thinking that here one
a dish and evidently awaiting the entrance of the commander in chief.
a distant expedition, starting from the oak grove where there was an
a distant past. Then he recounted an episode in which the husband
a distant relative of the Rostovs', a man of small means, and their
a distorted corpse. He muttered unceasingly, his eyebrows and lips
a divine creature, who will regenerate, purify, and elevate me. But you
a domestic serf, about forty-five years old, with grizzled hair and a
a dramshop, came drunken shouts and songs. On benches round the tables
a dream in which a man fancies that a ruffian is coming to attack him,
a dream? Isn't Princess Mary mistaken? Am I not too conceited and
a dressing jacket with slippers on her bare feet and her hair in
a drink!" Rostov glanced round, looking for someone who would put this
a feeling of contemptuous ill will. He snorted whenever he mentioned
a feeling of desire while stooping over the snuffbox at Anna Pavlovna's,
a feeling of horror at renouncing the possibility of real love still
a fellow diplomat, "that the Chancellor told him flatly that his
a few hours ahead of the French who were approaching Hollabrunn from
a few minutes later the chief forces of the French army moved rapidly
a few minutes later. "Now our Natasha has come to life. You should have
a few of them still move, rise, and feebly fly to settle on the enemy's
a few seconds he looked at him in silence. His handsome face assumed a
a few steps and be killed themselves in the same way.
a few steps he stopped before Prince Andrew, who lay on his back with
a few steps he stopped, having apparently decided that these were good
a few steps, turned, cut a caper, brought her little feet sharply
a few weeks previously, on that hot August day, such bodies had filled
a fictitious but a live character who like every man had his personal
a field of battle they considered impossible to hold? The lower-grade
a fight led Murat to try to deceive Kutuzov in a similar way. Meeting
a fine fellow, a fine fellow! Well, come with me now." He took Prince
a fine tactical war"; and, laughing contemptuously, went on into the
a first example, of which it is very desirable that there should be more
a flag of truce, demanding an audience with the Russian Emperor, was
a flask, and Nesvitski was treating some officers to pies and real
a fool, que vous etes un sot, but everybody knew that. What will be the
a foraging expedition. Rostov in his cadet uniform, with a jerk to his
a fortnight ago he would have had a paymaster's clerk at Yukhnovna
a fragrance of perfume and wine, and had uttered the words "better late
a fresh and vigorous woman of fifty, but a month later she left her room
a friend older than himself and whom he respected. His whole time was
a friendly way that the commander and the officers were higher up
a fright! Oh, what a pig I am!" he repeated, flushing suddenly. "Well,
a frightened and suffering look resembling that on the thin Frenchman's
a frown on his brow), "to consult with him to act, and to aid the army
a fugue--though Petya had not the least conception of what a fugue is.
a fur coat girt with a silver belt, and a sable cap jauntily set on one
a future seemed to them to insult his memory. Still more carefully did
a game of boston, and at night she had the newspapers or a new book read
a gentleman in disguise, and who was passing under the arch of the
a gigantic war, and he was glad to be free for a while from the
a girl of fifteen, and a plump rosy-faced boy in a short jacket.
a girl the Rostovs had known from childhood, and who had now become a
a given direction the animals transfer their will to the animals that
a glade in the wood lit up by the moon, or some unmelted snow, or some
a glimpse of her, she seemed still more lovely. She was a charming girl
a glimpse of something blue, of ribbons, black hair, and merry faces.
a gold snuffbox on which was a portrait. In the middle of one of the
a good frame of mind quietly waited till he had had his soup and then
a good match, had drawn his particular attention to her. When he met her
a good one, especially from the strength of conviction with which he
a gray swallow-tail coat with a star on the breast, and evidently still
a great effort he tried to return to life and to see things from their
a great effort she did however go to call on them a few weeks after her
a great man," remarked the vicomte.
a great sin, it is hatred of that vile woman!" almost shrieked the
a green jacket, who was moaning piteously. Another criminal, thin and
a grimace as if to say that everything Dolokhov had said to him and
a group of undertakers, who hid whenever a carriage drove up, waited in
a guard of honor of the Semenov regiment.
a gully that lay in her path. She was an old animal with a gray back and
a gunner, coming up to Tushin.
a half of what they carted, while peasant horses were fetching five
a happiness he had long forgotten and of which he had not even been
a headache began to say good night.
a heart full despair he rode away, continually looking back at the Tsar,
a heavy fire had been opened on him and he was losing men uselessly, and
a high collar, came into the room beaming with good-humored amiable
a hoar frost now turning to dew, but in the valleys it still lay like a
a hollow between two hills near the village of Pratzen, the Russian
a horn, with the signal agreed on in case of a fight.
a horrified expression on his handsome face, Anatole looked at Princess
a host welcomes an honored guest. He reported that his regiment had
a hot temper and said such and such things; we learn that Rousseau was
a hundred times. "Didn't I explain to you that I have come to this
a hurried sign with her eyes, glancing at the sick man's hand and moving
a husband to his wife, and secondly by not allowing himself to suspect.
a jerkin, who stood nearest, sprang forward and snatched it up. Several
a jocular tone. But before he had finished he felt that his jest was
a keg, filled one after another the canteen lids held out to him. The
a kindhearted but unhappy man, and so people had been inclined to avoid
a large udder was attached to the cart behind. A woman with an unweaned
a larger guard had been allotted to that baggage train than to the
a letter addressed in a woman's hand from a bag hanging above the table,
a letter of recommendation he had brought from Pierre had become
a letter; it is a premium for the man who writes a history of Suvorov's
a lid, and a gold snuffbox with the count's portrait on the lid which
a lift out of Moscow. The major-domo to whom these entreaties were
a listless old woman taking no interest in life. But the same blow that
a little later with greater suffering. Timokhin, the red-nosed major of
a little old lady, wearing large bows of ribbon in her cap, who had come
a little on one side of his face under his gray mustaches, especially as
a little smoke."
a little to their right and behind the accountant, crashed to earth with
a living being by the fact that he wills, that is, is conscious of
a logical answer and not at all a reply to them. The answer was: "You'll
a long time and did not recall the past, but as Helene was enjoying
a long time. Then suddenly the grating sound of a harsh voice was heard
a long while specially surprised and delighted him were the women, young
a long, greasy, flowered silk waistcoat next to his sallow, thin bare
a long-drawn groan and then again became silent. Morel, pointing to his
a look at his Frenchman with the dimple on his chin. He was sitting in
a look of complete absent-mindedness, kept rubbing the bridge of his
a look of glad approval on Natasha's face.
a look with Sonya.
a loud voice began boldly demonstrating the necessity of sending
a loud voice of command ordered them to put up the horses. Having done
a loud, monotonous voice began to read out the dispositions for the
a louder tone and more hurriedly than before. During the speech that
a madman's cunning, Makar Alexeevich eyed the Frenchman, raised his
a man calling out to his servant, "Heah! Bwing me my pipe!" It was
a man has to talk, talk, and talk, merely to convince himself that he is
a man he disliked, those new thoughts had come to him which promised him
a man in a frieze coat who held a paper in his hand.
a man no longer young, with snow white hair and brilliant black eyes,
a man of education, who speaks French. He is a Russian seigneur who has
a man should not and cannot forgive and forget," he replied, and though
a man who on a hot day takes a final run before plunging into the water.
a man who values his honor, perhaps too hastily, but we won't go into
a man you are jealous of without cause." Helene raised her voice and
a man."
a mass because the spirit of the army had so fallen that only the mass
a mathematician who ceases to prove in various ways the accuracy of
a meeting with Napoleon. To the joy and pride of the whole army, a
a merry sparkle in his eyes.
a mesalliance by marrying you," and Bilibin smoothed out his forehead.
a mild and attractive personality; and a personal grievance against
a military group of a size able to endure a collision with the warlike
a militiaman and having had rather too much at the pub--heard that
a minute and must go back--but you wrap the fur cloak round her first
a model of perfection because Prince Andrew possessed in the highest
a model of perfection for that kind of composition, but still they were
a moment to Natasha's sleigh and stood on its wing.
a moment. His love for Natasha, Antichrist, Napoleon, the invasion, the
a month ago," Prince Andrew was saying, "and by those who were unable to
a mop, his legs far apart, sprang to the wheel; while Number Two with
a more comprehensible way than Pfuel himself (who was a harsh, bookish
a most dejected state of mind amid Denisov's hospital comrades, who had
a most serious, deferential, and innocent expression.
a movement among the peasants to emigrate to some unknown "warm rivers."
a movement of her hind legs out of the gully, and having disengaged
a musketry fire at the French cavalry that was pursuing our troops. It
a name, and not even a Frenchman, emerges--by what seem the strangest
a need to escape from it by some strange, and usually cruel, action.
a needle than for a rich man to enter the Kingdom of God, are terribly
a new and peculiar pleasure. Sonya, muttering to herself, kept looking
a new man. Where was his spleen, his contempt for life, his
a new white sphinx appeared, standing at the door. And that sphinx had
a nice set of fellows if we were to wait about and so give him a chance
a notebook, hurriedly scribbled something in pencil, tore out the leaf,
a pack he prepared to deal. Rostov submissively unbent the corner of his
a pack of hounds and huntsmen on ahead to find the quarry, mounted his
a page of Napoleon's, a young lad of an old aristocratic French
a pale face went out of the room and into what had been Prince Andrew's
a pale set face, but not at all shamefaced as Pierre expected to find
a pale young officer with a bandaged arm. On seeing the count the
a pang in his heart. But this uneasiness lasted only a moment. He felt
a paper in his hand, and called over all the Russians there, naming
a paper she held in her hand--with the verses Nicholas had written,
a paper that lay before him, did not look up. Without raising his eyes,
a parade does not begin till all the troops are assembled," said the
a parade. We had expected, as I told you, to get at their rear by seven
a party last night, and there out of five ladies three were Roman
a pause, "that you should have suspected me!" He began to laugh. "Well,
a peasant coat and cap. Physically he had changed much during this
a peasant delegate, and the village clerk, who were waiting in the
a peculiar significance to the spectacle, as music does to tableaux
a peculiarly threatening character to everything, amid this vortex of
a physical wound and, strange as it may seem, just as a deep wound may
a picture of a solemn meeting of the lodge presented itself to his mind.
a pistol, confiding to him his intentions of remaining in Joseph
a place by the cannon from where he hoped to see the Emperor who
a place for you somewhere nearer the sun."
a plain farmer: he did not like innovations, especially the English ones
a plateful of biscuits brought him and began throwing them down from
a pleasant smile, respectfully asked his future father-in-law to let him
a plot against him which not only fails to harm him but confirms his
a portrait so characteristic of the original as to be amusing.
a position in the army which seemed to him most attractive. "It is all
a post on the commander in chief's staff. Berg and Boris, having rested
a power, and therefore before speaking about Napoleons, Louis-es, and
a practiced motion of three fingers, taking down another that had been
a present to Belova, nor toys for his wife's nephews. In the early days
a probation; yet we cling to it and think to find happiness in it. "How
a problem that has already been proved. Wolzogen took his place and
a proof of how far away he now was from everything living.
a qu'un pas," * said he. And the whole world for fifty years has been
a queen, and that it exists to perpetuate its race. A botanist notices
a quick eye, and resolution.... And what role is your young monarch
a quite peculiar way. Natasha was so used to this kind of talk with her
a real one, but that they would talk of that later. Princess Mary was
a receipt for such and such stores received. If not, as the demand was
a red ball through the dust, burned and scorched his back intolerably
a red face was dancing the trepak with much spirit and agility.
a regiment would ruin him. Pierre listened to him, scarcely able to
a regiment. I cannot stand it here. Headquarters are so full of Germans
a regimental but a Cossack horse. A judge of horses and a sportsman,
a remarkable crop that year, had been commandeered by the troops and
a reply unnecessary. She smilingly waited. All the time the story was
a representative to the Faceted Palace to recover things that were to be
a reproach to everyone. Now tell me, Count, was it right, was it
a reputation for bravery, and there was something he could not at all
a respectable general who has been overlooked in the distribution of
a retirement into the depths of the country in accordance with precise
a retreat, also good! Why ask me?" said he. "Why, you yourselves know
a reverse act of impoliteness. First he had left a lady before she had
a right spirit within us, strengthen us all in Thy faith, fortify our
a ring, he made the sign of the cross over him with a gesture evidently
a room of your own," and she took the inkstand from Nicholas.
a room with a lamp dimly lit before the icon Theodosia was talking of
a rule to speak out... Well, what answer am I to take? Will you come to
a rupture gazed at her son with terror, but in the obstinacy and
a scene on the very threshold of a dying man's room? Intriguer!" she
a schoolboy on holiday. Everyone--the stagecoach driver, the post-house
a second father...."
a secret to no one but himself. Pierre absolutely disbelieved both the
a sense of disgust the minutest details of this humiliating scene he
a serious expression, but with a smile lurking at the corners of his
a servant who passed out on tiptoe without heeding them. They went into
a servant. From there they passed into another room. A man in strange
a service of prayer. All that Denisov had said was clever and to the
a seven to turn up, gazed at Dolokhov's hands which held the pack. Much
a seventy-pound weight were tied to it. He could run no more. The
a shade of contempt for the youthfulness of this officer and with a hand
a shade of melancholy, evidently relating to the young man's recent loss
a shaggy cap, who was standing sentinel before his tent and had drawn
a shell burst in the midst of that dense throng, killing some and
a short pause. "Besides, would the princess have me? And besides, she is
a shot, and our troops could be seen hurrying to the crossing.
a sincere desire to act on this advice. In the evening he came back to
a single armed enemy remains in my country!" It seemed to Boris that it
a single hair of our heads will fall without His will. And His will is
a sinking heart the movement of Dolokhov's hands. Those broad, reddish
a sleigh drawn by two gray trotting-horses that were bespattering the
a slipper for his left foot. With a childlike smile of embarrassment,
a small bundle of scraps from inside his shirt and gave it to the
a small cloud had scattered some raindrops lightly, sprinkling the road
a small object. Kutuzov seemed not to understand what was expected of
a small party and moved in Denisov's vicinity), the commanders of some
a smell of perfume, and put it to Nesvitski's nose.
a smile that broadened his round face more and more, prepared the
a smile.
a snub nose. His pale waxen face was still freckled and his eyes were
a sofa in a far corner of the room. He closed his eyes and seemed to be
a soldier in a peaked cap and blue overcoat, lit up by the fire, was
a soldier with a sack over his shoulder, stopped, came close up to
a soldier, Aunt, I don't force myself on anyone or refuse anything," he
a soldier, he should be dressed in regulation uniform like the others."
a solemn silence, listening to the words of the President, who held a
a solution of that question.
a sort of presentiment that it would not come off. She is a sterile
a soul he has!"
a special enclosure where there are oats--that this very ram, swelling
a special estrangement from the members of her own family. All of
a special gratuity for his faithful services, well knowing that at that
a special smile in addition to her usual smile as hostess. Looking at
a spectacled doctor was cutting into his muscular brown back.
a stand there behind a wattle fence in a garden thickly overgrown with
a state of alarm and commotion. Natasha was very ill, having, as Marya
a state, live like brothers, render mutual aid and protection one to
a step, and with his whole weight, as if lying down to rest, fell on
a stern air. She wore her holiday shawl, in which she paid calls, and
a still-stronger agitation of mingled joy and fear seized his soul. He
a storm at the square, cut his way in, slashed right and left, how his
a story, heard from her aunt but finished in her own way, which she
a strategist and the conqueror of Napoleon? Had he not seen the
a straw about anyone but those I love; but those I love, I love so that
a stretcher that had been brought. The soldier groaned.
a strong impression on Prince Andrew on the Wednesday, when he
a stuffy room, so a whiff of youthfulness, energy, and confidence of
a subject however trivial it may be, and that there is no subject so
a subject near to her own heart, she could not reconcile herself to the
a submissive tender love for this man who would never understand all
a suffering child and to wring her little hands even with some
a suffocating smell of powder, and Prince Andrew started to one side,
a superior officer perhaps. You have borne arms against us. That's not
a suppressed smile of the joy of life, now when he first entered and
a surgeon who has just performed a difficult operation and admits the
a surprise, so he pretended not to see de Beausset and called Fabvier to
a tail coat, and put on narrow boots with pointed toes, and drive to
a tall, grizzly-haired staff captain, with enormous mustaches and
a taper. He lit it and, distracted by observing those around him, began
a target."
a tender look in her eyes which were veiled by long lashes, thick black
a tender, sly smile. His glance met Malasha's, and the expression of his
a tenth part of his detachment returns I shall thank God," he added as
a terrible one," continued Anna Mikhaylovna, sadly, dropping her voice.
a tete-a-tete talk with the friend of her childhood, Princess Anna
a thing as other people's happiness and peace, and that you are ruining
a third was being helped by an hussar to mount his horse. In front, the
a thousand miles he must imagine that something good awaits him at the
a three days' rest and then, on the sixteenth of September, to go on
a tight place he runs away as quietly as he can, and often thinking to
a tipsy, hoarse voice.
a tool, but also a judge of farming and an end in himself. At first
a toy, seeing the effect these prearranged receptions had on Pierre,
a trace of his former doubts remained in his soul. He firmly believed
a traitor yourself! I know you. I'll flay you all alive!..." And as if
a trembling hand placed a charge in the cannon's mouth. The short,
a true Freemason should be a zealous worker for the state when his aid
a type of face different from that of the men, squeezed his way along;
a vague consciousness that she was not Bonaparte's servant, was really,
a very bad humor, very morose. Be prepared."
a very despicable part in this affair and that he returned to Petersburg
a very fine thoroughbred gray Arab horse with a crimson gold-embroidered
a very gloomy frame of mind in a royal study in the Kremlin, giving
a very small one, it was a matter of great importance, for a man who
a vigorous attack on the orator.
a village elder of mine writes in his reports. She is rich and of good
a violent passion, shouting: "Arnauts!" ("Arnauts" was the Tsarevich's
a voice from behind the fire with a repressed laugh.
a war had there been no English intrigues and no Duke of Oldenburg, and
a war in the personal activity of a single man. Whenever I look at my
a war near Moscow, there would be fighting at the town gates, arms were
a warlike spirit in the people of the capital--that the Emperor should
a week.
a well-fed but not overfat horse that feels himself in harness and grows
a well-to-do homestead, plenty of land, we peasants lived well and our
a whisper and four more Uhlans left the ranks and placed themselves on
a whisper that the prince was sleeping, and hastily closed the door.
a whisper though the music had ceased. "But I am certain that we
a whit worse than you or I." At dinner the prince usually spoke to the
a white belt as well. But when not on duty they will only wear a red
a white cap with a red band was visible, his gray nape sunk between his
a white dressing gown, his wife at the tea table, his wife's carriage,
a white handkerchief on her head from under which loose locks of hair
a white waistcoat so long that it covered his rotund stomach, white
a whole army, the Archduke Ferdinand and the Archduke Karl give no signs
a whole life for the sake of amusing yourself! Amuse yourself with women
a whole month. Napoleon's position is most brilliant. He can either fall
a whole series corresponding to a series of events which brought the
a whole series of ideas he had long laid aside but which were deeply
a whole series of reminiscences arose from those sounds. She sat behind
a wig, put his head out of the door of the antechamber, reported in
a wink, and passed on followed by another, an old man.
a winter campaign and, on the other, the character given to the war
a wish to see her often, but yet always became ill-humored when she
a wolf. The whippers-in no longer set on the hounds, but changed to the
a woman and, like a chained convict, you lose all freedom! And all you
a word and has no real existence. But to understand phenomena man
a word to the questions addressed to him. But on entering Moscow he
a word to you and you... What?" he added with renewed irritation, "I beg
a wounded French general, whom the officers surrounded. Crowds of
a wrathful wrinkle on her rather prominent marble brow. With her
a written report. Toward midnight Bolkhovitinov, having received the
a year in cash, besides running up debts for as much more, which his
a year later they executed those who executed him--also for some reason.
a year: go abroad, take a cure, look out as you wanted to for a German
abandoned Moscow to the enemy.
abandoned by its inhabitants to be burned. They went away each on his
abandoned it and did not welcome the French with bread and salt, nor
abandoned since her marriage. At the rare moments when the old fire
abandoned since the ball. Having finished her morning tea she went to
abandoned the attempt to find the cause in the will of some one man,
abandoning his companions. The others who could do so drove away too,
abandoning the attempt. "I can't prove it to you. You say that
abandoning their belongings and proving by that negative action all
abandonment made an epoch in his life. A novel feeling of anger against
abandonment of Moscow."
abandonment of Smolensk to the enemy. It is pitiable and sad, and
abbe. Another, of young people, was grouped round the beautiful Princess
abdicate, and sent him to the island of Elba, not depriving him of the
abduction had been arranged and the preparations made by Dolokhov a few
able to do so. Without finishing what he had begun to say he made a
able to do.
able to refrain from laughing, stooped as if trying to make out the
able to suppress their laughter.
abodes! You will soon find means of satisfying your needs. Craftsmen
abominable... In my house... horrid girl, hussy! I'm only sorry for her
about M. Dessalles, whom he had brought from abroad to be his son's
about Mademoiselle Bourienne was dreadful. It was untrue to be sure, but
about Nikolenka, twice asked when the last letter had been received from
about Paris and about some changes he meant to make in the Empress'
about Pierre, it was only his unabashed, meditative concentration
about Sergey Kuzmich that interested Prince Vasili just then, and Prince
about Sonya and about the confusion of their affairs, and Nicholas again
about Sonya?"
about a mile and a half off on the opposite heights. Down below, on
about as a cripple, a burden to everybody, for another ten years. It
about before she left home so that the maid could hardly get her hair
about discussing it. Besides the ordinary topics of conversation, Pierre
about four miles away, where Napoleon was then stationed. Beyond Valuevo
about her confinement, and how she dreaded it, and had complained of her
about her native land. When he saw the pretty little Bourienne, Anatole
about her.
about her. But see, those two, though not good-looking, are even more
about here till you get hurt. Be off! Go!" he shouted at the officers.
about him and about his love for him, letting it be understood that he
about him and even speak.
about him interested them greatly. They were telling him something and
about him, but above the level of the wounded men. He evidently wanted a
about him, conscious of having said much that was amiss, he again got
about him, when he had just returned from abroad, and when, if you
about him. He reddened and turned away.
about him. His health was better in the winter, but last spring his
about him: "You have not only saved Russia, you have saved Europe!" they
about him; or, "No, don't, we'd better wait!" He listened to the reports
about his relations and his financial and family affairs, "ma pauvre
about his subordinate Pryanichnikov addressed a question to him.
about in it. All this naked white human flesh, laughing and shrieking,
about it and have not thought about it. Moscow is chiefly busy with
about it he had found that peace and inner harmony only through the
about it, and as the event results from the collective activity of
about it," said the countess.
about me? Let us talk about you," he added after a silence, smiling at
about so!..."
about such a base thing as money, and because their youth was over....
about that, and secondly, if the Russian nobility had that right, the
about that," said Natasha.
about the Preussisch-Eylau battle from Petenka--he took part in it--and
about the army and about the enemy who was already attacking the town,
about the army and the battle, and then the talk went off into merry
about the meaning of the mutations of power in time it can answer
about the new building. He has been reading a little, but now"--Michael
about the old prince and criticized him.
about the rooms fashionably dressed but looking sad and dull. Here, as
about the uniforms they wore, and listened attentively to words spoken
about them. The family separated on the most friendly terms.
about three hundred men.
about to ask their way of an elderly footman who had sprung up as they
about to repeat his blow. Vereshchagin with a cry of horror, covering
about to smile, and once on coming out of the chapel Prince Andrew and
about to tell a good story he put down the cards, leaned back in his
about two minutes, which to Pierre seemed an hour. Suddenly the broad
about was gaiety and women, and as according to his ideas there
about with a smile.
about you!"
about you. We shall see whether he cannot attach you to himself or find
about your mother? It would kill her, that's one thing. And what sort of
about, gave them some further instructions, and was about to dismiss
about, till the boards were withdrawn from under him and he disappeared
about, went across the room to where Pierre was standing and gave him
about.
about. And so there was no one cause for that occurrence, but it had
about. Don't say it--I know. No, do tell me!" and she removed her hand.
about; yet they beat him a plate couture,*(3) and where are we to find
about? Eh? The peasants are rioting, and you can't manage them? You're
above all he knew that he himself was bright and happy. He wanted
above all he remembered his incapacity to think and feel all that time.
above all this the lofty sky, formed the chief subjects of his delirious
above and below him in social standing. Something always drew him toward
above his head and, holding it there for some seconds, suddenly flung it
above the elbow, lay on the velvet edge of the box, while, evidently
above the knee. His neighbor on the other side, who lay motionless some
above the knee. Pierre hurriedly began taking off his right boot also
abreast.
abroad to be initiated into the higher secrets of the order.
abroad, the other is with the Guards, who are starting on their march
abrupt stories of the past, or uttered yet more abrupt and scathing
abruptly and in a bass voice, as self-assured Germans do--it might
abruptly.
abruptly.
abruptly.
absence was expiring, Anatole Kuragin made his appearance in Moscow, and
absence. He, as I wrote you before, has changed very much of late. After
absence. Little Nicholas had been unwell for four days. The coachman who
absence: "High time, my dear, high time! We were all weary of waiting
absent-minded way, which inspired the respect of the onlookers, "Will it
absent-minded. When he rose to go, he took up instead of his own, the
absent-mindedly as if forgetting all he wanted to say or do.
absent-mindedness, some of which had even been invented about him.
absentees, and its peasants were of quite a different character from
absolute truth.
absolutely necessary.
absolutely nothing to weep about yet he was ready to weep. What about?
absorbed all his mental powers. All else was to him only life's
absorbed him and to that question he heard no reply from anyone. The
absorbed the greater part of his vital energy. He did nothing, did
abstained from lifting my arm at the moment that has already passed? To
abstraction, made some remark to Mademoiselle Bourienne and then
absurd! Come, let go I tell you."
abundance, then? And a housewife? And your old parents, are they still
abuse, dreadful words, ejaculated one after the other.
abused each other for their causeless panic.
accent, "for the reasson zat ze Emperor knows zat. He declares in ze
accent.
accent. He was breathless with agitation, his face was red, and when
accept it and fixed the stake himself. Nicholas submitted to him, and at
accept the offer," but before he had time to say it Natasha began again.
accept them as gold, or among those who do not know the nature of
accept this challenge or not. Anatole did not release him, and though
accept this terrible necessity sternly and seriously. It all lies in
accepted Pierre's taking up his residence in the house without
accepted as a great man, still less as Emperor of France. And my father
accepted.
accepted. But I understand that you value what opens up a fresh line,"
accepted? Why was the battle of Borodino fought? There was not the least
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
accessible, we get the conception of a maximum of inevitability and a
accidently."
acclamations which he evidently endured only because it was impossible
accommodation of the visitors and their belongings.
accompanied any reference of hers to the Imperial family, "has declared
accompanied by General Bennigsen and Marquis Paulucci, had gone a second
accompanied by a Cossack with spare horses.
accompanied by adjutants, galloped off in different directions, and
accompanied by two hunt servants.
accompanied them on foot as far as the bridge that could not be crossed,
accompanied them, formed for two months the subject of inexhaustible
accompanies the presence of a betrothed couple. Often when all sitting
accompany him everywhere. The disfavor into which he falls with the
accompany him to the army in Moldavia, to which the old general had
accompany the Emperor; he wanted to sleep, did not know how to ride and
accompanying him to the hall.
accompanying me on his way to the army, so I hope you will allow him
accomplished much for the welfare of mankind."
accomplished without all the preceding wars and without the invasion. If
accomplished.
accord in the evening and tell me everything. Perhaps I spoil her, but
accord with the proclamation of his highest excellency the count, they
accordance with the enemy's movements.
accorded to the lowest hierarchy in her drawing room. But in spite of
according to Thiers it was only eventually found, like a lost pin, by
according to all the rules of the art of fencing. The fencing has
according to my observation he is incapable of feeling respect for our
according to our greater or lesser knowledge of the circumstances in
according to rules at a distance from the French, still regarded many
according to the enemy's movements and the number of men increases and
according to the point of view from which the action is regarded, but
according to the rules of fencing are the historians who have described
account have told a deliberate lie. He began his story meaning to tell
account of the hostile tone the countess could not help adopting toward
account or the number of quarters of flour in any of the endless
account the spirit of the army continually proves incorrect and is in
account yield their position. Mary Hendrikhovna obliged them with the
account. And during the two days of the young man's visit he was
accountant, "but he feels a pain in the pit of his stomach already."
accounts a whole series of innumerable, diverse, and petty events, such
accounts with the horse dealers. When he had finished that business it
accurately as every German has to. How can I explain?... Well, say your
accurately. Here now--wouldn't one of these gentlemen like to ride over
accuse him of that)--had not the same conception of the welfare of
accustomed movement, bent till he touched the ground with his hand, and
accustomed to do everything accurately and not just anyhow, and that he
accustomed to that idea and have become so used to it that the question:
accustomed to win in their battles," he concluded his evidently
accustomed when going into action to think about anything but what would
accustomed, as if all that was taking place and all that had still to be
aches and shrinks at any external irritating touch.
achievement--though they much regretted not having taken Napoleon, or at
aching all over; anyway I shan't be able to keep up."
acknowledge the genius of the Russian commanders when they speak of
acknowledged by all the religions and all the thinkers, but has never
acquaintance Count Willarski, who had introduced him to the lodge in
acquaintance has left, but as seldom happens, no one said anything but
acquaintance of many persons who might prove useful to him, and by
acquaintance with the Polish landowners, preparing for reviews and being
acquaintance," said Pierre. And again, glancing at the stranger's hands,
acquaintance--he wished him simply a brother and a virtuous instructor.
acquaintance. But as soon as Denisov smiled at him Petya brightened
acquaintance. Having ridden up to Nicholas, Ilagin raised his beaver
acquaintances he had made in Moscow formed a current that bore him along
acquaintances was a mixed and indefinite one. In Petersburg they were
acquaintances would have considered rather bad form, but who was liked
acquaintances, but there were no men who could at all vie with the
acquaintances, who had so often dined and danced at his house and had so
acquainted with Prince Andrew Bolkonski, through whom he hoped to obtain
acquiring a trotter of his own, very stylish riding breeches of the
across his path. Rostov put his horse to full gallop to get out of the
across his puffy face, and bowing low and respectfully he took the
across that lofty infinite sky! How was it I did not see that lofty sky
across the bodies and under a terrible fire from the French, he attended
across the field. The borzois bore down on it.... Now they drew close
across the threshing ground to a field leading to the Otradnoe wood.
across two barrels). Davout took the packet and read the inscription.
act basely. But he also knew (or rather felt at the bottom of his heart)
acting: there is war in Russia! The enemy is advancing to destroy
action an hour ago in choosing one direction out of several for his
action and its investigation, and according to the greater or lesser
action did Prince Bagration, still hearing the cannonade in the center,
action he did not understand but which was working well.
action of an insane, intoxicated, or highly excited man appears less
action of every historic character has other more general purposes
action they had been wounded. "Day before yesterday, on the Danube,"
action was that he himself was going to don a uniform and ride at the
action whatever of Denisov's. That was why Petya had blushed and grown
action, and in the company of well-known, elderly, and respected racing
action, as if flying through the air without touching the ground.
action, this section also represented nationalism, which made them still
action--he drew the glove from his shapely white hand, made a sign
action--seeing Pierre, touched his sleeve with her finger, saying:
action.
action? May I speak to him?"
actions and those of others appear.
actions are evidently pitiful and mean, but again an inexplicable chance
actions are incommensurable. And there is no greatness where simplicity,
actions for which they blame him (the Holy Alliance, the restoration of
actions no one could possibly be guilty of. In historic events the rule
actions of the mass but is itself continually controlled. It may seem
actions that seem to us less free the better we understand their cause.
actions!"
active and clearer than ever, but they acted apart from his will. Most
active brotherly love among men, which Joseph Alexeevich had revealed to
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
activities of 160,000 Russians and French--all their passions, desires,
activity controls people's actions, for that view is not confirmed by
activity in 1812, never once swerving by word or deed from Borodino to
activity in which no one could be justified or guilty--a realm of
activity is considered by the historians of culture to be the cause or
activity of all those who opposed the tendency that then prevailed in
activity of men and their historical movements, just as such a
activity of some dozen people who did not burn houses, practice
activity of the millions who migrate, burn houses, abandon agriculture,
activity of those men as representing the activity of the whole nation.
activity was so unswervingly directed to a single aim; and it would be
activity, Tushin did not experience the slightest unpleasant sense of
activity, and guide him in planning his future actions. Just the same is
activity, nor even by a combination of the two as historians have
activity, quite opposed to the spiritual world in which till now she
activity, whirring, and chiming in the higher spheres.
actors and actresses were robbed.
actresses--with the chief of whom, Mademoiselle George, he was said to
acts and way of life--were glad of Pierre's return because they knew
actual historic event such as the campaign of 1812 for instance, they
actually did. He remained in Moscow till October, letting the troops
actuated by a real desire for peace.
acute angle not only because the French advanced between our two armies;
acute attacks was driven inwards and never left him for a moment.
adapting her in his imagination to all the conditions of married life:
added hurriedly. "No, don't be angry, but promise! I have asked Golitsyn
added quickly, and as if his words were always waiting ready in his
added quickly, glancing at Natasha and noticing on her face curiosity as
added quickly.
added stinginess.
added to the huntsman.
added with studied carelessness as if it had only just occurred to him,
added, "Let the Emperor but say the word and we'll sacrifice everything
added, "Look at it, young man."
added, addressing Natasha.
added, addressing Prince Vasili, and without waiting for an answer she
added, looking smilingly at the little girl who clung to her father.
added, seeing that his servant had entered... "and success."
added, turning to Vera, "You'll never understand it, because you've
added, turning to her hostess. "You wrote that it was to be quite a
added.
added.
added.
added.
added. "Is it a holiday?"
added. Countess Helene Bezukhova had suddenly died of that terrible
added: "I am glad; really, dear, I am very glad."
added: "I need good officers myself, need them myself!"
added: "Oh yes; take the battle of Friedland, which I think the count
addicted), he regarded even this not as a defect but as a sign of
adding the priest's clerical title, as if she had no opinion of her own
address him. "They call me 'little falcon' in the regiment. How is one
address. "This letter would be of great use to you."
addressed an edifying exhortation to them. He imagined to himself
addressed his remarks chiefly to the good-natured battalion commander.
addressed to him. Alpatych moved forward and next time the official came
addressed yourself first to me. In that case you would not have obliged
addressed, though he was sorry for the wounded, resolutely refused,
addressing Natasha directly.
addressing Natasha. "Let him tell you whether I have told the truth."
addressing Pierre rapidly between her sobs. "The fire broke out
addressing Pierre with a sad smile. "No distinctions made nowadays....
addressing first one, then another. He said he would not have been
addressing her with the careless tone of habitual tenderness natural to
addressing the first violin:
adhered to," said he, drumming on the table with his bony fingers. "What
adjoining room.
adjutant and the minister. "Away from the smell of powder, they
adjutant by his elaborate courtesy appeared to wish to ward off any
adjutant galloped up with an assurance that the Russians would be routed
adjutant he ordered him to bring down the two battalions of the Sixth
adjutant on duty to take in his name, but received an ironical look and
adjutant returned half an hour later with the news that the commander
adjutant somewhere and can snap your fingers when it is said 'There are
adjutant to Raevski's Redoubt. His horse lagged behind the adjutant's
adjutant was heard. Natasha sat up.
adjutant whom he so hated.
adjutant, dismounting, lifted the soldier under the arms to place him on
adjutant, he addressed Bolkonski.
adjutant, or really let the matter drop, was the question that worried
adjutant.
adjutant.
adjutants general to Petersburg and plunged into an open struggle with
adjutants general were there because they always accompanied the
adjutants whom he knew. The adjutant looked angrily at him, evidently
adjutants, as they passed Rostov going or coming. And Nicholas, who had
adjutants, in his camlet coat, as he jolted on his horse with a convoy
administration was devoutly preserved among the serfs. "He was a
administrative, and financial, from the Council of State down to the
administrator finds the chief reward of his labor and efforts. While the
administrators) that he controlled the external actions of Moscow's
admirable young woman and you always liked her, but now suddenly you
admiration at the Milky Way.
admiration for his wife.
admired his regiment, rejoiced in it, and that his whole mind was
admiring his partner, himself, and the fine outlines of his legs in
admit that what happens to them may also have purposes beyond their ken,
admit the persons who would be coming that evening, but not to let them
admitted that he had been to blame, did not lift his eyes from the
admitted that they did not know what upheld the earth, but knew there
admitted to the Emperor. But it was impossible to smarten oneself up
admitting of no rejoinder and raising her eyebrows. "Two such charming
admonishingly, turning to Pierre.
adopt toward Moscow. In his imagination he appointed days for assemblies
adopted the tone of one who has suffered a great disappointment, like a
adopted to lure Napoleon into the depths of Russia, and this plan some
adopting a quiet tone, discussed the whole matter.
adorer and courtier of anyone but himself, Napoleon. "Are the horses
adorer.
adorning his speech with terms of endearment and with folk sayings which
adroitness and Italian play-acting! Do you know the tale about him and
advance on Moscow, nor did Alexander and the Russian commanders then
advance, and the next day his army began to cross the Niemen.
advance, he set out with post horses for Voronezh.
advance. The Emperor intended to join the army personally in a few days'
advanced beyond the village went back; but as though in revenge for this
advanced his horse's chest against Balashev, put his hand to his saber,
advanced into Prussia sooner, then things would have taken a different
advanced line under the fire of the French and had there twice fired
advanced noiselessly, only occasionally a jingling of the artillery
advanced to Rostov, having bared his head while still at a distance.
advancing by forced marches toward Znaim, which lay sixty-six miles off
advancing from Russia, without losing his army as Mack had done at Ulm.
advancing on Petersburg or on Nizhni-Novgorod, or retiring by a more
advancing to attack the French cavalry that was coming to meet them.
advancing to the same heights as Morand's and Gibrard's divisions, which
advancing."
advantage of it!"
advantage of the order to collect provisions, took also horses,
advantage. What receptions we had in Poland! What dinners and balls!
advantageous background to his elegant and tactful wife. Pierre during
advantageous style, like a well-garnished joint of roast beef on a hot
advantageous to attack the enemy's latter wing especially if we occupy
advantageously, as long as no one asks what is the security behind them.
advantages are far less than in the infantry. Just consider my own
advantages of any suggestions can be seen only at the moment of trial.
advantages of attacking that what had been discussed at the council--the
advantages of drawing nearer to its supplies caused the army to turn
adventure at Bogucharovo, rallied him on having gone to look for hay
advice about Petya's education or Nicholas' service. The old countess
advice and help! He is a most absent-minded and absurd fellow, but he
advice expressed the opinion that his severity to his wife was wrong
advice of Moscow doctors would be good for her.
advice. Don't be angry with me for exercising an old woman's privilege."
advice; but no, you go and blurt it all straight out before the
advised me not to avoid intercourse with the Petersburg Brothers, but
advised me to hold fast by brother A. Though I am unworthy, much was
advisers!" said he. "If we had listened to them all we should not have
advocating the very thing the Emperor had hinted at the day before,
aerial living sound, the only reply is a disconnected buzzing from
affair as follows:
affair had come to an actual duel). "You know, Count, it is much more
affair of the war went on independently of them, as it had to go:
affair public. You are offended at being put on duty a bit, but why not
affair without knowing for certain how many there are. I like to work
affair, and about some ladies they both knew.
affair, and like everyone in similar cases, did not yet believe that the
affairs cheered Sonya.
affairs of his regiment and was considerate and kind to his men and
affairs of honor and had twice regained his commission.
affairs of which she never spoke to anyone. On ordinary days, after
affairs or a definite explanation of the meaning of the force producing
affairs reluctantly, left everything to his generals, and while awaiting
affairs, but a remote sympathy not dulled by petty interests; a moral
affairs, into which we had been drawn by the Peace of Tilsit. "We ought
affairs, took advantage of the armistice to get leave to visit Denisov
affairs, which called for some decisive action. Their town house and
affairs. He did not know at all how much he had, what his debts amounted
affairs?" concluded his father. "But it troubles me. I don't sleep
affect the essence of the matter but, like the hands of a clock detached
affect them and they did not feel it necessary to foment their grief.
affectation of indifference. For a long time they continued to look at
affectation. Princess Mary ran out of the room to fetch Mary Bogdanovna.
affectation. They went silently to table. The footmen drew back the
affected her very strongly. She was sure he would speak soft, tender
affected languor and indolence. He now looked like a man who has time
affected their mutual relations but does not account for the submission
affection for Kuragin--were sitting at tea in Dolokhov's front room.
affection for him.
affectionate as it was--expressed a sense of his own superiority.
affectionate eyes, now came up and took his arm. Before he looked round
affectionate letters to your parents, and if you think you may be
affectionate to her: you're younger than she. When he comes, he'll find
affectionately.
affianced lover.
affinity are only distinguished from one another in that they are
affirmatively.) "When you hear a knock at the door, you will uncover
afforded him pleasure, and he went quickly up to the prisoners, who
affording him a special kind of pleasure and a consciousness of
affording opportunities to undermine a rival and obtain an extra cross
affronted, was finishing with these words:
afraid of Marya Dmitrievna that she always let her have costumes at a
afraid of being late for Matins. Hastily washing, and meekly putting on
afraid of grieving either.
afraid of him."
afraid of wasting his store of anger, he left Alpatych and went rapidly
afraid she might find some means of consolation, he returned and trying
afraid to speak out.
afraid you might think that she does not like you."
afraid."
after 1807, he continued to serve in the Pavlograd regiment, in which he
after Natasha down the passage into the sitting room with flushed face
after Natasha's singing he had proposed to a little girl of fifteen
after a battle have lost it is what we say; and according to that it is
after a moment's pause.
after a short deliberation they agreed to advise his appointment as
after a twenty-mile march, were kept mending and cleaning all night long
after all their experience of previous battles--when after one tenth of
after being wounded and the flower of eternal, unfettered love had
after calling her so in his presence did Natasha notice it herself.
after dinner Pierre left Moscow. When changing horses that night
after giving the letters to Sonya, went to Marya Dmitrievna who was
after he had been hit. His face had the same swollen pallor as the faces
after her candle was out lay open-eyed and motionless, gazing at the
after her meal. "What are you saying about the government? I don't
after her!" said Anna Mikhaylovna, wishing to show her sympathy for
after him (the most insulting expression a cavalryman can address to a
after himself and, in passing through to the drawing room, stopped a
after his death, surprising everyone by the immense total of small
after his father. And he's hand in glove with Speranski, writing some
after his fright. He was that glad!"
after his long privations. At posting stations, at inns, and in the
after his reception by the Austrians, to speak if not in Russian
after his talk with Prince Andrew.
after losing half their men were retreating in disorderly confused
after rain, and the air was unusually pure. The smoke did not hang low
after staying but a short time with the Tsar went to see the grand
after stumbling a few staggering steps right up to the saber, he sank
after supper at Prince Vasili's, when he spoke those words he had found
after the engagement of Andrew and Natasha and the death of Joseph
after the many subsequent speeches, but to animate it the crowd needed a
after the murder of the duc there was one martyr more in heaven and one
after the other.
after the review and we will do what is possible."
after the soup the prince became more genial.
after the storm; drops still continued to fall, but vertically now, and
after they had received a letter from Nicholas telling of his meeting
after vainly hunting all over Moscow, his valet informed him that Prince
after visiting his estates had involuntarily found himself in a leading
after yesterday's march, were sitting, clean and neatly dressed, at a
after-dinner nap he gave orders to saddle Mars, an extremely vicious
afterwards acquired, he could not have had a better or more profound
afterwards and wanted to comfort you, but do you know, I felt ashamed
afterwards. Nor did she cry when he was gone; but for several days she
again and grew unconscious and delirious from the agony. He kept asking
again and remained for a while with the Ismaylov regiment.
again assumed its anxious expression.
again become what she had been at the ball.
again began speaking about indifferent matters, about Sergey Kuzmich,
again began to laugh. She evidently felt unable to look at him
again completely borne away into this strange senseless world--so remote
again drawn out in a thin line the musketeers were descending the hill,
again every time she shook herself and moved toward the wood where she
again getting in front of the first line as he had done when the Horse
again glanced at Natasha, and a still-deeper flush suffused his face and
again glanced at Prince Andrew. As often occurs with old men, it was
again have risen had not the prince still held her fast, "though he
again he flushed. "I give you my word of honor it shan't occur again,
again he told himself that it was impossible, that there would be
again he twisted the screw with the stripped thread, and again it turned
again hemmed in.
again in Voronezh the impression she made on him was not merely pleasing
again it sounded as if someone were walking on detonators and exploding
again joined her. They began talking in whispers, but their talk broke
again looked at the princess. She still sat motionless with a look of
again ordering their armies to kill one another, but just then Napoleon
again pressed Pierre's hand, and leaned his elbows on the table in a
again quarreled with Bonaparte and had made constitutions and unmade
again raised, and those who had run to look at the cannon ran back
again recalled all the details of the victory and his own calm courage
again regained consciousness, and while drinking tea once more recalled
again shook with a deep ringing laugh, the laugh of one who always eats
again something in his face twitched--"That is just why I do not begin,
again struck up, the count and countess kissed, and the guests, leaving
again when Alexander came out. The interview had lasted an hour and
again when he passed to another group whose center was the abbe.
again! Perhaps you think you have invented a novelty? You have been
again!" On one side of the table sat Anatole, Dolokhov, Nesvitski,
again, and only much later did Pierre learn that he lost an arm that
again, as soon as all turned toward him, excused himself and said no
again, be magnanimous, and so on?... Yes, that would be very noble, but
again, but instead of the band a choir began singing a cantata composed
again, drank a great deal, and came once more in touch with the bachelor
again, evidently wishing to avoid the inquiring looks and questions
again, passing the militiamen.
again, under Helene's influence, what had seemed terrible now seemed
again--another week past," she thought, recalling that she had been here
again--though she could hear Dunyasha coming--called her in the deep
again.
again.
again. "Oh, what a terrible thing is fear, and how shamefully I yielded
again. At last four men in uniforms and sashes emerged from the
again. Probably it had never had an owner, and it still belonged to
again. She tried to think of something else and to pray, but could do
again; I woke you up! Mavra Kuzminichna has sent me: they have brought
again; another, rubbing some dry clay between his palms, polished
against Napoleon.
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
against anyone.
against each other.
against his legs.
against his wishes, could only be arranged at Otradnoe.
against it and forcing its way in. Something not human--death--was
against it," the prince said to himself, "but he must be worthy of her.
against one another, you two, and I'll look on!"
against something. The Cossacks and Dolokhov galloped after Petya into
against the French?"
against the enemy of the human race. Anna Pavlovna received Pierre with
against the fence to save himself from falling.
against the muslin of the curtain.
against the palings with its face smeared with soot.
against the pillow.
against the power once appointed, should be absolutely regarded as an
against the senator who was introducing this set and narrow attitude
against the sovereign's wishes and who had removed the Grand Duke and
against the wall, and the second of the three sisters rushed out
against the worsening of their position they were all particularly
against their stretchers and gazing intently, as if trying to comprehend
against which she had argued, but divested of everything superfluous
against which they had hurt themselves. Ney, who had had a corps of ten
against whom he stumbled, seized his thin neck with his hands and,
aged wisdom what they could understand, he told them of the golden
agent by which nitrogen, oxygen, manure, and plow were made
ages. Rostov, leaning his head on both hands, sat at the table which
aggrandizement antinational. I should have associated my son in the
aggrandizement of the great man. It is not Napoleon who prepares himself
aggression. In fact, the ambassador, as he himself has declared, was
aggrieved look on her face, hastily got into the coach to rearrange the
agility with which he capered about on his light feet, Marya Dmitrievna
agitated by the encounter to be able to talk of the affair calmly. In
agitated him and evoked his sympathy. In men Rostov could not bear to
agitated voice, evidently picturing vividly to himself from Prince
agitated voice. "You know some decision must be come to. What is going
agitated.
agitating conversation, and added: "I sent for you to keep you with me."
agitation and obscurity. He fell asleep.
agitation whether going into action now, with a single division, would
agitation. But the more he tried to hide it the more clearly--clearer
aglow with dazzling light--as if he had only awaited this to begin the
ago have asked her what to do and have done whatever she told me, and
ago this suddenly happened." She understood those words to mean that he
ago to have punished him," he thought. And giving her no further reply,
ago. Since then she had not seen him. Before Sonya and her mother, if
ago."
agree on, and if a seller is unable to obtain a fair price he will be
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
agree," or for variety, "I too am of that opinion," and so on had even a
agree."
agreeable and interesting work. His face expressed more satisfaction
agreed or disagreed and was satisfied or not with the arrangements. Next
agreed to sign. In this letter, availing himself of permission given him
agreed with him, though he understood Prince Andrew's thoughts somewhat
agreement co-operate to confirm that power. Chance forms the characters
agriculture, or slay their fellow creatures.
ague.
ahead of it, when it turns frequently the wave ahead of it also turns
aid of his servant, and not looking at Pierre. With a pair of felt boots
aid. "I have nothing to do with him and I only wanted to see the
aide-de-camp and was duly conducted to pay his respects to the aunt and
aide-de-camp of Kutuzov's and will be here tonight."
aide-de-camp with a respectful politeness evidently relating to the
aide-de-camp, "dat one liffs after de sird stroke."
aide-de-camp, a most brilliant position. He is so well known, so much
aide-de-camp, and sat down in the lady's chair, placing his huge hands
aide-de-camp, had subscribed a large sum toward the expenses. Boris
aide-de-camp, received Bolkonski and informed him that the Emperor,
aide-de-camp.
aide-de-camp.
aides-de-camp at Bennigsen's country house.
aides-de-camp in attendance that a dinner and ball should be given for
aides-de-camp, diplomatic officials, and a large number of foreigners,
aim it is necessary that you should add your efforts and should, if
aim of your alliance with England? What has she given you?" he continued
aim remaining for him was to effect a junction with the forces that were
aim was to shorten those marches. To that end Kutuzov's activity was
aim was to show General Weyrother--who had read his dispositions with as
aim was to unite them, though uniting the armies was no advantage if we
aim--to establish peace in Europe on firm foundations--has now decided
aime'?" he kept repeating to himself. And when he had said it for the
aiming at becoming commander in chief, unexpectedly employed his energy
aiming, now counting the charges, now giving orders about replacing dead
aims, and feels with his whole being that he can now do or abstain from
air and in silence, nodded with approval or shook his head dubiously,
air of a conqueror.
air of a happy conqueror who has attained the object of his desires.
air of escaping from the ills of life with which unhappy people look at
air of importance that showed that she felt she quite knew what she was
air she considered indispensable for a girl on such an occasion. But,
air was admitted at that terrible door. This officer's audience lasted
air with joy.
air, and disobeying orders. The moral hesitation which decided the fate
air, cawing and noisily flapping their wings. Together with that sound
air, went out into the deserted streets lit by the clear light of dawn.
air. "A man told me to give you this-" and she handed Natasha a letter.
akimbo, began stamping his cold feet rapidly and deftly on the spot
akin to them did he begin boldly to manage his serfs, that is, to
alarm lest something should have happened to the child while he was
alarm on seeing her mistress.
alarm with their abdomens raised, and ready to die in defense of the
alarm, awaiting her sentence) that the rain had ceased and they must go
alarm, supposing these words to mean that the young count was displeased
alarmed at the feeling she was aware of in herself. "And could we ever
album, making him write in it, did not allow him to allude to the past,
album. Boris sketched two trees in the album and wrote: "Rustic trees,
alcohol, and sounds of voices and shouting in the distance.
alert than he had done the day before. Only his eyes gleamed feverishly
alien to him and brimful of joys unknown to him, a different world,
alight in her. She was completely transformed and from a plain girl had
alight, and let her pass into the house before him. Old Tikhon, wearing
alighted from his horse and whose big body was jammed against the
alike, felt that the commander did not himself know what to do, and this
alive and suffering from a burning, lacerating pain in his head.
alive and wishing to live--nor you either."
alive could understand or explain.
alive! We have a house of our own in Moscow, but it's a long way from
alive, had suddenly been wrenched out and everything had collapsed
alive, that is not my fault, so I must live out my life as best I can
alive. And then such a death... without friends and without consolation!
alive. How sorry I am that he died, and how glad I am that he is alive
all Frenchmen unable to imagine anything sentimental without a reference
all His mercy to one who is blind, or who shuts his eyes that he may not
all I have to say to you. The count is very, very ill, and you must not
all I have to tell you. Happy he who has ears to hear. Good-by, my dear
all about it and understand it all," he said. "You behaved as becomes
all alone--for Papa is always busy, and I... well, you know what poor
all as we can imagine or relate it. And so he did not like Zdrzhinski's
all at once for a moment of glory, of triumph over men, of love from men
all attempts to attain it were most shamefully baffled--then this last
all be done properly, according to rule. Look here, put it under the
all because we want to ape the foolish enthusiasm of those Muscovites,"
all been given and were now being executed.
all by himself. Pierre stopped laughing, got up, went farther away from
all causes. But there are laws directing events, and some of these laws
all communication with men of that stamp and to leave here as soon as
all connected, while now they had all tumbled to pieces. Only senseless
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
all die for him gladly! Is it not so, gentlemen? Perhaps I am not saying
all done casually in a moment of anger, of illness, and was afterwards
all else. He rose and went to the door to bolt and lock it. Everything
all falsehood, except that infinite sky. There is nothing, nothing, but
all felt it to be so.
all felt that this was really a council of war. The conversations all
all follow that the march was the cause of it.
all for his relations was the fact that there was still a possibility of
all four and rushing to bark at the crows that sat on the carrion. The
all gazing eagerly at the icon. As soon as the tired chanters, who were
all go.... We're not Germans!"
all gone, and your only thought is not to let him get away!' And that's
all her attention. He seemed to her kind, brave, determined, manly, and
all her clothes in Petersburg and that heaven knew what she would have
all his affairs, and while looking with pleasure at the enormous table
all his attempts to talk sentimentally, evidently not listening to what
all his belongings to his neighbor, and doubts on which he tried not to
all his own simple relations with her. Urged on by Ramballe's questions
all hope of a junction with Buxhowden. If Kutuzov decided to retreat
all hugging him, and the serfs, men and maids, flocked into the room,
all humanity.
all in a way that seemed to say: "We, you and I, understand what they
all in due order.
all in the East, and in regard to Bonaparte the only thing is to have
all its detail the night at Bald Hills before he had the last stroke,
all known wars.
all like a girl in love and parted from her affianced husband. She was
all like the conduct of a great man!"
all looked so at him, and flattered by this general admiration he would
all loved, Schmidt, you expose to a bullet, and then you congratulate
all men seemed like those soldiers, seeking refuge from life: some in
all nonsense... I said then that it was not in order," voices were heard
all not managed to present at the right moment, though she had so long
all of them stared with naive, childlike curiosity at Pierre's white hat
all on one plan, for hospitals, schools, and almshouses, which were soon
all out later on!" But the later on never came.
all over with mud and had smeared his face by wiping it with his sleeve.
all poetry and old wives' talk--all that doing good to one's neighbor!
all pressing toward the one spot, could sighs, groans, and the shuffling
all quite forgetting the danger and all regard for self-preservation, he
all remained as of old, the inner relations of all these people had
all right my staying a day with you?" And not waiting for a reply he
all right on a loaded cart..."
all right. Only I haven't the least idea what I am to do; I wanted to
all rubbish! I saw chivalry and flags of truce in 1805; they humbugged
all rules of logic, without premises, deductions, or conclusions, and in
all running back somewhere, and I shall run with them, and it, death, is
all saw Pierre--or someone extraordinarily like him--in a coachman's
all she knew or not; she seemed to feel that before those luminous eyes
all sides awaiting a word from him.
all sides logs were being hewn, new houses built, and old, charred ones
all sincerity--not as a future Mason but as an honest man: have you
all stared in timid bewilderment at the strange, long-haired commander
all stupid; but I know this: an illegitimate son cannot inherit... un
all surprised at something when there was nothing to be surprised at.
all that I see? I have tried, and have always found that they too in the
all that had happened to him, and above all vividly remembered the
all that the peasants had has been eaten up. I myself will remain in
all that turmoil of the world at large, where he did not know his right
all that would be required of him.
all the Club members and to all the Club guests, and finally to Count
all the Russians of that day desired--to drive the French out of Russia
all the army methods and had infantry, artillery, staffs, and the
all the comforts of cleanliness and all the refinements of life, Prince
all the figures on it: the sun, the moon, a hammer, a plumb line, a
all the historians are: freedom, equality, enlightenment, progress,
all the men, old and young, in uniform and evening dress, and all the
all the old feminine arts. But as soon as the prince had gone her face
all the past as a preparation for events that subsequently occur,
all the peasants had assembled at the barn by the princess' order and
all the pleasures of life here. If we were in Vienna it would be easy,
all the regiment knew for a rogue.
all the same never be like those Petersburg young men."
all the same, to the next house which seemed to them better. Many of
all the same?" she thought, and did not reply.
all the soldiers' remarks related to the two young ones. Every face bore
all the strange new facts he had learned; but on reaching Orel he
all the time in this same place at this table, chose and placed cards,
all the walls of the room: it was her own heart, sinking with alarm and
all the wrongs she had done him. When they prayed for those who love us,
all their heavy baggage, their artillery, and half their men, and fled,
all there is the well-known conversation after the council, between the
all these brilliant young men.
all these dreams melted and merged into the chaos and darkness of
all these schemes, crossings, and interminglings appear to be a true
all they could to destroy themselves. From the time they turned onto
all this and not feel sad? But 'the maggot gnaws the cabbage, yet dies
all this and therefore waited calmly for what would happen, with more
all this is not right, it's not right! You may take offense or not but I
all this time in Pierre's soul, revealing much to him and causing him
all this, rose and approached the princess. He seemed unable to bear the
all those faces the same expression of consciousness of the solemnity
all through the dinner, replied that just as "all roads lead to Rome,"
all to blame that my face has the misfortune to displease you. However,"
all to him and, will you believe it, placed us in front of the icons.
all understood that the war was not ended.
all up today."
all up."
all was still. The whole sun appeared on the horizon and disappeared
all went away silently and with drooping heads.
all were seated again, turned with his kindly smile to Rostov.
all who knew them, including Anatole himself, respected him more than
all would have been well."
all you have been doing on your estates."
all your valuables."
all! But probably he knows it well enough and is only pretending. Shall
all!" he added in a tone of command.
all, and without promising to help me?" thought Pierre, rising with
all, like children of my own, as you know."
all--she herself, Mamma, and Sonya--should be as well dressed as
all. You'll take me, won't you?" he said, turning to Dolokhov.
all."
all...."
all...." said he.
alleged that he had been the first to leave the range of fire, they
allies--the Poles. There are eighty thousand of them and they fight like
allow anyone to put a spoke in his wheel," observed Anna Pavlovna.
allow him a moment's peace! Here, Pierre, tell them your opinion," said
allow him something for his maintenance, all my trouble will have been
allow himself to think that he was doing good to others for virtue's
allowed him to express his friendship more freely. She knew that she
allowed no respite and no peace, and those who had seemed to pity
allowed to go on so and that it is the duty of all decent men to
allowed to pass by special permission. The eyes of all the soldiers
allured him. "A splendid wife, children, a good pack of hounds, a
ally. We shall therefore confidently await the moment when the Imperial
almond-shaped eyes at the ground before her. Evidently she was aware
almost all honest-hearted young men do, that is, as a possible wife,
almost at a trot through the deserted streets toward the Yauza bridge to
almost at the middle of the table. Facing them sat Pierre, beside Prince
almost been jealous on his wife's account, was the butt of this set.
almost before he had righted himself in his saddle he saw that he would
almost frightened, eyes as she passed him.
almost happy tears.
almost hot, no wind could be felt. The birches with their sticky green
almost impossible to distinguish anything. Moreover, his whole attention
almost killed the countess, this second blow, restored Natasha to life.
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
almost the same smile, expressing unseemly thoughts about the women.
almost there!"
almost to death. And for a long time, despite the feverish haste with
almshouse and the lunatic asylum, could be seen some people in white
alone all my life, and I love her so that I cannot imagine life without
alone and involuntarily witnessed what was taking place on the other two
alone by herself, it was incomprehensible. "What is it? What was that
alone during the retreat of the French said that all our maneuvers are
alone foresaw, was his heart's one desire.
alone have any influence with my father, and now and then can save him
alone kept the conversation going, now relating the latest town news,
alone knew what their life meant to them, and so they neither understood
alone with Helene in the little drawing room where they were sitting.
alone with her, so Rostov, now that he had attained what he had longed
alone without any allies, it might perhaps have been a long time before
alone, and Anatole had taken her hand and said in a tender voice:
alone, but also a love of strife that had moved him in the dispute.
alone, even when they did not wish it. When Prince Andrew spoke (he
alone, in which there was something more significant than in the general
alone--the countess had many visitors I do not like. I ate and drank
alone. Kutuzov is removed and he is appointed... "Well and then?" asked
along Kobelnitz and Sokolnitz behind the ponds that are there, while we,
along beside her while the coach still moved on.
along in his galoshes as far as the door and stopped and looked
along planks, while others stood about doing nothing.
along the Ryazan road and nearer to its supplies. Subsequently the
along the entire line outside and above it and especially in the woods
along the highroad in the midst of a young copse in which were a few fir
along the highroad past the avenue leading to Bald Hills. Heat and
along the lines.
along the most disadvantageous and dangerous path, where the old scent
along the old Smolensk road, the destruction of the invading army of
along the path that led to the back porch. He knew Sonya would pass
along the ranks shouting. The train drivers and orderlies harnessed and
along the road and field leading to the Otradnoe covert.
along the road from Krems to Olmutz, to unite with the troops arriving
along the road to Posen, Thorn, Danzig, and Konigsberg. At each of these
along the road, trying not to miss anything of importance.
along them a network of shadows from the bare old lime trees fell on the
along to the colonel,' I said. He starts yelling, and suddenly there
along, holding him up under the arms, and he screamed. When they got
along..." said he, glancing wearily round, and he stepped onto the porch
alongside, and blew our way, the maid called out 'Fire!' and we rushed
aloud to him and being friends with Princess Mary. Mademoiselle
alphabet, she so longed to pour her own knowledge quickly and easily
already been choosing a career for three months, and had not decided
already been concluded, he admitted to the Emperor that the merit of
already begun to disconcert him. Now this world disconcerted him no
already being reaped, made his calculations as to the sowing and the
already breaking. As for Natasha, for a long while Nicholas wondered and
already commanded the squadron he had taken over from Denisov.
already founded; all that remained was to organize it.
already lost him. He bent over him and, as his sister had taught him,
already on the friendliest terms--galloped back over abominable roads,
already opening a door.
already passed. Through the terrible and deafening roar of those voices,
already prevails in consequence of its activity. The government has
already seated in the drawing room. The count took the gentlemen into
already seen the young master, and, before he had reached the drawing
already some five officers. Mary Hendrikhovna, a plump little blonde
already taken were perishing of hunger.
already up and astir. The smoke of the campfires, into which they were
already, Count? Well then, good-by! Oh, but the cushion for the
already," he said, evidently trying to entertain a visitor with whom he
also be given in the answer. So he wrote Le russe Besuhof and adding
also because they would all receive handsome presents for the holidays.
also danced with him, Anatole said nothing when they happened to be by
also distinguished by the fact that she always presented some new and
also entering the regiment. On returning home Petya announced resolutely
also felt depressed and constrained with his visitor, "I am only
also has joy.
also have the pleasure of a more detailed chat with you."
also in French:
also in Petersburg and from the chancellor, Rumyantsev, who, for other
also intending to shout at him, but on recognizing him he nodded.
also of his object, and why he considered it better to risk his life
also remembered his difficulty in procuring a conveyance and horses, and
also small scratch groups of foot and horse, and groups of peasants and
also talking in low tones and wearing ball dresses. The mirrors on the
also that Murat's mistake would very soon be discovered, proved
also the Abbe Morio. Do you know that profound thinker? He has been
also to the soldiers. Looking at their boots he several times shook his
also tried to rise but fell back, his sabretache having become entangled
also wished to see him. He did not know whom to answer, and for a few
also, and the chief culprit was Alexander I, the same man who according
also, as he said, to let the lassies enjoy themselves for the last time.
also," she went on, gaining a little strength; "he is nice... there are
altar with her. How and when this would be he did not know, he did not
altered and unexpectedly rapturous and tender expression on Dolokhov's
altered in shape by its pressure on the table, now at her still more
alternated with despair. Several times he addressed a prayer to God
alternately or together, dead, wounded, alive, frightened, or
always a fraud? There is no spring, no sun, no happiness! Look at those
always a right way of doing things," replied the governor's wife.
always afraid, came into her room with a peculiarly restless and malign
always be my daughters' first confidante, and that if Nicholas, with his
always better to "bow too low than not bow low enough." So the soldiers,
always carefully rolled it up again with his left hand, as if it were
always cheerful, satisfied, and serene. What wouldn't I give to be like
always closely followed by Ilyin, rode along the side of the road
always comes as a surprise, when the sun hangs low and gives more heat
always ended with these words.) "He is an excellent man!"
always exist and always have existed. I feel that beyond me and above me
always feel at their trial, perplexity as to why these questions were
always felt between herself and other men. She did not know how it was
always had lady companions, but who they were and what they were like
always happens in such cases rivalry sprang up as to which should get
always happens, was met by representatives of the other. The members of
always hide it?" said the voice of the man who was stretching himself,
always high-pitched, mournful, delicate, and almost feminine, and his
always in love with someone," he thought of Sonya and Natasha. But he
always in one direction, humming with whispers and talk and the sound of
always liable to do of late--"I can only say that if there are any
always occupied his mind--about life and death, and chiefly about death.
always ran away; you remember cette chere Annette!"
always remain the same backs and foreheads."
always shall be independent; but to go against his will and arouse his
always shall, and I want nothing more."
always sitting in the same attitude.
always solved questions that seemed to him perplexing by deciding that
always some with Denisov and Rostov, sat in their shirt sleeves.
always stick to mother truth. It's not right!"
always surrounded by the same decks, masts, and rigging of his ship, so
always the first thing that tells me all is well. When I was driving
always thwash scoundwels... and I'll tell the Empewo'... Ice..." he
always to sacrifice oneself for love meant not to love anyone, not
always transferred to the men whom we have noticed, it happens that the
always used to bring a special kind of gingerbread from his visit to the
always well disposed toward him, and Kutuzov suggested that he should
always, always anxious! Especially just at this age, so dangerous both
always, but beneath her sympathy for her brother, Pierre noticed her
always, thank God, been my children's friend and had their full
am I to do if I love her?" he thought, and he involuntarily groaned,
am finding out.... Only do let me into the very... into the chief... I
am fond of the officers, and I fancy the men also like me. I should be
am giving you the grain to keep you here--that is not true. On the
am in this condition." She looked down at her expanded figure and in the
am madly, madly, in love with you! Is it my fault that you are
am only happy to have had the opportunity of making your acquaintance.
am only surprised at your opinion of Bonaparte. You may laugh as much as
am really frantic with vexation; forgive my writing boldly. It is clear
am sitting on a barrel and working in a dirty shed?" the expression of
am sorry for that," he went on.
am sure your mother will be grateful to me. What a charming girl she is,
am used to suffering."
am very glad to have made your acquaintance. It's queer," he added after
am! What is happening to me? How happy I am!" said Pierre to himself.
amazed Pierre.
amazed at his own words.
amazed at their own boldness, feared every minute to be surrounded
amazed the French themselves. Rostov was horrified to hear later that
amazement appeared on the Emperor's face. He took Balashev by the arm
ambassador was there, and a foreign prince of the blood who had of
ambassadors, ministers, and various generals, whom Peronskaya diligently
ambition, some in cards, some in framing laws, some in women, some in
ambitious activity.
ambulance station on the field of Borodino. His feverish state and the
ambush in a ditch, now attacked the French unexpectedly. Timokhin, armed
ami, mais pas pour vous, pas pour vous. *(2) Only a hobbledehoy could
amiabilities to Mademoiselle Bourienne.
amiable, good-natured, and genuinely grateful to Pierre for saving his
amid every occupation, was now replaced, not by another question or by a
amid people of whom he was weary had gone, instantly every thought of
amid the smoke of their campfires, the greater part of whom were
amid the smoke that screened it. On the sloping descent to the Dnieper
amid the square masses of troops standing motionless as if turned to
among his conductors. He heard those around him disputing in whispers
among his generals and marshals at the rear of his suite. Those sent to
among others awaiting him in his reception room there was a Frenchman
among the Russian people. But no one at the time foresaw (what now seems
among the birches was an unpleasant reminder of winter. On entering the
among the men and a dispute about something important and clever. Now
among the rows of new-mown hay which he had taken no notice of amid the
among them and could not utter a word. He hugged the first soldier who
among them the staff officer and Zherkov, who had been twice sent to
among them. But those who surrendered, while remaining in the same
among them; but this was told chiefly to introduce Rostopchin's witty
among themselves, tried to keep near the commander in chief (whose
among these men twenty thousand are doomed to die, and they wonder at my
among which figured the names of Tuchkov, Bagration, and Kutaysov. In
among whom was Pierre. On the twenty-second of October that party was
amount as the others.
amounted to cruelty. Had he forced her to prostrate herself to the
ample means to avert this fresh calamity. Remember that you have still
amputated, he recognized Anatole Kuragin. Men were supporting him in
amuse himself in this way," he added in Russian--but pronouncing the
amuses himself in this sensible manner! And he was said to be so well
amusing recollections of things that had never occurred. Mademoiselle
amusing to give away dresses and ribbons to the maids, but when that was
amusing, or caressing women and children. There were many such men both
an Englishman is undoubtedly correct. An Italian is self-assured because
an Order of St. George at his buttonhole and a plain forage cap set
an absence of cause. However inaccessible to us may be the cause of the
an action committed a second ago I must still recognize it as not
an activity unknown to him, which was his life. But his life, as he
an actually existing phenomenon.
an acute angle--we led the French on to Smolensk. But we withdrew at an
an adept at French.
an adjutant galloped up with a message from the commander of the
an adjutant to the dragoons with orders to attack the French. But this
an advantageous peace, or in case of a refusal make a menacing move on
an agitated and serious face. As soon as he saw Natasha his face
an aim had been simply a search for God, and suddenly in his captivity
an allowance of ten thousand rubles. He had a dim perception of the
an ambush, that they should not be seen and might be able to strike an
an amphitheater, extended before him in the clear rarefied atmosphere.
an amusement--almost a pastime," said Pierre. "For instance, he is
an angelic being! Ah, Boris, Boris!"--she paused. "And how I pity her
an angry buzzing can sometimes be heard. Here and there a couple of
an anteroom, and a hall, which were familiar to him, into a long low
an apoplectic flush over neck and nape as old people do.
an arc in the direction where most provisions were to be found and where
an armchair beside her.
an armed frontier and a firm policy, and he will never dare to cross the
an army corps much weaker than the army entrusted to you. It would seem
an army enters Bohemia. Napoleon I issues a decree and an army enters
an army of a million and only a miracle could save Russia.
an army of fifteen thousand men has been ordered to blow up the bridge
an assiduous and modest mien, and stooping over the outspread map
an atmosphere."
an attack. But when they had marched for about an hour in the dense fog,
an audience showed embarrassment and servility; the faces of those of
an eager and respectful look. "How is your health?"
an ear to Julie's mouth, was Boris' handsome smoothly brushed head. He
an earth saturated by autumn rains. The verdure had thickened and its
an end of it in each hand, went out into the street.
an end of it! And how do you, a young man and a young hussar, how do you
an enormous mouth, hardly refraining from laughing, "I felt like dying
an entirely new life quite unlike the old one, he expected everything
an escort, on the pretext of inspecting the army and the scene of the
an evident desire to say all he knew gave confused answers, merely
an evident effort to be affectionate, he said with his lips only (his
an example to other Russians, went to Moscow thinking only of their own
an example, walked about among the ranks, but he soon became convinced
an excruciating pain in his arm, for which he could find no satisfactory
an exemplary officer of twenty-two years' service, who had never been
an expert. I have just been talking to Dmitri Onufrich" (the family
an explosion, a whistle of splinters as from a breaking window frame,
an eye on me! Very well then! Get along with you!' So he writes the
an hour's delay they at last moved on, descending the hill. The fog that
an immense fortune. The will has not yet been opened. I know you well
an impenetrable veil between us and the Eternal? Let us rather confine
an incessant movement and buzz of voices. The chief magnates sat on
an incomprehensible, supernatural force--a miracle--one cannot admit
an inconvenience resulting from marrying two husbands at the same time,
an inexhaustible number of pretty young women, married and unmarried,
an inn in the village which the officers frequented. Rostov rode up to
an instance in history of the aim of an historical personage being so
an instance of a bluestocking being carried away by affairs of the
an intimacy with a young foreign prince. When she returned to Petersburg
an invasion of Russia and never did so. Today he ordered such and such
an object of observation, is subject to certain laws, and man submits to
an officer and men began to run toward it. A general who was standing
an officer and ought to be warmed. A Russian officer who had come up
an officer of the Semenov regiment, a notorious gambler and duelist, who
an officer who struck Prince Andrew by his humiliated and frightened
an old maid who lived with the Melyukovs, during supper.
an old maiden lady, an inmate of the house, and many others such as
an opinion about everything), but above all at his capacity for work and
an opinion contrary to the general one. Meeting Helene at a ball she
an opportunity of effacing it. Having heard that Count Mamonov was
an orderly officer, the staff officer on duty, riding a fine bobtailed
an orderly's charge, and he felt the blood rush to his heart with a
an orderly, or a townsman was carried through the waves of infantry; and
an ordinary point of view are insane, to test, as it were, his personal
an organ in it on which some rugs were piled, and in one corner stood
an unacknowledged sense of the guilt of that desire paralyzed his will.
an unconsciously happy smile. Occasionally he rose and walked about the
an unpleasant feeling of depression in his heart. Something vague and
an upland of his about a mile away which he usually kept for himself and
analyze her at all. She is enchanting, but what makes her so I don't
analyzing the properties of manure, before entering into the debit and
ancestor of the Bolkonskis. Prince Andrew, looking again at that
ancient capital, the New Jerusalem, receives her Christ"--he placed a
ancient times has occupied the best human minds and from most ancient
and "Uncle" flew, reckless of where and how they went, seeing only the
and "Uncle's" red Rugay two rivals he had never yet had a chance of
and "Uncle's" red borzoi, straining and curving its back, caught up
and "ladykins" as he called the cocottes. More than once in their
and 1809, gaining strength and growing. In 1811 the group of people that
and Alexander were called, was such that when Napoleon declared war on
and Bennigsen some diamonds and a hundred thousand rubles, others also
and Bory's life is only just beginning...."
and Charles I are executed by their people? To this question historians
and Count Ilya Rostov became more and more moved, more glass was
and Count Rostov, glancing angrily at the author who went on reading his
and Denisov stayed on at the Club till late, listening to the gypsies
and Denisov's, unable to make out what it all meant.
and Dolokhov saw through the gloom that Petya was bending toward him and
and Dolokhov went along the pavement. When they reached the gate
and Dolokhov were at that time notorious among the rakes and scapegraces
and Dolokhov, and anger, and honor--it's all nonsense... but this is
and Dolokhov--who was now again an officer in the Semenov regiment. The
and Dunyasha. I saw him lying on a bed," said she, making a gesture with
and Gerasim heard him pacing restlessly from one corner to another and
and Gospels. Let us not seek to penetrate what mysteries they contain;
and Hessian boots could be seen through the windows, laughing and
and I accept your offer. I am glad. And my husband... I hope... but it
and I am beginning to experience it. But the Guards, Rapp, the Guards
and I am old. I should like to help you as far as lies in my power."
and I am rich.... Yes, that's the only reason.... Yes, were it not for
and I don't yet see my chessboard clearly. Go!..."
and I have come to do so today. I never experienced anything like it
and I shall leave the children... in an excellent position."
and I will tell Papa!" said Sonya resolutely.
and I wished really to stab his bare breast with the sword I held to it.
and I'll have you tried, and you'll be hanged! Say from whom you had
and Ilya Ivanych. I don't think Ilya drives anyone except the Tsar!"
and Julie were saying to one another. The governess kept looking round
and Kamenski the latter was preferred. The general comes to us,
and Kutuzov was left with only his own weak and exhausted forces.
and Kutuzov with his eagle nose and puffy face appeared in the doorway.
and Lieutenant Telyanin, a small officer of the same squadron, entered
and Louis XVI was executed because they considered him a criminal, and
and Madame Kwudener, and wead Ecka'tshausen and the bwethwen. Oh, they
and Madame Schoss, who had not yet undressed, went out with him. Only
and Malo-Yaroslavets, and make conjectures as to what would have
and Mamma has sent for me to go and dine at the Apraksins'. Read the
and Murat, humiliated and anxious to expiate his fault, had at once
and Natasha rested her head on the arm of her chair and closed her eyes,
and Natasha sat down beside a little chess table with Sonya, thereby
and Natasha, and about albums and fancywork with Sonya. Sometimes the
and Nicholas' letter to the Rostovs, keeping the appeal, the bulletin,
and Petya took off their wraps and sat down on the sofa. Petya, leaning
and Petya--whom she had drawn into the business of packing--press on the
and Pfuel says that is what constitutes its strength; Toll proposes
and Pierre especially, for he reminded him of all the painful moments of
and Pierre ran down the slope stumbling over the dead and wounded who,
and Preussisch-Eylau, was concentrated near Bartenstein. It was awaiting
and Prince Andrew began telling him the story of Bluebeard, but fell
and Prince Andrew saw that Hippolyte, of whom--he had to admit--he had
and Prince Andrew understood the insignificance of the people with whom
and Princess Mary long remembered the dying creak of that wheel, which
and Princess Mary looked at one another in silence, and the longer they
and Princess Mary's helpless attempts to protect them were their
and Prussia. And there too he killed a great many. In Russia there
and Rostopchin had said to them in French: "Rentrez en vousmemes; entrez
and Sardinian emigre; Wolzogen--and many others. Though these men had
and So-and-so did and said this and that, and that Helene had great
and Sonya, and hastened to inquire after "Mamma's" health.
and Sonya. She valued the company of those to whom she could come
and Tikhon a hero too, and that it would be shameful for him to leave
and Toll that the movement that had miscarried should be executed next
and Uvarov's on the right flank against the French, were actions
and a Moscow burgher called Karpushka Chigirin, "who--having been
and a Swiss who had formerly been tutor at the Kuragins'. All maintained
and a ball flew whistling over the heads of the hussar squadron. The
and a bullet whizzing high up in the mist with a plaintive sound passed
and a campfire was built before it. They beat the tattoo, called the
and a castle with a park surrounded by the waters of the confluence of
and a certain kind of civilization of a small corner of the world called
and a cocked hat standing apart from his suite in front of his tent on
and a fear and anxiety of which she did not understand the cause. She
and a feeling that was both joyful and painful agitated him and made him
and a few days later left to rejoin his regiment.
and a few here and there with powdered hair and in Russian kaftans.
and a foreboding that Moscow would be taken, was present in Russian
and a half feet, and this did duty for bedsteads and couches. The roof
and a hope of glory. "And should there be nothing left but to die?" he
and a particularly happy light in his eyes, "you see, brother..."
and a plan. These he put down beside him--not letting anyone read them
and a present consciousness of the future importance of what was
and a quarter away and would receive Balashev and conduct him to his
and a short, long-haired, young man in a black garment had rushed back
and a string of pearls round her thick red neck--which Natasha knew was
and a third day's march, and at last, on the first of September when
and a thousandth corporal and private also refused, there would have
and a trial balloon that was to go up next day. The balloon was not yet
and about Natasha and Prince Andrew; and again everything seemed to him
and about which I shall know nothing. I shall not exist..."
and above all to himself, a secret of which he himself had been unaware.
and absurd husband of a distinguished wife, a clever crank who did
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
and accouterments put in order.
and accused of being a French "spyer" (so Count Rostopchin had told the
and acquaintances, invitations, and social occupations were so numerous
and acquired the serenity that comes with years. People talked about
and added in a whisper so that her son should not hear, "Wish me good
and addressed him in French.
and admit historical events which are exceptions to the theory.
and advanced during the night. It was an autumn night with dark purple
and advantages of service under members of the Imperial family.
and affected sympathy of which indifference and even irony could be
and affronts matter? I love and forgive everybody now."
and after a short pause added: "Yes, it's Scythian warfare. It's all
and after a short pause he added: "And I behaved badly today. You
and after his sick father had had to flee to Moscow, abandoning to
and again at the arm, and on his face a feeble, piteous smile appeared,
and again fixed her eyes on the corner of the stove. She had been in
and again he felt something terrible and monstrous rising in his soul.
and again proceeded to gallop along the line, penetrating farther and
and again repeated his long-drawn cry, "A-tu!" (This call and the
and again went up to the cot.
and agitation, like that of the whole crowd, reached the highest pitch
and aides-de-camp. Berthier, his chief of staff, dropped behind to
and alien to himself--and had returned to his former peasant habits.
and all the institutions of state and church that have been built up on
and all this was unconsciously accepted from her with insufficient
and all those idiotic societies!" Natasha declared of the very affairs
and also very few domestic or literate serfs, and in the lives of the
and am able to show my readiness to serve you," said Rostov, rising. "Go
and among them at the Rostovs' with whom he had renewed acquaintance
and amused as he was when he put on the little icon. "Did he believe?
and amused himself at his expense without letting the other feel it.
and amusingly. "And why not marry her if she really has so much money?
and an epileptic fit on Bennigsen's. But at the critical moment the
and an infinite series of causes.
and an officer gave the word "Fire!" This was followed by two whistling
and an officer's saber with a sword knot. The Don horse he was riding
and animated. Natasha was in a state of rapturous excitement such as she
and annoyance of the countess, had for some unaccountable reason found
and answered at the same instant. He was alone in the middle of a field.
and anxiety and felt mortified by it. She blushed for him, grew still
and anxiety that his name should not be smirched now seemed not merely
and anxiety they threw their burden of sorrow on one another and
and appeal, which he would obtain from Count Rostopchin.
and are connected with me in time cannot seem to me as free as the life
and are keen at guessing their master's baser impulses, especially those
and are no good to anyone." She stood by her mother's side and exchanged
and arguments proves to him that the complete freedom of which he is
and arouse his energy, and Barclay, feeling less free than ever under
and artillery pass by and go forward and then Generals Bagration and
and artillerymen's bonfires. To the left, not far from the farthest
and as is always the case, not a single column reached its place at the
and as soon as they reached the top of the incline turned round and
and as they went along he was told allegories of the toils of his
and ask for money he had no right to after giving his word of honor, was
and ask him, I!... does that satisfy you?"
and asked how much he owed.
and asked when he was leaving. Though Boris had come intentionally to
and asking them all to be seated began:
and asking whether he would like to be an hussar. He took the boy on
and assimilated all the diverse impressions of life? How did they all
and assurance, as if he were adding every time: "You know I am
and at a short distance merged into the dull, moist veil of mist.
and at him, about some pair of boots he had thrown into the bushes.
and at once went to meet the major.
and at the beginning of August showed that they expected this. Those who
and at the grand balls was divided into several circles, each with its
and at the head of a regiment--he fell as a hero, worthy of his father
and at the people in it. Round a long table covered with black sat some
and at the same instant plumped into something. Some militiamen who were
and at the same time punished a miscreant."
and at the very instant he died, having made an effort, he awoke.
and attaches this Frenchwoman to himself? He doesn't understand, so I
and avoiding their eyes.
and awkwardly over the parquet floor of the reception room, not knowing
and back, and back again and again in an instant.
and back, galloped strenuously forward, and with a dashing salute reined
and backward did not improve or alter the position of the troops. All
and bad people, and with a tranquil conscience carried his head high.
and baggage trains started.
and baking bread with rolled-up sleeves, and cooking; or frightening,
and barked fingers just where they have grown, whether from my back or
and battens, and led him into one of them. In the darkness some twenty
and be delighted with me!" And suddenly his bosom heaved with sobs and
and be essential for its purposes, but in its application to history, as
and beautiful building. I woke up. O Lord, great Architect of Nature,
and because many complaints were made against the troops, who, taking
and because you yourself don't love him."
and becoming more animated and talking more rapidly: "what if a letter
and began calling often and spending whole days at the Rostovs'. It
and began dancing round the room with it.
and began deliberately to examine the whole battlefield extended before
and began replaiting it. Her long, thin, practiced fingers rapidly
and began singing. Prince Andrew stood by a window talking to the ladies
and began to cry.
and began to lay them out for a game of patience.
and began to speak in a voice in which for the first time new deep
and began to speak.
and began to speak. A throng of officers surrounded him. He looked
and began to understand its different branches, it was the serf who
and began translating for him, hardly able to keep pace with Pfuel, who
and begrudge nothing."
and behind the outposts and told him that his wish to be presented to
and being, as a malcontent, much interested in what was occurring in
and bent over him.
and besides this, nine men in every thousand for the militia. Everywhere
and best human attributes--love, poetry, tenderness, and philosophic
and better than the feelings which the beautiful eyes of a young man can
and bewilderment. In contrast to his former reticent taciturnity
and bind Karp. The men obediently came out of the crowd and began taking
and blocked every path of activity. Yet he had to live and to find
and blocking the streets and alleys, while endless masses of troops were
and both halves of the door noiselessly opened. It entered, and it was
and both parents gladly accepted this offer, for they saw their daughter
and bounded forward, followed at the distance of a couple of feet by all
and bowed his head, and his eye lit up with a mild and apparently ironic
and brighter with an old man's mild smile, which drew the corners of his
and broke it up. In this action for the first time trophies were taken:
and brought to have his boots mended with, went up to the sick man and
and brought with them, Ramballe invited Pierre to share his dinner, and
and burdened with such riches--to what temptations he will be exposed!
and buried her face in the pillow.
and burst into such a loud, ringing fit of laughter that even the prim
and bustle now, my job's done and I'm lying down--capitally!" He could
and butterflies knock awkwardly against the walls of the hive in their
and by his sedate deliberate walk he wished to appear a grown-up man.
and by what right he allowed himself to claim quarters that were already
and called him "Nicholas."
and calling the nurse began giving the medicine. The child screamed
and came out to the porch in his lilac silk dressing gown. In the yard
and can't, for I know no other. But think, Andrew: for a young society
and captured by the French, and hid in the forests without unsaddling,
and carefully placed her in an easy chair.
and carrying his hat under his arm. He stopped and looked about him,
and carrying muskets, knapsacks, and enormous sacks, stood in front
and ceased talking when Vera entered. Sonya and Natasha looked at Vera
and certainty of his vocation, which radiated from his whole being (and
and chair a canon * we are ready to make of ourselves--and not to obtain
and character but alike in the social circle to which they belonged.
and cheeks, and nearly all had red, swollen and festering eyes.
and chief action of the battle of Borodino was already lost on the
and children." The nobleman smote his breast. "We will all arise, every
and clearer than violin or horn--played its own part, and before it had
and cleverness, and knew of something else that would decide the
and clumsy gestures possessed such calmness and self-assurance; he
and coiffure, and admired the beauty of the shoulders and the pearls.
and coldly cruel expression that had struck Pierre that morning on the
and come back in an hour and tell me in his presence: yes or no. I know
and come into line with the rest of the forces.
and come to us without fear. Inhabitants, return with confidence to your
and comfortable horse, Viflyanka, which was turning gray, like himself.
and comforting thoughts, memories, and imaginings that came to him.
and coming up to Prince Andrew took him along to the other end of the
and commendation are essential, just as grease is necessary to wheels
and commotion. Every day thousands of men wounded at Borodino were
and compelled to act under conditions of war unlike anything that had
and complacently seated himself on the sofa.
and completeness amid the conditions of court life and far from the
and comprehensible path, but hoped to do so.
and confiding affection for his sister. He wrote that he had never loved
and connections he belonged to the groups old and honored guests, and
and conscious of his proximity she experienced a frightened sense of
and consciousness of the justice of our cause, exactly expressed by that
and consequently he was made the buffoon of all the Cossacks and hussars
and consequently the rapidity and justice of his intonation had an
and continual expectation of some good, always in front of him but never
and contrary to them because quite different subjects were talked about
and convinced himself that the man was indeed a liberal, but of views
and corn as of his own, and few landowners had their crops sown
and could even sit up on the beds if one drew close to the table.
and could get nothing done. He kept criticizing his own work, as he
and could not imagine.
and cried "Hurrah!" Bagration also rose and shouted "Hurrah!" in exactly
and cries, and smelled blood and powder, and a feeling of horror and
and criticize his camp in his absence. From this short interview with
and cross by its three bridges, advancing to the same heights as
and crossed the room with him, unconsciously clearing a path seven
and crowding on the dam that was being attacked that if Raevski did lead
and curly blue-black hair, wearing a red shawl, ran out with a sable
and cut up by rough-shod hoofs, the marks of which were visible in the
and cut you down, I should not hesitate an instant, but should do it.'
and daggers, with trousers tucked inside their high boots and with belts
and decided in his own mind that all was as it should be, and that in
and decreed. Wherever the ship may go, the rush of water which neither
and definitely understood without any sense of contradiction, although
and delirium drew him back into its domain. The soft whispering voice
and destroy one another never is expressed in the account of the
and destroy their army--it is quite clear that the battle of Tarutino,
and did her hair, her ill-chosen words, and her jealousy--she was
and did not evince the least surprise at seeing them there.
and did not go wrong in the side streets that led to the Povarskoy.
and did not know what to do. The servants ran noisily about the house
and did not once mount a horse to inspect his entrenchments.... We shall
and did not raise it again till the heavy coach, rumbling, shaking and
and diplomatic combinations, laws, and treaties.
and discuss its possibility, but only to prove his own rectitude and
and disheveled, beat and turned the heavy feather bed for the third
and disrespectfully at Kozlovski.
and dissipated life, because besides the hours he spent at the Rostovs'
and distinguee, and it is on you that his relations' choice has fallen.
and distraught and now unnaturally animated and enterprising.
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
and do not now exist for those for whom the purpose of a dinner is the
and do not, desire war, that I have waged war only against the false
and don't forget to give him the Rostovs' invitation. They ask him to
and donned his cap.
and down before it.
and down from the border of one patch to another, at the edge of the
and down the battery under fire as calmly as if he were on a boulevard,
and down the room. He understood what she was weeping about, but could
and dozens of carts with wounded men began at the invitation of the
and draw it downwards, or absent-mindedly hold out his wrinkled,
and drawing up again next moment when her face broke into a smile of
and dreaminess, but in Princess Mary that very sorrow which revealed
and drew it downwards as if wishing to ascertain whether it was firmly
and drew out his pocketbook.
and drive away. The conversation was on the chief topic of the day: the
and drive home to supper with Denisov, Natasha, and Sonya, and will
and dropped it again behind her. Prince Andrew recognized her without
and drove from Letashovka (a village three and a half miles from
and drowsy Kutuzov, who reluctantly played the part of chairman and
and eager crowd down the hill at their disordered foe.
and eight feet long. At one end of the trench, steps were cut out and
and embarrassed, but sat on because he simply could not get up and take
and emerging from the forest in pitch darkness they descended into the
and emotion, as if justifying themselves: "Well, whatever he may have
and entered his shop. On seeing the soldiers he was about to shout at
and entering the military service, my dear. And there was a place
and enthusiastic appearance that made her glad.
and equality of citizenship, and all these ideas Napoleon has retained
and especially by the sound of the bullets.
and especially in the color of her slender but graceful and muscular
and especially since he had joined the active army and taken part in
and especially the deep and tender sorrow expressed in all her features
and especially to catch the incendiaries who, according to the general
and even Napoleon himself with his staff, were not on the far side of
and even an emperor. Before leaving, Napoleon showed favor to the
and even in those blasphemous words thou hast just uttered!" pronounced
and even she, was. This contrast weighed on and yet cheered him while
and even..." Count Rostopchin paused, feeling that he had reached the
and everybody at last and had spoken such pathetic words to the son, or
and everybody had to serve, he took a post under his father in the
and everyone rushed forward in one direction. Petya was being pressed so
and everything waiting for him in the Archives Department! Isn't that
and examined him with attentive curiosity. The Cossack was dead, but the
and expensive as possible, and gaily and contentedly galloped along the
and explained to them his intentions and wishes. He told them that steps
and express his thoughts like that when awake.
and face, which the doctors attributed to eating this root. But in spite
and falsehood termed military craft. The habits of the military class
and fear. All were still. Pierre took his hands from his eyes. Dolokhov
and fear. Only recently, talking with one of Platov's Cossack officers,
and feared her.
and fell on his hands. The others outstripped him.
and felt that only in the regiment would everything again become clear
and felt their feelings. What they would have said and what they would
and fencing from the village.
and fetch a fowl, please, a cock, and you, Misha, bring me some oats."
and fields to the left, in the valleys and on the summits of the high
and fifteen grooms in the stables, the same expensive presents and
and figures, but they all seemed to him equally meaningless.
and finally wrote him, but nothing would induce him to consent. I swear
and fire the bridge."
and firmly that if he was not allowed to enter the service he would
and flask, and swung his heavy person easily into the saddle.
and fling me into a hole that I may not stink under their noses, and new
and flourishing the whip.
and following the battle fresh changes were made in the staff.
and following them others, consider this flank march to be the profound
and footmen, who, with loud shouts, dragged his sleighs up to one of the
and for a long time he paced up and down the room, reflecting on his
and for some time his frightened, restless eyes could not find the baby.
and for the issue of the whole battle. "But be that what it may,"
and forests of fir and birch, which were partly cut down. The house lay
and fought for the water and drank it down to the mud.
and foul. Black robber bees are swiftly and stealthily prowling about
and found all sorts of reasons for this decision. A whole series of
and found her neither attractive nor amiable. Not that Natasha liked
and free from dependence on cause.
and freedom from all prearranged plans. Besides being advocates of bold
and freezing, surrendered in crowds, and when (as the historians relate)
and frequent blushes she told him she was very sorry about their past
and fresh rosy cheeks where soft down was just beginning to show--when
and from the consequent presence there of an indefinite, conditional,
and from the fact that some people Pierre knew as the meekest and
and frowning, now suddenly shrugging his shoulders and wincing, and now
and galleries began clapping and shouting with all their might, and the
and galloped back to the place where he had seen the Emperor, but there
and galloped off. But no sooner had he left Bagration than his courage
and gave the order to do what he regarded as useless and harmful--gave
and gentlemen than Rostov had ever expected to see him.
and geology, which directly contradict its assumptions.
and girdles tightened, were taking leave of those remaining behind.
and giving battle with a probability of losing a quarter of his army,
and giving it the rein leaped lightly over. Only a little earth crumbled
and giving orders, engrossed him. The burning of Smolensk and its
and giving orders, for which everyone came to her, occupied her all day.
and glad sparkle. Prince Andrew had grown thinner, paler, and more
and gladly regarded the ever-changing, eternally great, unfathomable,
and gloomy faces grew ever paler and gloomier.
and glory to whoever captures him,' he says. This is what his cajolery
and go into bondage! I dare say! 'I'll give you grain, indeed!' she
and got used to the idea that no one would oblige him to go anywhere
and grant us Thy salvation; make the hearts of Thy servants to rejoice
and gratefully of the merits of her son and the brilliant career on
and green swallow-tail coat.
and grew confused. "Then a patrol arrived and all the men--all those who
and grieved had he chosen not to see them. These different
and groans mingled in a general hubbub, then the firing died down.
and groups with horses, easily recognizable as artillery.
and grumpy German sarcasm he was pitiable, with his hair smoothly
and gun carriages, the tramp of horses, the crack of whips, shouts, the
and had a shivering fit. Marya Dmitrievna put a pillow under her head,
and had any effect on the people is another question) had been simply
and had brought from there these connections with the Napoleonic
and had his handsome face not worn such an expression of good-humored
and had insulted him, and only now had he at last succeeded in
and had made desperate efforts to combat it. Since the intimacy of
and had no understanding at all of the people he supposed himself to
and had not seen fit to recognize him. But now that Kutuzov had spoken
and had remained away till he was twenty. When he returned to Moscow
and had rooms for the house serfs and apartments for visitors. Whole
and had taken him to Vienna and given him the more serious commissions.
and hair, without looking at her eyes, with such contempt that the
and handed him a sodden envelope.
and handed him two letters.
and handsome moving toward her as she entered the room. Prince Vasili
and handsome young man and woman for one another. And this human feeling
and handsome, with his hand bandaged. In the study were four gentlemen
and happiness the victory had afforded him had been now left in the
and happiness... "I should wish for nothing else, nothing, if only I
and happy as he had been in perfecting his inner man, to which he had
and happy confusion glanced occasionally at her, and tried to think what
and happy he became. That dreadful question, "What for?" which had
and happy with him. I only wish you were all as happy as I am."
and hardly able to restrain his jerky movements, and from the way he
and harvested so early and so well, or got so good a return, as did
and haste, Pierre concluded that it was all absolutely necessary.
and hastened to reassure him.
and have another look and then come back to me."
and having crossed herself went down, thinking neither of her gown and
and having done this he rode back.
and having kissed his wife's hand he went back to his study.
and having picked up one of the wealthiest heiresses in Russia, he grew
and having written a letter to the Emperor Alexander in which he
and he applied for advice to the holy brethren of the Society of Jesus,
and he approved of her intention. Under guise of a present for the
and he asked where the old prince was and whether he was expected back
and he described women so alluringly that Pierre listened to him with
and he did believe, and felt a joyful sense of comfort, regeneration,
and he drew Pierre's arm downwards, "it is simply a misunderstanding. I
and he drew attention to the bullets whistling, singing, and hissing
and he experienced tenfold the joy of living, as he had not done since
and he felt a nervous shudder run down his spine. But the mere thought
and he felt ashamed of himself. Then he vividly pictured to himself
and he gave way to an old man's sob.
and he gazed at the opposite bank. Then he became absorbed in a map laid
and he has refused. Be the kindhearted man you always were," she said,
and he hastened to escape from these memories and to find some work as
and he often thought about her. But he never thought about her as he
and he patted her cheek. "It will drive all the nonsense out of your
and he raised his foot to the stirrup.
and he saw above him the remote, lofty, and everlasting sky. He knew it
and he shrank from beginning, afraid of exposing to possible ridicule
and he spoke of it enthusiastically. The Emperor's speech had been
and he turned inquiringly to Balashev, and evidently this thought turned
and he turned to go.
and he was horrified at the thought of the order he had to issue. But
and he was quietly telling me something about the teaching of our order,
and he would marry her. So her future shaped itself in Mademoiselle
and health. All who talked to her, and at each word saw her bright smile
and healthy, without a dozen officers making up to each of them; women,
and hearing something quite different. Formerly he had appeared to be
and held back the crowd that was pushing behind them.
and held out her hand with a glance of gentle inquiry. Mademoiselle
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
and her brother. For herself she did not care where she remained or what
and her face was tearful.
and her friend, and how impossible it was for her to be anything like as
and her head flung back, stood in the hall doorway looking with a stern,
and her short, downy, smiling lip lifted when she began to speak just as
and her son. She had opportunities of sending her letters to the Grand
and her tall cap with its light-blue ribbons, and busily filled his
and her words at her first gracious reception of him, and then that same
and here he noticed a stir and signs of preparation for battle; having
and hid it under his waistcoat.
and high boots, at an open desk on which lay abacus and some bundles of
and himself drove away by a back gate; now declared that he would
and his Bald Hills and his whole life fell to pieces. Princess Mary says
and his action more due to the law of inevitability, to someone who
and his court to leave the army; that the mere presence of the Emperor
and his eyebrows were lifted, then his eyebrows would descend and
and his face wore a strained look as if he found it difficult to master
and his fatherland. To the great regret of myself and of the whole army
and his forehead became smooth again, he bowed his head respectfully,
and his friend's. He tried equally to avoid thinking about his wife,
and his hair pomaded.
and his jaw trembled, shivering feverishly. He was placed on "Matvevna,"
and his old nurse, and asked them to kiss for him "dear Sonya, whom he
and his one division, and even then Mortier slips through your fingers!
and his own. The blue-gray bandy legged dog ran merrily along the side
and his party had been on the move. All day long he had been watching
and his presence there, Natasha had resolved to see him. She did not
and his round face seemed rounder and pleasanter than ever.
and his son's expected any day. You'll have to make his acquaintance.
and his son."
and his thoughts followed one another with extraordinary clearness and
and his wife, who were not dancing, came up to them.
and historical causes of the action, and the simpler the action we are
and history itself understand alike this relation between necessity and
and holding out the letter.
and hopes that had been on the point of awakening within her and were
and horror he did not himself understand, aroused by the sight of that
and horses) had it not occurred to Rostov to flourish his whip before
and horses, from the little puffs of smoke on the enemy's side (always
and hostility, which occurred most frequently during Countess Mary's
and how badly the latter would fare now, especially if the Essen corps
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and hurried away. It was when Pierre (wearing the coachman's coat which
and hurriedly removed.
and if I have a son, do not let him be taken away from you--as I said
and if we recognize this unknown quantity in its entirety as being
and imagining it was some very wise man--the wisest and best of
and imagining that we are going home, but that heaven knows where we are
and immeasurable meanness.
and immediately, hearing behind him the tramp of the horses of his
and immutably self-confident men, self-confident to the point of
and impossible, he again glanced timidly at her. She did not sit down
and in Russia--and that the movements from the west to the east and from
and in every motion, she looked at the visitors and, with a pleasant
and in full view of the Emperor.
and in his rude and savage way throws himself on the Prussians without
and in order to press them again to her lips, she slightly pushed away
and in other parts of our realm for consultation, and for the direction
and in pain. Beside him sat Uvarov, who with rapid gesticulations was
and in place of an intellect (grouping events and drawing conclusions)
and in romantic love for Natasha; he had sought it by reasoning--and all
and in the general catastrophe one could not disregard oneself and one's
and in the night from the nineteenth to the twentieth, the whole eighty
and in the same place. No, it can't be! Surely it will all end in
and in what month?' He asked all about it and his heart began to ache.
and inapt but she attained her object. The conversation was resumed, and
and indicating Helene with a sorrowful gesture. "Ah, she is such an
and indignity.
and indulgently to smooth with it the heart of his neighbor. As to the
and industrious artisans, return to your work, your houses, your shops,
and infinite life around him. And the closer he looked the more tranquil
and inhuman role predestined for him.
and insignia he saw the uniforms and decorations at which they aimed in
and insignificance--particularly acute by contrast with the sphere of
and interests before him! "Yes, they have taken a wise decision," he
and interrupted him.
and intonation that obliged one to listen to each deliberately spoken
and involuntarily took a step back from the campfire.
and involuntary.
and irrationally. But later on, to fit what had occurred, the historians
and irrepressibly, as water does in a creek. Had the Russian army been
and is interfering with its action and tossing about in it is its most
and is nothing unworthy of you, but it will comfort me. Promise,
and it is all I!" thought Pierre. "And they caught all that and put it
and it seemed plain to her that those words, which had then so comforted
and it seemed that they might have forgotten him, or confused him with
and it will be tomorrow, and always; and there was yesterday, and the
and its lodges were full of people and more than twenty sat down to
and ivy, with a gleam of white shoulders, glossy hair, and sparkling
and jokes were heard on all sides.
and jolly lad who shouts, 'Hurrah!'--a detachment of five thousand
and jolted him at every step.
and judge of its purity? Only by the inner purification of myself can I
and kinds of dessert, in order to send a full description of the dinner
and kissed it.
and knew how unpleasant every sign of anxiety on his account was to him.
and knew that he was face to face with death. When he came to himself
and knew that the chief way to make them obey is to show no suspicion
and know how to deal with them all! It's quite astonishing. How did you
and laughter.
and laughter:
and law, that look established human relations between the two men. At
and leaned against the wall to keep from falling. To see him, talk to
and leaned her portly person against the doorpost.
and leaning his head against her he began to cry.
and least of all on position."
and leaving large sums of money with them for alms, went away to his
and led by inexperienced commanders as the Russian army was. Not only
and led first to one and then to another place with dozens of other men,
and legs always fell into unnatural positions.
and let this always be a reminder to me," and he pointed to the broken
and life--that made his personality what it was and from which the
and lifted it to his lips, threw back his head, and raised his free hand
and light, joyous steps. At the visitors' request the young people sang
and listened to her. In the midst of a phrase he ceased speaking and
and listened to stories of Potemkin's and Suvorov's campaigns, or to
and listened to the conversation of his two neighbors, whom he egged on
and locked up the church. That night the doors were again broken
and looked at her in such a way that not only could she not bear his
and looked at him closely.
and looked ecstatically at the spot where Napoleon had been but where he
and looked round with a smile. She was, as always at evening parties,
and looked up at Pierre who was just approaching them.
and looking severely at the dishes in front of Kutuzov he began to
and looking straight before him with a smile that did not leave his
and looks when she spoke to him about his house, recalled thousands of
and loss of good looks, and involuntarily she examined her bare arm
and louder. Rostov could hear the sound of French words but could not
and love.
and loved in another those previously incomprehensible virtues. For
and made a movement of the lips resembling a smile. With hurried hands
and magnificence of Napoleon's court.
and maim tens of thousands, and then have thanksgiving services for
and making a wide sweep with his arm, amid a thunder of applause and
and malevolence with which the old prince received and dismissed the
and many others had also come.
and men's esteem? Death, wounds, the loss of family--I fear nothing. And
and merry voices could be heard from there. Another section amid the
and mimicked his every movement. Each time the commander started and
and mingling with one another. He could also, by the gleam of bayonets
and ministers and propounding the historians' own reflections concerning
and ministers, and by the lives of Napoleon, Rousseau, Diderot,
and minutely examining various religious, philosophic, and political
and modeling you must get smeared with clay," suggesting consolation
and more a physical and also a moral necessity. Though the doctors
and more animated and evidently wishing to express his new outlook to
and more attractive.
and more diffident than usual. The guests were reluctant to address her,
and more miserable."
and more rapturous joy. Every word of Pierre's burned into his heart,
and more subject to necessity than those of a man living in solitude and
and more than forty borzois, so that, with the borzois on the leash
and more than sweet, looked at him from those attentive eyes.
and more than that, you can't make me believe that you do not think so
and more vivid than ever, awoke in his soul. He now remembered the
and most just of monarchs. Soldiers and citizens, of whatever nation you
and most painfully. What would she not have given to bring back even a
and mother were much the same, only a little older. What was new in them
and mouth were twisted to one side. This soldier was looking at the
and moved to the right; from behind it, dispersing the laggards, came
and moving noiselessly in his bast shoes over the roots and wet leaves,
and much farther to the right beyond the dragoons, the officer of the
and must endeavor to secure that the honest man may, even in this world,
and must not miss opportunities, but must avail myself of them!" he
and muttered something in which some people caught the words, "the old
and my good management we can get along nicely. I am not marrying for
and my relations with Father. I want nothing from him. I have been and
and near Moscow.
and never will depend, on position, or equipment, or even on numbers,
and never will, only to you."
and new furniture sat Berg and his wife. Berg, closely buttoned up in
and next day Napoleon. Tomorrow our Emperor will send a St. George's
and no one drove him away.
and no one knew where he was. The officer snatched a little food at
and nodding to right and left as casually and good-naturedly as if he
and not let us cross? But it will please our sovereign the Emperor
and not only at the same hour but at the same minute. With those about
and not so much smell as a whiff of gunpowder.'"
and not to admit anyone who was not on that list? Then why was that
and not to command armies! Why has he taken on himself such a
and not with his eyes.
and nothing more" (this nickname, bestowed on Vera by Nicholas,
and noticing nothing around him went on moving his legs as the others
and now soaring up with glittering sparks, with here and there dense
and now the latest political gossip.
and now with their whole army are on this side of the Danube, marching
and now, to get rid of them, handed over to them a man to be killed
and now... in this cond..."
and obliges me to interrupt you. I am very sorry to leave your
and obtained that manner which the pas de chale * would, one would have
and occasionally in French. In that drawing room were gathered, by
and occasionally ran his eyes over the score against him. He had decided
and of Pierre himself in those early days. From the death of Count
and of Speranski, and a diligent Petersburg newsmonger--one of those men
and of an old pattern. The French swarming round their guns seemed to
and of making similar statements to show that the danger of the campaign
and of our army.
and of the sturdy young fellow seated on the box was all that could
and of the tortoise was continuous.
and of whom there were very many in the lodge.
and officers advanced to the gate. In the gateway lay three wounded and
and often a corps commander, or even the commander in chief, did not
and old soldiers that the chief reason for the war was the necessity of
and on all their faces he recognized the same eagerness that filled his
and on horseback--raised the curiosity of the serfs to such a degree
and on recognizing Pierre he told the Cossack who occupied the driver's
and on their left flank Uvarov's cavalry had put the French to flight.
and one I shall never forget--that of my dear sister-in-law--left that
and one cheek was swollen to the size of a baby's head. His nose
and one knocked out," he added, unable to restrain a happy smile, and
and one leg bent under him. Pierre ran up to the post. No one hindered
and one of them insisting that he should be led along a certain carpet.
and one tall, long-necked officer, walking round the fire, came up to
and one year later they all regarded him as an outlaw and a brigand.
and only blushed till the tears came, and lowered his eyes.
and only then was he able to relate what had happened to him.
and other historians with profound respect, were as follows:
and other singers.
and other things they do not like were simply the product of Napoleon's
and others like them walking singly across the field shouting and
and out of the bedroom glanced at the princess and turned away. She did
and outlined everything. The smoke of the guns mingled with this mist,
and over the bottle of wine conversation between the three officers
and over the whole expanse and through that mist the rays of the morning
and painfully felt. My father talks of nothing but marches and
and palpable a blunder.
and parched lips and dry fixed eyes, she sat at the window, uneasily
and parted smiling, the German returning to his cowshed and Rostov going
and participating in the work of the legislative commission, could give
and passionate desire to give herself entirely to helping them. It was
and passionately demanded obedience, grew angry and nearly cried because
and paused facing her at the foot of the sofa on which she was lying.
and peacefully.
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
and perspiring necks, and their shirts opening from the left toward
and physically feeble during his stay in that town. He attended to army
and picked out Milka who attracted his attention by her breadth. "That
and placed a bottle of claret in it. He also brought a bottle of kvass,
and placed alone in a small, ruined, and befouled church.
and placed an iron pot on it into which they broke some dried bread and
and placing an arm on the back of the chair on which she sat, so that
and pleasure for themselves as possible. In the troubled waters of
and pointing to the Grand Duke who with his high shoulders and frowning
and pour out to him his indignation against the French and especially
and powder. The cannon balls flew just as swiftly and cruelly from both
and prepare for Holy Communion, and Natasha gladly welcomed the idea.
and presented a strange appearance among the hussars, Cossacks, and
and pressed together a bunch of raveled lint with her thin, beringed
and pretending not to understand what was said to him and not to be
and princes with whom he was dissatisfied, presented pearls and diamonds
and profligate life, though I did not like it and did not want to,"
and profundity of one's own ideas.
and prolonged part in the defense of his country, but did so casually,
and prolonged yells. On the other table, round which many people were
and promised nothing more than she was already, but that was enough.
and promised to write to him and guide him in his new activity.
and proud sphere, Prince Andrew noticed the following sharply defined
and proudly around while Bagration spoke to his son.
and prove my devotion to His Majesty the Emperor and to Russia!"
and puckering the skin above his left eye, "malgre la haute estime que
and put the matter before the Emperor," said Princess Anna Mikhaylovna
and put to proper use fall into the hands of another, and especially
and questioned him with an important air, as if considering the general
and quickening his pace went down the street.
and quickly shuffling on his feeble legs to a chair, he almost fell into
and quiet comment on the advantage or disadvantage of Bennigsen's
and quietly with one another.
and quite contrary to his usual character and said disagreeable things
and radiant light.
and raises his arm to strike that ruffian a terrible blow which he knows
and rapid change of position by each army, even what information was
and red-faced man, screwing up his eyes and blinking because of the
and regained her former position.
and regarded as the key to the position. He saw over the mist that in
and regimental commanders mounted, crossed themselves, gave final
and reined him in without effort with a firm hand.
and reined in his horse with an amused expression.
and rejoices in life, in which like everybody else he will deceive or be
and remained so for some minutes. Piteous, helpless, animal moans came
and remarriage during a husband's lifetime, and the priest told her that
and repay all that the family had done for her by breaking off her
and repeated in a whisper, the one coarse word she had used, supposing
and reported to Napoleon that their attack had been repulsed, Campan
and reports up to the time of his death. He alone said that the loss of
and resentment the Emperor had found a phrase that pleased him, fully
and resignation to the will of God. "If you do not understand these
and respect as few hardhearted men would have aroused. Although he was
and respected by his comrades, subordinates, and superiors, and was well
and retired to his apartments directly after dinner. In the evening,
and retired, leaving Bagration's division exposed. Another emissary rode
and return to life.
and returned a glove Pierre had dropped; the doctors became respectfully
and ribbon? But now, even if they do get peppered, the squadron may be
and ribs and was squeezed so hard that suddenly everything grew dim
and ride over the black field up the hillside. To keep to the road which
and ridicule. Whatever was spoken of he would bring round to the
and rising heavily and smoothing out the folds in his fat white neck he
and roast goose or suckling pig. But in nothing in the house was the
and rode up to Dolokhov.
and ruined my life. And only now when I am living, or at least trying"
and ruined the people of Smolensk and Moscow and were killed by them.
and running out from the porch he went round the corner of the house and
and runs at once to the arms of its mother or nurse to have the aching
and said "to take tea with us," and quickly doubling up his tongue he
and said at Helene's what he should have said at Anna Pavlovna's and
and said what she had to say. Then Efim deliberately doffed his hat and
and said, "Come." Pierre went with her to the bed on which the sick
and said, 'Believe in me and I will make you whole.' So he begged: 'Take
and said:
and salt and an icon of Saint Peter and Saint Paul, asking permission,
and salt. Sulphur is of an oily and fiery nature; in combination with
and sat down on a crimson throne. The maiden who had been first in white
and sat down.
and saw Julie sitting beside her mother with a happy look on her face
and saw close before him the head and ears of the horse he was riding,
and saw the dark figures of Russian prisoners round their campfires.
and saw wounded being brought back (there were not many of them), and
and saying something in their gypsy accents. Nicholas understood that it
and scanty beards emerged from the tavern, smiling, staggering, and
and scarcely breathing, watched from her ambush with sparkling eyes.
and scarves strewn all about her, gazing fixedly at the floor and
and scattering public buildings and benefactions on all sides and
and schools and reduced the quitrent the peasants had to pay, had not
and screamed hoarsely, evidently with some heroic fancy in his head.
and searching beneath the eyebrows and mustache for his former and his
and secured their release by heavy payments. He did not know that the
and see us quite informally," said the governor, taking leave of him.
and seeing that significance can refrain from meddling and renounce his
and seemed quite exhausted. On approaching the fire he had been going to
and seen so much (having traveled both in the east and the west), that
and seize the apparently elusive--the life of a people. They described
and seizing the little princess' arm as if she would have run away and
and self-sacrifice. And cost what it may, I will arrange poor Amelie's
and sensible, no one up to now had proposed to her. So they gave their
and sentiments of various generals, and not the history of the events.
and serene expression. In her face there was none of the ever-glowing
and services to be again performed in the churches.
and seventy kopeks, and if she took those powders in boiled water at
and severity.
and severity.
and she began to recover physically.
and she rushed forward so that the maids who were tacking up her skirt
and she therefore asked Pierre to tell his brother-in-law in her name to
and she told herself that he was only shy from love. Her melancholy,
and she was fastened with a leash, as if bridled, her legs were bound
and she was in a spirited and energetic mood unusual with her. Some
and she, smiling and shaking a finger at Hippolyte, invited Prince
and sheepskin coats, was short of provisions and without vodka, and
and sheepskin coats, without a roof over their heads, in the snow
and shining eyes and prayed God to help her.
and shone with cleanliness. And not only externally was all in order,
and shook himself free.) The lad was unable to walk. They dragged him
and shot him in the fleshy part of the back. That wound (which Tikhon
and should first of all be freed from ineffectives, such as dismounted
and shouted rudely at the Russian general, asking: was he deaf that
and shouting, while the man and woman on the stage--who represented
and shouts in the enemy's camp. Rostov rode up to Bagration, reported to
and showed him all sorts of favors.)
and shrewd rulers of France, feeling that their part is played out, are
and shudders of a mortally wounded animal. Very often a wounded animal,
and sighs and the sound men made as they crossed themselves were heard.
and silent when the talk related to any topic that had no direct bearing
and similar unnatural exploits, but unobtrusively, simply, organically,
and simple law--the law of love and self-sacrifice taught us by Him who
and sinking down again into her former position.
and sinking heavily into an armchair.
and sister's laughter (it could never enter his head that they might be
and sit in a mosque, so in Moscow he must be beneficent like the Tsars.
and slowly turning her eyes from the visitor to her aunt, Anna Pavlovna
and smartly across his horse's back as if by that gesture he meant to
and smile that she could not, whilst looking at him, say what she had to
and smiled at him over her bare shoulder. Anatole, who was as handsome
and sniffing at her singed hair. The woman's husband, a short,
and snorting horse and, accompanied by the dogs yelping at her, took her
and so conforms to the chief condition of motion (absolute continuity)
and so dazzled by the sight of Murat's mantle and ostrich plumes,
and so forth. They had heard all that before. And all he said--that it
and so it is possible to find some connection between the intellectual
and so it is to our own day. All Napoleon's wars serve to confirm this
and so it might be supposed that all necessary arrangements would be
and so it was only necessary not to stop their flight. Secondly it was
and so on to the highest military command which is concentrated in one
and so on--mistaking these for the real significance of the factor,
and so on.
and so on. Similarly a man who committed a murder twenty years ago and
and social tact," thought he; "been proud of my house, in which she
and social topics were ended and the time had come for intimate
and soldiers of the French army knew it could not be done, because the
and solemn, and awakening in the men an unusual curiosity. On the day of
and some in governmental affairs. "Nothing is trivial, and nothing is
and some old Hungarian wine, who had a snuggery where he smoked, and who
and some unknown x.
and something that had long been slumbering, something that was best
and sometimes asked them to repeat their remarks, but did not himself
and sometimes laughed. Nearest of all to the commander in chief walked a
and sometimes, when he came within six paces of them, the black figures
and somewhat to his satisfaction, that in the depth of her soul she too
and songs and coming from the field where the review was held. Sounds of
and sought the acquaintance of only those above him in position and
and sounds had no depressing or intimidating effect on him; on the
and speaking in a muffled and guttural voice.
and spoke of it as Plutarch speaks of the deeds of the ancients.
and squeezing desperately, had cleared off the bridge and the troops
and stab the wolf, when she suddenly thrust her head up from among that
and standing before Dolokhov in the same pose he had assumed before it,
and standing still in the middle of the room he raised his shoulders,
and stars, they would tell me of their victories over the Russians, and
and state and, as far as the passions that seethed around him allowed,
and state the patient's condition.
and staying till three in the morning. Julie never missed a ball, a
and stiffened her forelegs.
and still is written about the Berezina, on the French side this is only
and still less speak about it, but must only attend to one's own work.
and still more this disrespectful, application of brute force to
and still seeks, some secret motive in our actions. What answer did
and still thought of them, and other matters that interested no one and
and stood still in the dim light beneath the curtain as if not wishing
and stood, hanging her head.
and stooped glass in hand over the infant.
and stopped in the doorway. The evening sky that had been so clear was
and stopped near him.
and strength of the class of men he mentally classed as they. When
and strength. He was continually traveling through the three provinces
and suddenly Petya heard an harmonious orchestra playing some unknown,
and suddenly began to cry.
and suddenly determines to speak out.
and suddenly seemed to grow very merry.
and suddenly, as if he had studied her sufficiently and had formed a
and suddenly, at the sound of the service, she felt horrified at her own
and suffered and tormented one another and injured their souls, their
and sunny after a sharp night frost, and the cheerful glitter of that
and surely recognized, Lavrushka was not in the least abashed but merely
and surround his exhausted army of forty thousand, and he would find
and take personal command, and to have walked about with a birch stick
and takes bribes. What nonsense! Besides, why shouldn't he take bribes?
and talked to the innkeeper. Above Pierre's head some pigeons, disturbed
and tear whatever came to his hand. "Why did I tell her that 'Je vous
and tears.
and terrible. There in that enormous, illuminated theater where the
and terrified mobs. The generals re-formed them, but their numbers
and that Alexander had acted on it. What would then have become of the
and that a new war should not be begun nor the frontiers of Russia
and that he attached too much importance to these matters. But she knew
and that he had already passed it. He would not soon have remembered
and that he wanted to see him as he had a letter and money for him.
and that he was neglecting one of the first rules of Freemasonry by not
and that he was not a man who had mounted a horse, but a man who was one
and that he, from above, saw her affection and gratitude. The princess
and that if a letter reached the Grand Duke in command of the Guards
and that if they would let him have a convoy of a hundred men he would
and that it was all nonsense. And it was even pleasant to be able to
and that she had known it a long time (it seemed so to her because she
and that she would tell about it next day. On hearing of Countess
and that that law is untrue, but man, who is the subject of history,
and that the Italian's cure consisted in removing such inconvenience;
and that the greatest happiness is at first! On the contrary, now is
and that the position at Borodino (the one where the battle was fought),
and that the power he was supposed to hold was no longer his. And he
and that the richest peasants (who formed the deputation) had begun
and that the whole army had surrendered at Ulm proved to be correct.
and that they must retreat, Kutuzov looked at him in silence.
and that they were being taken to the proper place. Pierre felt himself
and that tomorrow everyone would be sent out beyond the Three Hills
and that we were led into error by the fact that we ourselves were
and the Austrian troops. But they all stood in the same lines, under one
and the Crimean estate, in order to make it possible: all of which
and the Emperor returning to the veranda, he stood still. They were
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.
and the Minister of War does not even care to hear the details."
and the allowance to the three princesses; about 15,000 was given in
and the army swayed and started in one enormous mass six miles long.
and the arrangement of the gardens and completely breaking off his
and the boyish face Rostov, breathless with excitement and hope, was the
and the brilliance of the bright sunshine merged in a single joyous and
and the buying of expensive seed corn, and did not make a hobby of any
and the cavalry dashed without orders in pursuit of the flying Russians.
and the chief of the hospitals asks where the wounded are to go, and a
and the click of a musket.
and the coachman. The women, who had been silent till then, suddenly
and the consequent exhaustion of the horses, the chief means
and the consequent impossibility of a speedy emancipation.
and the constant gleam of her white teeth, thought that they were in a
and the corners of the white house in the distance, all stood out in the
and the country house on his Moscow estate, which had cost him eighty
and the country? It is wartime. Such a fine fellow must serve. Well, are
and the crackling of dry branches.
and the curtain dropped. Once more there was a terrible noise and
and the curtain rose.
and the defect of frankness in their opinions. They feared Napoleon,
and the difficult names of villages. Weyrother complied and Dohkturov
and the dignity of France was thereby offended.
and the disgrace of having lost two guns and yet remaining alive present
and the doctor had only been afraid of gangrene. That danger had also
and the end of the world. In Pierre, however, that comet with its long
and the flight of the French without further conflicts, is one of the
and the hall, footmen were bustling about with wine and viands. Groups
and the heroic endurance of Captain Tushin and his company," and without
and the hollows on both sides of the Kolocha.
and the little countess could be driven home in a trap."
and the magnate had proposed to her and that she loved both and was
and the men to flush.
and the more correctly we perceive the physiological, psychological,
and the more he talked the less could he control his words.
and the more power he has over others, the more evident is the
and the most diverse people met at their suppers. Country neighbors from
and the movement of the nations.
and the munching of the lieutenant.
and the old countess were especially disturbed, and to a lesser degree
and the old countess' grief fell blow after blow on the old count's
and the other orders to take with him when he went to dinner.
and the pillage of Moscow it had borne within itself, as it were, the
and the pistols loaded, Nesvitski went up to Pierre.
and the prostrate adjutant, near a wormwood plant between the field and
and the rattling of carriage wheels seemed to fill his ears, and now
and the reading of the letter began. After a brief description of
and the recent news of his father's death--and had experienced so many
and the reports of a musket and of two cannon shots were heard
and the rest, pass before their stern judgment seat and are acquitted or
and the rider beyond all price! Yes, one would have to search far to
and the roads became impassable. For days neither provisions for the
and the same thing: "It is time I understood her and made up my mind
and the sappy leaves. The left side of the forest was dark in the shade,
and the second aim, that of purifying and regenerating himself, did not
and the sheep to be safe..." or: "They cannot understand this..." and
and the skin over his left temple puckered, "either you will not reach
and the sound of a torban, drowned every now and then by shouts. These
and the stakes at cards meant, but carrying forward to another page I
and the starlight of the winter nights seemed to call for some special
and the stubble. Again Erza and Milka were abreast, running like a pair
and the thirteenth of June was fixed for a ball, dinner, regatta, and
and the tramp of horses' hoofs were heard. Kutuzov and his suite were
and the traveler became absorbed in it. Pierre looked at him. All at
and the two Emperors were living with their suites, households, and
and the two girls were to sleep on some hay on the floor.
and the unpopularity of the foreign commander in chief, there resulted
and the vicomte was served up to the company in the choicest and most
and the victory of them that put their trust in Thee, and to Thee be all
and the visitors try to guess from these glances who, or what, they are
and the war began...
and the whole household went on tiptoe when he was occupied--that is,
and the whole secret lies in the terrible truth that she is a depraved
and the women who were breathlessly longing to be asked to dance.
and their impulses has remained unknown.
and their sabers clattering.
and their stories, and all came to look at the wolf, which, with her
and then a cracking sound and the ring of something heavy falling close
and then at his bare feet which he placed with pleasure in various
and then blushing.
and then continuing the conversation. They were now discussing dreams.
and then immediately fell asleep behind a partition in a corner Boris
and then in light blue, now wore only a smock, and stood beside the
and then interrupted him. Princess Mary came out to meet Pierre. She
and then more shots.
and then they put him in his sleigh and escorted him as far as the first
and then you know, Andre..." (she looked significantly at her husband)
and thence again beyond Drissa, drawing near to the frontier of Russia
and there are plenty of them as it is. It would be different if you
and there broke through that cloud. A great number of people crowded in
and there is nothing to thank me for. No one has ever complained yet of
and there locked himself in and wept bitterly. When he came in to tea,
and thereby corrects the inevitable error which the human mind cannot
and therefore in the way that always produces the most powerful results.
and they handed her a fur cloak. She threw this over her head and
and they marched gaily. Some columns, supposing they had reached their
and they were called to breakfast. Natasha kept looking uneasily at
and they were more excited. But Pierre, though he felt that something
and they will at once perceive a unity and coherence in what happened
and they're always sending me fresh ones. There are four hundred? Eh?"
and things were going from bad to worse. "For God's sake, I implore
and thirty men who had set out from Moscow fewer than a hundred now
and this explained to him why they all prepared for death calmly, and as
and this is the first time I have seen him in society. Nothing is so
and this observation helped to calm her.
and those in which form prevails. To the latter--as distinguished
and those who had been campaigning under Kutuzov. The two Emperors, the
and though Julie (now Princess Drubetskaya), who had resumed
and though he always disliked speaking of money difficulties had told
and though he could not read he had never forgotten a single money
and though the "God's folk" who came to see her reported, in their own
and though the Emperor Napoleon himself wrote a letter to Alexander,
and thought, and, having deduced the refutation he needed, would again
and thoughtful for a good while, told me his view of the matter, which
and thoughtfully shaking his head. Did he fear going to the war, or was
and thoughtfulness, and the way he spoke French, which struck them as
and thousands of carts conveyed the inhabitants and their possessions
and three pairs of gloves, and then the Grand Master addressed him. He
and threw it up.
and threw them round the little girl who had run in.
and thud was heard, followed by a boom of cannon blending into a dull
and timidly in the direction of his trap.
and timidly, and lowering his head shifted his feet on the step.
and to halt facing Vienna with Znaim to his rear, and if he succeeded
and to his surprise noticed that when he or his father had visitors
and to invite to dinner only a small number, a list of whom he gave to
and to learn that he had to capture a "tongue"--that is, a man from
and to let me know how he looks at the whole matter and whether there is
and to repeat after someone who read aloud an oath of fidelity to the
and to suppress robbery.
and to the city entrusted to him, and of himself--not himself as
and to those of Monsieur de Jobert and their voices trembled. A dance,
and tobacco, which she had known so long. "Now, madam, these triangles
and tone. In reply to his last question Pierre again explained who Makar
and tongue moved, sounds came, and he began to speak, gazing timidly and
and took a long time settling into her place.
and took aim at the French. "Fire!" repeated the officer once more,
and took possession of her.
and tormented her but she was in absolute need of it. As soon as anyone
and tormented me," said he to himself, passing in review the principal
and treat her not as a marriageable girl but as a sexless acquaintance.
and trembling, threw a frightened look of inquiry at Anatole and moved
and tried to discover what he thought about marriage.
and tried to excuse herself, as if there had been something to be
and trotted downhill toward the French cavalry which was seen below to
and truth, but of seeing the evil and falsehood of life too clearly
and turned away, not because he felt it hard and sad (Princess Mary and
and turned her, the only sound audible, apart from the ever-quickening
and turned to him. Hardly had Balashev begun to speak before a look of
and turned-out toes, climbed the hill with difficulty.) Prince Bagration
and turning sharply away; but rising immediately, he paced up and down,
and under that appellation, which to Pierre seemed terrible, they were
and understood the meaning of the rebuke and despair in that protracted
and unfathomable than in the Architect of the Universe recognized by the
and unheard-of rapidity toward the goal they had fixed on. Besides the
and unjust. It is understandable that a theory of their 'genius' was
and unoccupied where, they thought, yet greater riches might be found.
and unsteady fluctuation of relations, which is in place at court but
and until evening, the party had watched the movements of the French
and untried?"
and urging it on with his saber. In another moment Rostov's horse dashed
and utter one of his mots.
and velvet gown.
and very old people was particularly evident in her. Her life had
and villages on Russian soil beginning with Smolensk, without the
and virtue, and thereby try with all our might to combat the evil which
and vitality--the strength which in that vast space amid the snows
and voices. This class of guests and members sat in certain habitual
and wait for her, she went silently toward the door that everyone was
and waited until Natasha, after turning over a couple of times, had
and wandered from room to room like a shadow, idle and listless; she
and warmly pressing his hand looked affectionately over his spectacles
and was beloved, though she never said this definitely to herself
and was crossing himself with his right hand, turning his eyes upward
and was going to tuck up the other trouser leg to save this stranger the
and was going toward his room.
and was himself convinced that he was so, and therefore assumed a more
and was horrified to find neither. What meant still more to him was that
and was hurrying from the room.
and was just putting his question to a soldier when his attention
and was leading him from the room.
and was therefore out of sorts, a state of mind which with her always
and was thus at the duc's mercy. The latter spared him, and this
and watched those broad-boned agile hands in the same way. When did it
and way of life.
and we are told of many geniuses and heroes of that period of the
and we did lose it. And we said so because we had nothing to fight for
and we haven't stretchers, or bunks, or dressers, or doctors enough for
and we shall all do our duty. But before a battle, there is nothing more
and well informed foregathered when the news began to arrive in
and well rounded in these deft movements, in the man's well-ordered
and well-bred Count Rostov. Among the men was an Italian prisoner, an
and went as usual to thank the old countess, Countess Mary held out her
and went himself.
and went in at the open door. There was no one in the anteroom; empty
and went out of the corridor.
and went out onto the balcony. The people, with Petya among them, rushed
and went out. Natasha had put on one spurred boot and was just getting
and went to meet a tall, bald, fair man of about forty with a large open
and went to the door. Suddenly the strange sound of a far-off whistling
and went to the further end of his study. Having stood there a few
and went to the window, involuntarily inhaling the freshness of the
and went up into the porch of a large country house which had remained
and were standing in a semicircle with flushed and animated faces,
and what do you think, dear friends?" Karataev continued, his face
and what to expect after it beyond the grave! How happy and calm I
and when everything had been plundered fled farther.
and when he came to himself a third time it was in the complete
and when the regiment was put on war footing with an increase in
and whether anything had happened to her betrothed, she assured him
and which had always opened so quietly, burst noisily open and banged
and which he called his "will.")
and which is supposed to preclude human frailty, Pierre like the others
and while Kutuzov was turning managed to make a grimace and then assume
and who at the best if the flight continued would have to go a greater
and who considered himself above them, was all the same his serf and
and who did not know Russian, yet felt deeply moved (as he wrote) when
and who is not displeased that it should be so. The unbrushed tufts
and who was one of the disinterested friends so brilliant a woman as
and who was still having lessons.
and whom Boris addressed turned round crossly and told him Bolkonski
and wife can talk, that is, with extraordinary clearness and rapidity,
and will soothe him better than a skilled man who is a stranger could.
and willingly accepted that role. Now he had been sent by Denisov
and wine' I don't understand!"
and wipe them out?" These were the questions each man of the troops
and wiping their faces with their cambric handkerchiefs.
and wished he could tell what, if anything, this man was thinking and
and wished to say something. But what it was, no one could tell: it
and with a nervous movement of his fingers he unconsciously broke the
and with a severe expression sailed back to her table in the sitting
and with an idiotic expression of face. He wore a woman's loose gown
and with baritone notes in his voice, new to Boris, pointing to his own
and with his embroidered red mantle, his flowing feathers, and his
and with his hand at the salute rode up to the general.
and with marked solemnity and stiffness accompanied her to the anteroom.
and with the boot still on.
and with the household. With the stern old prince and the gentle, timid
and with this object offered a three days' truce on condition that both
and without answering drew out a handkerchief. Blood was flowing from
and without communicating to the generals around him the profound
and without fuel or forage, so something must be done, and, as you
and without fuss or strain on his part this set things going.
and without his sovereign's assent, that the Emperor Alexander did not
and wolf and fox skins hung about.
and women Pierre could not understand why he did not love her.
and women danced with bare legs. Then the king again shouted to the
and wonderful blessing has been revealed."
and would dispute and shout at the council, beating his breast and
and would not have others do so."
and would recommend him for a St. George's Cross. When sent for by Count
and yard, shouting and disputing. Natasha, with the ardor characteristic
and yet be happy..."
and yet during his whole reign never once attempted to execute that
and yet long to cross that line, and know that sooner or later it must
and yet loved him. I experienced that feeling of love which is the very
and yet more were heard mingling with and overtaking one another.
and yet you are willing to negotiate."
and you want to go into the army! There, there, I tell you," and the
and you were pitied...."
and you'll be in a pretty position without your boots!" (The staff
and you'll know how to manage. Be kind, and use your wits. Then all will
and you'll see."
and young people are rarely capable of it. His hearers expected a story
and zeal in the service. He brought with him into our rearguard all the
and, addressing him, again used the epithet "young man" that was
and, after discussing her plan with the aunt, remarked that though
and, almost crying, began to arrange her wallet. She evidently felt
and, as always happens, had got somewhere, but not to their appointed
and, as it might seem, of the obligations to her he had taken on
and, as usually happens when a man is in a pleasant state of mind,
and, before the latter had time to draw his sword, knocked him off his
and, bending his head, smiled pleasantly.
and, catching her breath more and more quickly, began to sob.
and, commanding the Uhlans to follow him, spurred his horse and galloped
and, drawing up an armchair for Prince Vasili, pointed to it and began
and, evidently unable to suppress the thoughts which were uppermost in
and, finally having chosen his direction and realized his danger, laid
and, from the first day, the people concerned themselves to get this
and, having spent the day with him, returned to Barclay and condemned,
and, having undone her pale-colored plait, was pulling it straight
and, his boots scrunching the snow, ran back to his sleigh. The same
and, lurching with his whole body and puckering his face with the
and, making the sign of the cross on his breast, began in a loud and
and, raising his voice more and more, cried:
and, regardless of whether any "gentlemen of the embassy" were present
and, resolving to break the silence, looked at Natasha and at Princess
and, returning to her hut, fell sobbing on her bed.
and, seeing the knot in it, pondered, shaking his head sadly and
and, seizing a moment when Prince Andrew was alone, began a conversation
and, stooping over the dying man, beckoned to Lorrain from behind her
and, taking Natasha's hand, kissed it.
and, walking backwards before the company, jerked his shoulders and
and, waving her thin arms from under the woolen shawl, cried:
and, with his plain face, to be looked on as a sort of Paris possessed
and, with the aid of the Code Napoleon and the Institutes of Justinian,
anecdotes were heard of individual examples of heroism shown by our
anew pictured to himself the blissful, irreproachable, virtuous future
anew--but that he must live out his life, content to do no harm, and not
angel," she said with a sigh.
anger and distress. But his strength soon began to fail him, and looking
anger and walking up to the regiment wished to find a further excuse for
anger but was still seeking an object on which to vent it. "Here is
anger he did not condescend to notice, and said: "I think you were
anger suddenly swelled up in his heart.
anger, but I did not sufficiently repent. Afterwards Boris Drubetskoy
anger, now that he may perhaps remain with us such a short time, would
anger. I am calm. I have thought it over, and it will be carried
angle--so that the left flank was at Shevardino, the right flank near
angling, while his grandson, with shirt sleeves rolled up, handled the
angrier at having blushed, and looked at the princess with a bold and
angrily avoiding Pierre with his eyes and speaking to his men.
angrily blowing his nose. Hardly had Prince Andrew gone when the study
angrily pulling down his tight scarf.
angrily up and down the room. What so affected him was Kutuzov's calm
angrily, and through the ominous silence and the regular tramp of feet
angrily, came in at the other door. Natasha checked her first impulse to
angrily--"that one wouldn't have done for you. As if I don't know what
angrily: "O Lord! How stupid and deaf she is!"
angry and frightened, strode energetically along with downcast eyes.
angry and swore at the French with the funniest curses. The only effect
angry at this and went to fight the French once more. And they defeated
angry reprimand for not having provided his full quota of men. Natasha,
angry with me! Tell me everything--the whole truth. What did he say?"
angry, quarreled, said they had come quite wrong and were late, gave
angry," he replied.
angry. It made him angry just because the idea of marrying the gentle
animal looked around him with glittering eyes.
animal went when excited. Bending his foaming muzzle to his chest, his
animal. It was plain that he did not quite grasp where he was. Now
animal." * Her success as a beautiful and elegant woman did not surprise
animated and gay. They spoke of personal reminiscences, of amusing
animated by the same desire.
animated. "And believe me, they are reaping the reward of their betrayal
animated. Only when a man was killed or wounded did he frown and turn
animation Pierre had not seen in her for a long time. "You know Nicholas
animation and apprehension, but it seemed to Pierre that the cause of
animation as he stood sipping tea from a delicate Chinese handleless
animation of the past or the future. It was as if Prince Andrew would
animation that had formerly burned there and constituted its charm.
announce a victory, supposing that the more people they have killed
announce him, but, changing his mind, came back and stooped to kiss the
announce?"
announced her demands. Pierre was greatly surprised by his wife's view,
announced that she was going to see Prince Nicholas Bolkonski to have an
announced that the carriage was ready, and Marya Dmitrievna rose with
announced to his household that he would remain at Bald Hills.
announced with such solemnity and significance that the official turned
announcement issued:
annoyance, folded them across his stomach, repeating the words: "For our
another Majesties, Highnesses, or Cousins, they all felt that they were
another admirer of that powder-monkey emperor of yours," he exclaimed in
another and Kutuzov most of all. Anticipation that the failure of
another and soon the whole battalion ran forward shouting "Hurrah!" and
another as form and content, no conception of life is possible.
another at the same time they both began to speak. Pierre began with
another candle. Still lower, beyond the turn of the staircase, one
another channel and express his own deeply felt idea for the sake of
another committeeman, carrying a large silver salver which he presented
another day one of the big guerrilla detachments will snatch the prey
another for their lack of confidence.
another greeting the Tsar with the strains of the march, and then
another group where Bilibin was talking about the Austrians: having
another he would never cease to love her, for that would be impossible.
another horse lay, like Pierre, on the ground, uttering prolonged and
another in such and such ways, why not explain them by the fact that
another in the large hall and they whispered to one another. Then a
another like a flock of sheep, squeezed into the exit, Pierre pushed
another of the precepts--that of reforming the human race--and had other
another one hundredth, and so on forever. This problem seemed to
another peasant had even brought from the village of Visloukhovo, which
another person dressed in black. Pierre remembered that the princess
another pie but felt shy, and therefore pretended to be examining the
another place, and Chichagov should have crossed (more than knee-deep
another that he was coming to dinner. Pierre felt it strange to see this
another that: "The priest whom I found and invited to say Mass cleaned
another they presented projects of maneuvers to be made with those
another time Denisov would not have left the regiment for so slight a
another time of borrowing money on a note of hand. A few days before
another time to ask questions and give replies concerning a thousand
another time."
another to try Ilyin's horse.
another was not decided by Napoleon's will but occurred independently of
another! Again! It has hit...." He stopped and looked at the ranks. "No,
another's eyes--and what had seemed impossible and remote suddenly
another's faces and speak to one another. Besides the soldiers who
another, "ride along the line and announce that tomorrow we attack."
another, according to whether the animal is or is not leading them in
another, and the sound of hundreds of seemingly merry French voices
another, and then, as if afraid of being too late, seized each other's
another, both smiling with self-satisfaction, and each mentally claiming
another, crowding, panting, and pushing, scrambled the soldiers and
another, like bubbles rising in water.
another, more important, subordination, which made this tight-laced,
another, unite to defeat the intentions of the evil-minded, obey the
another--Bernadotte, who promptly went mad--for no Swede would ally
another--a childlike, kindly, even rather silly look, which seemed to
another.
another.
another.
another. And in fact his health was poor.
answer he sought. L'russe Besuhof made 666. This discovery excited him.
answer in her own heart. "Desire nothing for thyself, seek nothing, be
answer the old prince without expressing views of his own, he now
answer to Pierre's question, and smiled.
answer to Princess Mary which she had been unable to write all
answer to his doubts and to confirm the fact that now he understood and
answer to the count's inquiries she replied that things were all right
answer to the question that engrossed him. He wrote the words L'Empereur
answer to the question were contained in his name, his nationality would
answer, she left the room.
answer. At last he moved up to Pierre and, taking the kerchief that lay
answer. Prince Vasili had brought his son with the evident intention of
answered a voice struggling with tears.
answered her son coldly. "But I have promised and will do it for your
answered her, as he had the countess, only in monosyllables. The other
answered his own question: "You see I was told to find out--well, I
answered the countess sharply and sarcastically.
answered the general.
answered the princess joyfully.
answered the soldier. Prince Andrew took out his purse and gave the
answered."
answering "Uncle's" remark by this call to his borzoi. Karay was a
answering a thought that was in his visitors' mind, said:
answering unexpectedly gave a sob, being evidently greatly moved.
answers from him to the questions that occupied all their minds.
answers. The old valet Tikhon, with sunken, emaciated face that bore the
antagonists. The Masonic dinners were dull and dreary when he was not
antechamber experienced the same feeling of respect and even fear when
anteroom Prince Andrew heard loud voices and a ringing staccato
anteroom and downstairs into the yard.
anteroom with him.
anteroom).
anteroom.
anteroom.
anteroom. "I can't remain any longer in Petersburg. Tell me what news I
anterooms of many important men, and the different types of such rooms
anticipate her wishes, should become almost desperate when she brought
anticipating its movement.
antipathy to one another.
antique valor of the Russian army, which they--which it" (he
anxiety, and self-reproach for having let him go.
anxiety.
anxious to be presented to Prince Nicholas Bolkonski, and had contrived
anxious. The courtiers suffered because of the suffering the suspense
any action, as it was not clear to him now what he ought to do. He had
any administrative or public business whatever from the lowest to the
any case be renewed.
any company he was in.
any compulsion to induce them to expose themselves to hardships and
any contradiction and is becoming irritable. This irritability is, as
any defeats, we owe this entirely to Barclay. If Barclay is now to
any definite color did not seem to trouble the blue-gray dog in the
any explanations you can give me."
any great change and that all the danger he spoke of existed only in his
any happier or better?"
any heroic feelings), and the whole innumerable multitude of such
any hope?"
any kind of trial, and that if those scoundrels dared attack him he
any large gatherings, but only to small receptions. Prince Vasili's son,
any longer. You know, we love one another! Sonya, darling, he writes...
any one of them is borne forward to a prominent position.
any other force. The forces of gravitation, electricity, or chemical
any rate his light-blue eyes gazed for about two seconds into Rostov's
any rate loved the governing Synod and prayed for it.
any reasoned cause, makes a man contented with himself and disposed to
any single action is due to free will, then not a single historical law
any single plant better suited to it than those it produces, so it is
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
any step. Had his wife come to him, he would not have turned her away.
any that were at all serious, yet the French army ceased to exist. What
any town built of wood was bound to burn, quite apart from whether it
any way behind them, Pierre went to the Three Hills gate. But when he
anybody ever so much in love with you? And he's very nice, very, very
anybody now a days!" shouted the publican, picking up his cap.
anybody"--but probably realizing that he was shouting at Bezukhov who
anybody; but you are free to choose.... Go to your room, think it over,
anyone else had a right to criticize what the Empress desired or was
anyone else. He's not there himself, so you'll have to go in and ask the
anyone in particular, began to say how difficult it was to carry out
anyone knew where she had gone.
anyone new--especially anyone whom, like Speranski, he knew by
anyone or taken anything that was not mine, but have only helped my
anyone to pieces, but faced its fate, feeling within it the strength to
anyone who comes in sight of the enemy, and that feeling gives a
anyone who entered the room. She was evidently expecting news of him and
anyone who traveled anywhere would have found himself always in the
anyone who wanted to see him could come the hundred miles from Moscow to
anyone's tastes or rules and regardless of anything else, it rose and
anyone, but in whose soul there were never any unkind thoughts, had to
anyone, but wanted nothing for herself. She kept away from everyone in
anyone--while she felt herself so capable of loving and being loved.
anyone. They wished to administer the sacrament of unction."
anyone."
anyone: I love and pity everybody. But what am I to do?"
anything and I never will again, nor have I ever reminded you of my
anything and asks me, he won't get a refusal. When one has studied, you
anything else from a blind and depraved old man.
anything else he should do.
anything else.... You have not been ordered to return and have not been
anything from them, often gave them the last of their rations.
anything he wished to hear. Some discussed the position that had been
anything like it, you ought to give your wife a scolding! What are we
anything living; but it was obvious that he failed to understand, not
anything more till the spring. Now only twelve hundred rubles was left
anything of the 6th Regiment. None of them knew anything, and Petya
anything on the way, his intention could not now have been carried out,
anything that did not fit in with that aim, the channel was removed and
anything that went on that evening. They danced the ecossaise and the
anything to say to the contrary. But no one said anything. "Moscow, our
anything useful nor allow anything harmful. He understands that there is
anything! As fast as ever the horses can gallop, so fast we'll go!"
anything, but joined the Freemasons merely to associate with the wealthy
anything, but looked absent-mindedly and cheerfully from side to side.
anything, but to comply with his mother's demands he even incurred some
anything, but wait for what was bound to come to pass.
anything, doesn't remember anything," she went on, repeating her usual
anything, except only for permission, after the blow she had received,
anything, looked fixedly at him.
anything, since he does not believe that anything can be known. The
anything, when suddenly the well-known whispering of Mademoiselle
anything," thought Prince Andrew, "but he will hear everything, remember
anything.
anything. Here is a letter to Prince Vasili, and here is money. Write to
anything. There was something particularly pathetic and resolute in her
anything. To play blindman's bluff? He can't see at all!"
anything?" said he, as if it was ridiculous, in his presence, to be the
anyway he is an honorable and brave old colonel! You're quick at taking
anywhere else. Two sergeants major were sitting with them and their
anywhere without him, and his failing health prevented his going out
apart from the laws of reason that define it, differs in no way from
apart on a low bench, to the back of which a piece of green cardboard
apartments assigned to Prince Vasili.
apathy and egotism.
apologetically. "Christ be with you, sir! May God preserve you!" said
apologize to an old and honorable officer? Whatever Bogdanich may be,
apologize, because if he, as commander of this regiment, thinks it
apologize, you know me!... He was very pleased!" And he held out his
apologize, your excellency. Yes, go!"
apologize."
appalled at the thought of being left in the hands of the French.
apparent agreement being the simplest way to avoid discussions that
apparent reason and knowing that it will cost him all the money he
apparent--such as the commands of the general, the equipment employed,
apparently afraid of shooting himself with it. His left hand he held
apparently been running), "and I did so wish to have another talk with
apparently immersed in his own thoughts.
apparently knew this as well as Tikhon; he looked at his watch as if to
apparently ready to jump over the railings had his rider let him. "What
apparently seemed to Napoleon, as it had done to all who had seen it in
apparently suffering more than the dying soldier, and he rode away.
apparently the sight of them roused no pleasant feeling in Vera.
apparition and began speaking about the prince's indisposition. Natasha
apparition of a girl in a white chemise, dressing jacket, and nightcap.
appeals, but Bagration did not reply; he only gave an order to
appear and hold their own, however incongruous their presence and their
appear as if he did not want any of that wine, but was mortified because
appear evidently less free than a man's entry into marriage today. It is
appear firm began to pull on his jacket without looking about him, but
appear to know it.
appear to notice the constraint the newcomer produced and, with the same
appear to us more under compulsion and less free the more correctly we
appear, so that she concentrated them wholly on that one thing and yet
appearance before her now. Prince Andrew went round the sofa and kissed
appearance had nothing about it that would reveal to an Oriental mind
appeared a student with a crimson coat collar, an officer of the Guards,
appeared a stupid smile of glee which he seemed unable to suppress.
appeared all along their uneven ranks, and musket shots sounded. Several
appeared at his call. "Hurry off and tell Maksim, the gardener, to set
appeared in a new light. "Why do I strive, why do I toil in this narrow,
appeared in his place at the given moment and, uniting the nations of
appeared intimidated, as if asking in what they were to blame. Anna
appeared later, he could not know the course of the battle and not one
appeared punctually to the appointed hour. Everyone sitting in this
appeared shy of her unquestionable and all too victorious beauty. She
appeared that they had worn when under fire. Rostov watched his enemy,
appeared to be different, but was really just like all of them, and that
appeared to him in a dream: his mother and her large white hand, Sonya's
appeared to him like magic-lantern pictures at which he had long been
appeared to his hussar eyes as a rich civilian, the husband of a
appeared, then a second and a third almost simultaneously, and at the
appeared.
appeared. He would carry her away and then sa pauvre mere would appear
appearing at the open kitchen door with the pistol in his hand. With
appearing on the skyline, which they knew to be the enemy's troops. The
appears that we are within sight of the enemy and must give battle.
appeased. Many other victims have perished and are perishing for the
apple, also half smiling as he looked at the handsome girl.
applicable. Only unconscious action bears fruit, and he who plays a part
application. His love of theory made him hate everything practical, and
applied himself to the bottle of Bordeaux. He wrapped the bottle up
apply their activities there.
applying her handkerchief to her eyes. At last she rang.
applying to them the Personal Rights he had divided into paragraphs, he
appointed first secretary at Vienna? The baron by all accounts is a poor
appointed number of articles, "awl, soap, and all," as the soldiers
appointed place.
appointed time.
appointed to look after her. Petya, who was laughing, whipped and pulled
appointed two commissaries general, or chiefs of police, and twenty
appointment on the headquarters staff, left for Turkey.
appointment to London was a promotion and that he was so to regard it.
appreciate at a glance her superiority to the plain, badly dressed,
appreciated and newly illumined, and plunge him into the depths of
appreciated by everyone. The other day at the Apraksins' I heard a lady
appreciated the other's capacity or because he considered it necessary
appreciated. Some people began to laugh, others continued to watch in
appreciation of this remark.
appreciative according to the way the joke was received. Everybody
apprehension and distrust--but the expression on all the faces was
apprenticeship as old maid."
approach her after the old prince had gone out and they were left alone
approach of those in authority. The prisoners thronged together and were
approach us with offers to donate.
approached Bolkonski with a slight bow. Bolkonski made room for him on
approached Kutuzov. Of Kutuzov's suite only four remained. They were all
approached and suggested that they should ride along the line to
approached first, and she kissed the bold forehead that bent over her
approached first, experienced the same feeling as every other man in
approached him coming from the copse. Suddenly the wolf's whole
approached him, and kissed him, weeping.
approached his commander. It was Tikhon. His wrinkled and pockmarked
approached the door of the minister's room. He felt offended, and
approached, as if the hounds in full cry and Daniel ulyulyuing were just
approached, receded, and rose, he realized what was happening at the
approaching Tarutino Kutuzov noticed cavalrymen leading their horses to
approaching anger. "I was forgetting... Do you wish it brought at once?"
approaching catastrophe. One of his brother Masons had revealed to
approaching departure did not prevent his amusing himself, but rather
approaching enemy farther off. At the same instant the sun came fully
approaching enemy unexpectedly. Bennigsen did not know this and moved
approaching in the distance from the opposite side--the blue uniforms
approaching the fire. As he was going along a foot path across a
approaching. And at that moment, though the day was still, a light gust
approaching. At the approach of danger there are always two voices that
appropriate remark--showing that it did not interest her--or by a silent
approval, he merely studied her with interest. Formerly she had felt
approve of them for their endurance at work when they came to Bald Hills
apron under the leather hood of the vehicle. Prince Andrew rode up
apron, such as the others wore, was put on him: he was given a trowel
apron, which symbolized strength and purity; then of the unexplained
arbitrarily selected.
arbitrariness and violence, and regarded him as his bitterest foe. He
architect.
are Russians and will not grudge our blood in defense of our faith, the
are afraid of everything."
are all going to ----'s."
are all told us by Frenchmen. We cannot accurately estimate his genius
are and who we are."
are at Korniki with their hounds. That's it. Come on!... They'll take
are budding, and really every spring cold winds do blow when the oak
are capital people, who of course have not the slightest idea what a
are clever, you are well educated. And what have you done with all these
are destroyed. Napoleon himself is no longer of any account; all his
are drawn along."
are equal; please note that the angle ABC..."
are executed.
are expecting him every day. The count wanted to leave long ago, but the
are false.
are forcing us to exterminate them. So much the worse for the Russian
are going by yourself, are having the horses saddled and said nothing to
are gravely hampered by the political institutions of today. What is
are in her features and expression!" thought he as he looked at her and
are in love with and have just kissed for the first time. Sometimes that
are in love, marry him!" said the countess, with a laugh of annoyance.
are in residence and a police force is present, cannot help burning when
are intact?" he remarked interrogatively.
are known to us while we are conscious of others we cannot comprehend.
are languidly fighting, or cleaning themselves, or feeding one another,
are leaving."
are led, modern history should study not the manifestations of power but
are mad about him! It's 'Dolokhov the Persian' that does it! We never
are not aware of the fact..."
are not here. I came to the battle and have lost them."
are now provided for--I have arranged that rent for them in the Baltic
are only efforts to increase freedom. Wealth and poverty, fame and
are over. Remember me to Steshka. There, good-by! Good-by, Matrena, wish
are quartered. "Le patriotisme feroce de Rostopchine" and the barbarity
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
are sixty or seventy, without a gray hair or the loss of a tooth, as
are so considerable as not to allow of your taking the offensive? On the
are sorry for you, but we're not willing. Go away yourself, alone..."
are spying, treachery, and their encouragement, the ruin of a country's
are still plainer to me and I find it hard to imagine what would have
are taken to the field marshal's room, for he likes to do everything
are the absence of freedom, that is, discipline, idleness, ignorance,
are the steppes of Asia! It's a nasty country all the same. Au revoir,
are told, Napoleon attacked this advanced post and took it, and, on the
are valued for, but little that could have made him love her. He felt
are very pale!" said Princess Mary in alarm, running with her soft,
are warm, and when in those dark warm nights, golden stars startle and
are we afraid? I am not to blame that the Minister is vacillating,
are wrapped up in you, and that in spite of the distance separating us
are you being punished for, Daddy?'--'I, my dear brothers,' said he, 'am
are you hindering us?" Another in the same place turned round and fired
are--at the heart of affairs and of the world--is the talk all of
are... hundreds of lives may depend on it, while there are only two
are: Herr General Wimpfen, le Comte de Langeron, le Prince de
aren't you? Whose child is it?" they asked him.
argued, it was only because he wished to maintain his independence and
argument which was embarrassing for his companion. "If you will do
argument. But the law of history relates to man. A particle of matter
arguments, it had seemed obvious that he would be degrading himself if
arisen in all ranks--the force of circumstances compelled it to retire
arising from trivial causes. "What would it be to Thee to do this for
arithmetic, when rising from his chair he would walk away from her,
arm above the elbow--as from the shock to his horse and from fright.
arm against the disturber of its peace. All Napoleon's allies suddenly
arm and addressed the people, almost shouting:
arm and put him in the corner. Having put him in the corner she would
arm and stepping back from the door.
arm ourselves against our teachers and divinities? Look at our youths,
arm with the sleeve turned up to the elbow, trying unnaturally to spread
arm's length, or holding the head of the ax would cut thin little pegs
arm, led him aside.
arm.
arm.
arm. He began to laugh.
armchair by his pillow without undressing. Every time she gave him
armchair, sat a thin, shriveled, old woman, with a meek expression on
armchair. He took the guitar a little above the fingerboard, arching
armed peasants and domestic serfs. She sat by the window listening to
armies had its own commander in chief, but there was no supreme
armies had suffered in the former war from Austerlitz to Wagram. But
armies made their presence known, but later when they reached the
armies should remain in position without moving. Murat declared that
armies, so that it was as easy for the Russian rearguard to get to it as
arms and did something to the fox. Then from that spot came the sound of
arms and legs and those dead men?... Then again he thought of Lazarev
arms and neck were not beautiful--compared to Helene's her shoulders
arms and neck. By the grace of her movements, by the softness and
arms and the hope of future triumph. And he was not the only man to
arms and their sabers in the air.
arms behind him, long paced the room, now frowning, now smiling, as
arms on the table and began to read. After reading a few lines, he
arms round his neck, and he pranced along with her.
arms warmly pressing their lips to whatever place they happened to
arms, another group of horsemen galloped up to the opposite flank, and
arms, or the prosperity of the Petersburg and other universities, or the
army (with the Pavlograds on the right flank of the front); those
army also suffered from the severity of the season; so that by the time
army and people avoided a collision till Smolensk was reached, and again
army and people) it has been described. The battle of Borodino was not
army aroused that horror in Napoleon. He sat silently on a campstool
army at Vilna. Those about him said that he became extraordinarily slack
army because he wished to, or because he was very stupid, would be as
army caused by the rapidity of the advance had become evident, another
army corps. The progress of the war was eagerly followed, and only
army desired to do so. But to make an attack the wish to do so is not
army entrusted to you, and acting with resolution and energy, you have
army from the Ryazana to the Kaluga road and to the Tarutino camp--the
army generals, directed his whole activity here, as he had done at
army is presented to us by the historians as something great and
army nothing but flogging, drilling, and Military Settlements; the
army of one hundred and fifty thousand men would cut him off completely
army or of the doings of the enemy, or of the welfare of the people
army really began to improve from the time of that march, it does not at
army recuperate in Kaluga province, which was inhabited by Russians such
army that had not suffered in the battle, and though still holding their
army under Bagration, and thirdly, the one commanded by Tormasov. The
army was asking for leave to visit Moscow and had something to do there.
army was demanding.
army was flying from Russia with all possible speed, that is to say, was
army was. One of the Russians understood what was asked and several
army were discussing the siege of Saragossa and considering the
army were like the plan of a market gardener who, when driving out of
army!"
army's foraging operations, provision trains, and hospitals. When--free
army's inactivity, he alone continued to assert that the battle of
army, and that the only way out of the position would be for the Emperor
army, and then give it to his excellency."
army, as the sequel showed. Had Napoleon's aim been to destroy his army,
army, but wrote to his parents that he was sorry Natasha was ill and her
army, encamped there without any precautions. The Cossack laughingly
army, gains a victory by killing three, five, or ten thousand men, and
army, growing more incoherent and more diffused, mingling with music
army, he spent the night in apartments prepared for him on the estate of
army, that Napoleon was there and the whole army had left Moscow four
army, which--as was learned from spies and prisoners--was moving under a
army--French, Italian, German, Polish, and Dutch--hungry, ragged, and
army.
army.
army. And I won't--not even if Bonaparte were here at Smolensk
army. Prince Andrew Bolkonski came into the room with the required
army. The brilliant qualities of the soldiers of the army sent to Italy,
army."
army.... Go on... harder, harder!" he muttered, hunching his back and
army.... You are in a position to seize its baggage and artillery.
army; I am not a diplomat or a government clerk.--I don't know how to
army? The Emperor Alexander, not I! And you offer me negotiations when I
around as if he were abusing someone, as if they were all his enemies
around chin and mouth. The quartermaster frowned, looking at the
around he heard his comrades sobbing with joy.
around him. An infantryman came to the fire, squatted on his heels, held
around the dams and banks of the ponds near the village of Augesd.
around them cannon balls were flying, of which he was aware not so
around them, the smoke and the increasing fog, to see either the place
around them, they would have captured Murat and everything there.
around which tens of thousands fell, and which the French regarded as
around, as if afraid of everything in that large apartment. Awkwardly
around, were delicately green with fluffy young shoots.
around.
around. A captain, standing beside him, was gazing like himself with
around. The flames flared up again, lighting the animated, delighted,
aroused in him no feeling but pity that she had not known the bliss he
aroused in himself.
aroused terror, and besides this there were the foul air and the dust.
arousing an involuntary sensation of courage and cheerfulness. Their
arrange that?" said Helene.
arranged near the watchman's hut in the forest, and told the officer on
arranged the different groups in her drawing room with her habitual
arranged them on the table. When she had finished, she stepped aside and
arranged. It shall be on your family's behalf that I'll start my
arrangement of the festival in honor of Bagration, for few men knew so
arrangements in his corner, and even in his very smell, and he looked at
arrangements of the house, he interrupted himself:
arrangements to the minutest detail remain the same."
arrangements would be made for the sick, and that in general everything
arrangements, but instead of that I have the honor to serve here in
arrangements, the count grew quite tranquil.
arrangements.
arranging a match for her with young Rostov. It would be a very good
arranging a seat for the countess in the huge high coach that stood at
arranging the chairs and taking their seats. Anatole moved a chair for
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
arrival and of thanksgiving for the conclusion of peace with the
arrival in Moscow.
arrival in Petersburg he received only his due. I always wonder at the
arrival of many wealthy families from Moscow, and as in everything that
arrival of the rest of the troops who were on their way from Vienna,
arrival of young Prince Andrew and his wife was daily expected, but
arrival, thought in another way. Of course, she, a handsome young woman
arrival. From that day, as the doctor expressed it, the wasting fever
arrival... What's the matter, Rostov? You look as if you'd just come out
arrive, the men dispersed about the abandoned and deserted villages,
arrive. The French, avoiding the Russians, dispersed and hid themselves
arrived and Prussia took our side.
arrived and there's a letter for you."
arrived at the palace to find Dolgorukov. Everyone at headquarters was
arrived at their places at the appointed time and destroyed the enemy.
arrived at them clung to them tenaciously. When Pierre himself wanted to
arrived from Russia. With this object he intended to meet the regiment;
arrived from abroad, had he been told that there was no need for him
arrived in France with a battalion, and the French, who had been hating
arrived.
arrived.
arrived. One of Pierre's acquaintances, while they were talking about
arriving from Russia. If Kutuzov decided to remain at Krems, Napoleon's
arson (which is very doubtful, for no one had any reason to burn the
art of his reading was supposed to lie in rolling out the words, quite
articles removed?" "To leave the town empty," explains Count Rostopchin.
articles. Other French soldiers standing below went up to the drawer.
articulating each syllable distinctly, and, not replying to Madame
artificial conversation about trifles as soon as he looked her way.
artificial phantasm of life he had served so long. He felt in his own
artificially and therefore inspires involuntary respect. He entered
artillery fire near by. Having forced his way out of the crowd of
artillery sentry was pacing up and down; he stood at attention when the
artillery should be placed.
artilleryman to Prince Andrew. "Not like your honor!"
artillerymen were still as merry and lively as ever. Twice they noticed
artillerymen, some of whom were fighting, while others, having abandoned
artless smile, she had met him in secluded passages.
as Anatole had not turned up did not stay for dinner but drove home.
as Barclay had ordered him to and as he himself had seen and understood
as Berg said, "very agreeable and well en evidence."
as Boris. "Count! I am wounded in my right hand" (and he showed his
as Frenchmen are, and was, as all Moscow said, an extraordinarily clever
as Great Mytishchi. At ten o'clock that evening the Rostov family and
as I ran," thought Prince Andrew--"not as we ran, shouting and fighting,
as I write?
as Moscow? That is the question on which I want your opinion," and he
as Natasha and was therefore surprised on entering the drawing room
as Peronskaya had called him, and knew he was looking for them, and
as Pierre could see was one vast charred ruin. On all sides there were
as a Frenchman would speak after spending about a year in Russia.
as a bait to draw rich young men into his gambling set, made use of him
as a child, there was no longer in her singing that comical, childish,
as a cornet, had been educated from childhood and lived for years at a
as a dense cloud of smoke arose from it. The hussars had succeeded in
as a force that itself produces events. Yet in most cases universal
as a friend that frees the soul grown weary in the labors of virtue
as a man recently returned from abroad, in a political conversation in
as a mark of their gratitude for the benefits he had conferred on them,
as a mother. As it is, not only has she left us, and particularly Prince
as a post horse, but still I must have a talk with you, Catiche, a very
as a pretext for quitting the army.
as a proto-deacon's and hoarse with hallooing--and two flashing black
as a result of all that activity.
as a soldier after the duel with Dolokhov." And the memory of the dinner
as a veranda.
as all is over," and Prince Vasili sighed to intimate what he meant by
as an adviser and ready at hand to replace Barclay. The Grand Duke
as an equal.
as an intellectual influence, like the smoke that is blown away.
as arranged, and after going behind other columns for about two thirds
as at Ulm... it is..."--he seemed to be trying to find the right
as author of the military plan, argued that Bonaparte might easily
as before and saw in them and in the subservience shown to him by the
as calm and aloof as his look.
as clear as day, and can go so far astray. That is the only thing
as comprehensible as that they were made from a handful of earth at a
as far as Moscow and to stay with him there. Meeting a comrade at the
as form to content, do we get the mutually exclusive and separately
as girls of thirteen and fourteen do who are wearing long dresses for
as gladly as she had to the sounds of her own voice. Passing a mirror
as he alleged, he exposed his army to danger on this march, and it was
as he called it. Twice during his career Kutuzov had been governor of
as he called the Grand Master.
as he called them--and everyone said he spoiled them by his laxity. When
as he closed his eyes his ears seemed filled with the rattle of the
as he continued to deal.
as he did now and that only now did he understand and know what life
as he dressed to go to Marya Dmitrievna's. "If only Prince Andrew would
as he expected he was appointed an adjutant to the governor general of
as he felt himself to be at that moment. He was conscious that here
as he got up: and at that moment he felt that something superfluous was
as he had been accustomed to from childhood. Besides it was pleasant,
as he had been and his health was poor (the old man laid special stress
as he had been detained at the palace. He did not say that the Emperor
as he held the candle, and the face of another man who was still asleep.
as he opened the door--speaking from under the filmy skirt which still
as he pointed at the old men with his free hand.
as he read that book: the joy, hitherto unknown to him, of believing
as he rode by.
as he said this. She realized that if she said a word about his not
as he said this. She seemed to be trying to fathom the hidden meaning of
as he sang, with his small, husky, but true voice, some verses called
as he was doing, gazing straight into his eyes. And again she felt with
as he was in mufti and had come to Tilsit without permission to do
as he went on became more and more animated. He told them of his Schon
as he who decide the fate of nations," added Bolkonski with a sigh he
as her aunt mentioned Andrew. Evidently she could speak of Russia's
as his eyes filled with tears.
as hung over the French, and that the sick Frenchmen were left behind
as if anxious to get the first moments of the reception over. The band
as if asking what it all meant, but Helene was engaged in conversation
as if asking whether he should stand there, or go away, or do something
as if flinging something to the ground, the drummer--a lean, handsome
as if he had come back to life after a heavy swoon. He held his head
as if he were doing something not merely important but pleasing to
as if his sole aim were to put a given number of questions--the answers
as if it were obvious to him that his success must always be the chief
as if of its own accord. Toward night candles were burning round his
as if powers till then confined within him had been liberated, and that
as if running a sword through an invisible foe, and glaring savagely
as if saying: "Very well, finish me off."
as if she had asked him to do it.
as if she had put two barrels on her arms. You know not a day passes
as if she had to give some final necessary instructions.
as if stirred to his heart's core and himself regretting and laughing
as if the minds of these morally exhausted men found relief in everyday,
as if the sky were melting and sinking to the earth without any wind.
as if the thread of the chief screw which held his life together were
as if there were nothing more to come--nothing; that everything good is
as if trying to atone for her fault, paid unceasing attention to her
as in Michael Ivanovich's list."
as in a spoiled child, a continual consciousness of her charming defect,
as in a vise.
as in the depths of a forest amid that crowd of strangers, with no one
as inevitable as the retreat of the army beyond Moscow without fighting.
as infallible) that the Shevardino Redoubt was an advanced post--whereas
as instinctively as dogs worry a stray mad dog to death. Denis Davydov,
as it always happens in contests of cunning that a stupid person gets
as it had done then. He recalled all the words spoken at that
as it is I have to postpone my return for three months. You know me
as it seems to him directed his past activity, justify his present
as it was too far to the left flank for him to have time to go there
as it were family feeling of animation.
as it were, a council to elucidate certain questions for the Emperor
as lightly as fish scales. The beekeeper closes the hive, chalks a mark
as maid of honor. The youthful little Princess Bolkonskaya, known as la
as many as you want, or all if you like...."
as men for whom her feelings were as nothing compared with her awe and
as merely a hindrance and obstacle to the impending war.
as merely due to the will of certain people. In regard to the migration
as my sister Natasha was engaged to her brother it was of course out of
as not to wake the countess who had fallen asleep only toward morning,
as of a settled matter. About the same time he received letters from
as often happens when one is talking, felt somehow that this companion
as on the day when Pierre had been taken from the guardhouse on the
as possible to conceal his own part in the improvements that had been
as presents now became the most exacting of the creditors. Nicholas was
as quickly as possible, finish with the bows and greetings, and sit down
as real as any other recollection. She not only remembered what she had
as serene as if all this were happening at home awaiting peaceful
as she conducted him to her.
as she needed to work off her spleen so she had sometimes to exercise
as she sat in her room. But owing to the superstition that the fewer
as she stood before her pilgrims like a hen before her chickens.
as she went slowly along the passage.
as she who had herself suffered so much could render, and showed him her
as small as possible. He looked at the count, who still gazed at the
as something generally known. But it was the first time he had heard
as soon as I drew near I saw that his face had changed and grown young,
as soon as he uttered them, while on the contrary Hippolyte's stupidest
as soon as the necessity for a general European war presented itself he
as soon in fact as the adjutant had left Borodino--the bridge had been
as sorrow was manifest in every smile, the sound of every word, and even
as surly as a dog."
as tall as they. It was an enormous tree, its girth twice as great as a
as the "angel incarnate."
as the French entered. But the French entered and still Pierre did not
as the French; that is to say, under conditions in which it was not
as the Russian commanders did not wish, or were not in time, to begin a
as the chief market days and to that end a sufficient number of troops
as the flight of the French was to theirs. The only difference was that
as the guest of honor, to enter first. Bagration was embarrassed, not
as the little princess used to do. He alone did not obey the law of
as the officer came up to it a man in a gray coat with a shaven head was
as the only remaining choice was between losing the army as well as
as the product of many forces, can no longer, it would seem, be regarded
as the right flank would probably not be able to withstand the enemy's
as they entered.
as they were of defeat. If Bennigsen insisted on the position being
as those who lived in Moscow, and where fire had the same property of
as though he had long expected him.
as though he was really saying that all desire for positive happiness is
as tight as possible, and flying away! Like this...."
as to the further progress of the war. In this letter Prince Andrew
as to the only refuge from the horrors that surrounded him.
as to torture her mentally as harshly as possible. Princess Mary had
as to who had taken whom prisoner, the Frenchman ran back to the battery
as undecided and undiscerning--but whom we find commanding wherever
as unsuitable from every point of view, the battleground he had not
as usual, independently of and apart from political friendship or enmity
as usual," and Princess Mary pale, frightened, and with downcast eyes.
as usual. Despite their pale swollen faces and tattered uniforms, the
as usual. It was a hot July day. Even at ten o'clock, when the Rostovs
as was always the case at Anna Pavlovna's soirees, had a political
as was natural to him, felt contented with the life he led in the
as we are masters of Ulm, we cannot be deprived of the advantage of
as well as the quartermaster. Lavrushka was saying something about
as were all the words he spoke that day, and Count Ilya looked joyfully
as white as paper, clean, and not as much smell as a puff of powder
as with a kinswoman, a good, kind, true relation. And I tell you for the
as yet and it is unlikely that it will be threatened with any. I from
as you see does not want to march, I got that on the seventh at the
as, according to his understanding of his master, would touch and delude
ascended the carpeted stairs.
ascended the knoll from which, according to the doctor, the battlefield
ascended the narrow dimly lit stone staircase, calling to Pierre,
ascertain the position of affairs.
ascertain whether his father's habits had changed since he was at home
ascertained? No one was or is able to foresee in what condition our or
ashamed of in what Prince Andrew had overheard.
ashamed of so wild a cry and everyone else would have been amazed at it
ashamed.
ashamed; he felt that he was occupying someone else's place here beside
aside and to send something to my father," he went on, emitting a smoke
aside in terror. The wolf crouched, gnashed her teeth, and again rose
aside out of his salary proved a dream. Not only did he not save
aside the conception of cause, should seek the laws common to all the
aside to intercept it. But the quickness of the wolf's lope and the
aside, Dolokhov rode up the incline at a walk.
aside, drawing her hand downward. "I have heard of certain projects
aside, marveling at "the old gentleman's" conceited stupidity.
aside, or it would have wiped you out!"
aside.
aside. Yells and shrieks of laughter rose from the whole regiment. But
ask about him. Then suddenly Sonya told me he was traveling with us. I
ask forgiveness.
ask her what he had been saying, and be vexed if he noticed that she
ask him who he is," he added.
ask mercy, but I'm being court-martialed for bwinging wobbers to book.
ask on my knees for your hand and your love!"
ask you to put the money on your cards," replied Dolokhov. "Don't stint
ask!"
ask. She noticed at once that something had happened to him.
asked Anna Pavlovna, "and of the comedy of the people of Genoa and
asked Denisov.
asked Kutuzov, interrupting him.
asked Pierre if he had ever experienced a similar impulse to sacrifice
asked Pierre.
asked Weyrother several times to repeat words he had not clearly heard
asked about her health, and, swaying his head from side to side to
asked again in French, looking around and meeting Pierre's eyes. Pierre
asked for pardon.
asked her about Boris.
asked her where they were going to spend the summer, and then how he had
asked him into the room that had been assigned him. A bed had been made
asked him to forgive her for having dared, by Natasha's intermediacy, to
asked him to what regiment he belonged, who was his commanding officer,
asked him.
asked him.
asked himself with instinctive curiosity.
asked himself without finding an answer. And suddenly a new unexpected
asked his mother, not realizing the cruelty of his question and only
asked if no French had strayed that way, the elder replied that some
asked permission to advance.
asked the Italian how he stood Russian climate. The Italian's
asked the count sternly.
asked to gain time.
asked to play on the clavichord. Anatole, laughing and in high spirits,
asked to read it."
asked with a slight smile. "I guessed it then when we met at the
asked, repeating their first question, which he had declined to answer.
asked, suddenly changing his former stern expression for a most cordial
asked, turning to Shinshin. "Didn't he vanish somewhere?"
asked.
asked.
asked.
asked. "They say old maids have a mania for matchmaking, and though I
asked: "How is he?"
asking about his friend's last days.
asking for forgiveness.
asking for his sanction they appeared to be fulfilling a regrettable
asking for information.... What are your orders about the Fire Brigade?
asking for orders about their departure. (This was before his talk with
asking for their blessing, and that he kissed Vera, Natasha, and Petya.
asking for. I need only advise anything and his Highness is sure to do
asking him something. Then they led him away somewhere, and at last he
asking his help, but came to the conclusion that that would not be a
asking them to move aside. Some ladies, with faces betraying complete
asking three rubles for carting--it isn't Christian!"
asking to be discharged. She replied that she had never doubted his
asking what the point of the story was as he had not heard it properly.
asking, 'Is that the famous Prince Andrew?' I did indeed." She laughed.
asks too much."
asleep at a council, and has the very worst morals! A good reputation
asleep unexpectedly in the daytime, but at night, lying on his bed
asleep, nor even remain in one place, but had to jump up and pace the
asleep. He woke him up, told him to harness, and went into the passage.
asleep. Prince Andrew felt sorry for his sister.
aspect of Freemasonry.
aspect of that skein, as with a buzzing in his head after dinner or
aspect. Before the beginning of the second act Pierre appeared in the
assemble for the usual silent prayer with closed doors before starting.
assembled for, which usually shows itself in an army that has been
assembling, evidently preparing for the Emperor to come out.
assenting to everything Denisov asked him. Denisov turned away from him
assiduity of its commander the regiment, in comparison with others that
assigned to cavalry-captain Denisov, the squadron commander, known
assigned to the commander of the Pavlograd regiment in which Rostov
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
associating these words with vague yet joyful ideas. The door opened and
assume the title of commander in chief, but disposed of all the armies;
assume the unconditional transference of the people's will.
assumed a grave air and thoughtfully shaking his head said that though
assumed a legal, official form and became unavoidable.
assumed a malignant character, but what the doctor said did not interest
assumed a pose and began reciting some humorous verses in French which
assumed a serious expression.
assumed a subtle expression, he shrugged his shoulders with an air of
assumed a vindictive expression.
assumed an attitude of prayer, looked at the icons, repeated the words
assumed an unnatural pose. Enthusiastic whispering was audible.
assumed its melancholy expression), "he was mentioned at Her Majesty's
assumption that everybody's welfare depended on this or that issue
assurance that the rumors about the Emperor being wounded were false. He
assurance that you will find protection! Markets are established in the
assure the officer on duty that they, the marshals, are on their way to
assured him was ready to do anything for him. The captain was also in
assured himself from the way Rostov looked at it that his coat had been
astonished and irritated the count, coming as it did in the form of a
astonished at the word. "Well, you see, I'm building. I mean to settle
astonishment at the genius of his hero, a feeling of wounded pride,
astonishment in their eyes chiefly because Pierre, unlike all the
astonishment pushed back again.
astounded.
astronomy, far from destroying, even strengthens the foundation on which
astronomy, physics, chemistry, botany, zoology, and so on, just in the
asylums, and schools were to be established on all the estates. Some of
at Alpatych from the back of the crowd.
at Balashev and, evidently understanding that he only acted thus because
at Bald Hills with his wife. This pleasure will be but a brief one,
at Bald Hills.
at Bolkonski silently with wide-open eyes.
at Denisov, now at the esaul, and now at the French in the village and
at Krasnoe and the Berezina, and informed him of his intentions for a
at Mytishchi, at Troitsa, and at Yaroslavl.
at Natasha, and as if anxious to conciliate her, replying to her intent
at Natasha. The curtain had not yet risen and the overture was being
at Natasha. When he ventured to glance her way again her face was cold,
at Otradnoe she had fallen in love with him. It was as if she feared
at Otradnoe. Mitenka himself, returning tipsy from the town, used to
at Papa!" though as it was they never took their eyes off the couple.
at Pierre but Pierre was no longer there. In his place was his
at Pierre kindly, with a fixed smile. The third lay prone so that his
at Pierre's fine though dirty linen and at the ring on his finger.
at Pierre. While one hand hung up the first string the other was already
at Prince Andrew when he talked to Natasha and timidly started some
at Prince Andrew, and, evidently not recognizing him, moved with his
at Prince Andrew, evidently considering something.
at Prince Andrew--relapsing gradually into a tone of grumbling contempt.
at Tilsit he asked the names of those who had come with Napoleon and
at Wolzogen with eyes that brightened under their puckering lids.
at Yankovo. Rostov was just mounting to go for a ride round the
at Yaroslavl, and Denisov who told him this news also mentioned Helene's
at a chair (which seemed to place itself under him), and sat down on it
at a continually increasing speed and all its energy was directed to
at a soldier in the ranks of the third company in a greatcoat of bluish
at a soldier who lay prone, with blood on his uncovered head. The
at a time and shaking them.
at all there'll be tears and 'Papa' and 'Mamma,' and she's frozen in
at all!"
at all; I simply feel that the army is my vocation."
at an officer of the suite who turned away from him. "There, you see!"
at any moment on the ryefield opposite.
at any of them but smiling on all, as if graciously allowing each the
at any other time. "Uncle" himself twisted up the hare, threw it neatly
at any rate as he saw it here, sometimes seemed to him based merely
at anyone else and took delight in his every movement. The sound of
at balls, amiably smiling in the society of the most brilliant women,
at blindman's buff with the pursuing army. At the Berezina they again
at certain hours, though she declared that no medicine would cure her
at close quarters as at a distance, sat down beside her and told her he
at convenient moments between the words, shouting, "Be off! Never let me
at dinner and all that evening Natasha was in a strange and unnatural
at dinner.
at ease by him, "but I hope I have not offended you. I always make it
at ease. From the first glance Princess Mary did not like Natasha. She
at eight o'clock in the morning
at eleven o'clock, careful of their coiffures and dresses, they settled
at first from afar he heard men's voices and then women's. The voices
at first impossible to enter the drawing-room door for the crowd of
at first, the hoarfrost on the dusty grass, the Sparrow Hills, and the
at her devotion and trustfulness, and an oppressive yet joyful sense of
at her heart. She could not assume that pose, which would have made her
at her own vileness, simply asked God to forgive her everything,
at her red face and chin (nearly always powdered), her moist eyes, and
at her reflection in the glass. "She flatters me," thought the princess,
at her reproachfully. "And who is it she takes after?" thought the
at her shoulders) "like Diana's...."
at her shoulders, and she involuntarily caught his eye so that he should
at her sister-in-law.
at her sparkling eyes, and under the mustache a happy rapturous smile
at her timidly over his spectacles, and like a hare surrounded by hounds
at her with enraptured eyes.
at her. Natasha as usual answered before she had time to think what
at her. She was pleased to see that he was captivated by her and it did
at him and did not think, but felt, about something different. She felt
at him, but stood frowning by the door of the hut.
at him, flushed and evidently trying to master her rapid breathing. And
at him, made some reply to Boris who sat down beside her. After playing
at him.
at him. After this volley the regimental commander clutched at his leg;
at him. Probably the word "gallant" turned the captain's thoughts to the
at himself. "I had other duties," thought he. "The people had to be
at his comrades who were paying no attention to him, and he moaned
at his coronation, and, waving his right arm, said:
at his daughter.
at his estate. As regularity is a prime condition facilitating activity,
at his expense, and a priest was paid to teach reading and writing to
at his hesitation and, trying to arouse his former devotional feeling,
at his horse. Natasha sat easily and confidently on her black Arabchik
at his own sensibility, when Princess Mary entered. He hurriedly took a
at his post. If Your Majesty does not intend to shed the blood of our
at his son.
at his youthfulness--and yet in the arrangement of his collar and hair
at home about the preparations for their departure.
at home again. He felt that he had grown up and matured very much. His
at home in Helene's house, which every clever man was obliged to
at home in a quiet haven. In Moscow he felt at peace, at home, warm and
at intervals, and the bullets passed somewhere in the fog singing in
at irregular intervals as before, followed by one or two cannon shots,
at it, and stamped his foot twice on the floor as a signal. The door
at it. Take it. Well, now go. Go."
at its halting place--a village on the highroad. The quartermasters who
at last became silent.
at last decided on anything? Are you going to be a guardsman or a
at last he opened and read his wife's letter.
at last he saw how a whole detachment of French cavalry was brought in,
at law, hunted over places that belonged by custom to the Rostovs, and
at leaving home for the first time in his life on bad terms with him,
at me?"
at night on the first of September.
at night. Come now, where has this great commander of yours shown his
at once consented to Petya's request and went himself to enter his name.
at once found the chords of the song.
at once lit up for me my whole past and the future path I should follow.
at once marry her secretly.
at once showed itself by countless signs. These signs were: Lauriston's
at once what he wanted, moved about and whispered as they passed
at once, and go to Bezukhov's, and tell him 'Count Ilya has sent you
at once, did not know how to do it. But again the sense that she
at once, when she heard the young man's discreet steps approaching
at once.
at one and the same time. This simultaneous discussion of many topics
at one another (now that the hunt was over and they were in the house,
at one another, and that look saved Pierre. Apart from conditions of war
at one another.
at rest," said he without altering his tone, beneath the politeness
at science. He received me graciously and made me sit down on the bed
at some distance could one cut across the zigzag path of the French. All
at some unknown period of time, only explains from a fresh side
at tea with Bilibin. "The fete is for tomorrow. How is your old fellow?
at that age."
at that moment and down the steps into the yard.
at that moment made itself felt.
at that time of autumn. The Sparrow Hills were visible in the distance,
at that time, a very high ruffle, and a brown dress coat. This stout
at that unusual morning hour, gazing at the dark face of the Virgin
at the Berezina (in both cases we had superior forces), the French army
at the English Club when he had challenged Dolokhov flashed through
at the French.
at the Razumovski's ball... and Countess Apraksina... I was so
at the Rostovs' he stayed till midnight. The Rostovs' footman rushed
at the Sloboda Palace he had been continuously under its influence, but
at the appointed time.
at the arsenal: sabers, pistols, and muskets which could be had at a low
at the ball. Apart from considerations of politeness which demanded the
at the beautiful Helene with her radiant face and at the red, broad, and
at the camp, which treated the tranquillity of the capital and its
at the captain as at those who were laughing, among whom Zherkov laughed
at the council of war in 1805: there was now a panic fear of Napoleon's
at the court-martial." Then he turned to Pierre. "Do you speak French?"
at the dinner. Rostov looked inimically at Pierre, first because Pierre
at the dog who was pretending to be in earnest about biting him,
at the door for an instant as if struggling with herself, and then ran
at the door. In a suffering and weary voice he was saying something to
at the doors, but after all he did at last enter first. He walked shyly
at the end as at the beginning of the battle. The moral force of the
at the entrance.
at the faces of his suite, young and animated as his own. Czartoryski,
at the field of battle as he was, and, as it seemed to him, with the
at the first pause, the guests rise with a rustle of dresses and say,
at the foot of the hill, jostled and overtook one another, waving their
at the front door, and the old nurse--knowing how to please her
at the front to shout, 'We are cut off!' and start running, but a brave
at the full stop. "I hope you will find him sympathetic and ready to
at the gypsies', with the result that he had no recollection of how he
at the hare with terrible swiftness aiming at his scut, and, thinking
at the head of a movement that had already become unrestrainable. He was
at the head of them Rostov recognized Napoleon. It could be no one else.
at the merchant Bronnikov's house, in the Square not far from here,
at the movements of Napoleon's stout legs and trying to avoid meeting
at the noisy party under the shadow of the porch roof.
at the officer's handsome, self-satisfied face, and noting the eager
at the old man with moist, shining, and ecstatic eyes, "I say, do you
at the palace of the Tsars, at which Russian notables and his own would
at the place where a familiar portrait hangs. "Sorrow is sent by Him,
at the present moment to adopt conscription or to call out the militia.
at the punishment of vice and folly, and patronizing talent and virtue:
at the rate of twenty-seven miles a day that they could not go any
at the recollection and turning to Makarin who gazed rapturously at him
at the ruins and did not recognize districts he had known well. Here and
at the same time influenced by traditions of chivalry and, desiring to
at the same time simply, naturally, and forcibly. Now in 1812, to anyone
at the sentinel. "Je vous demande si le colonel est ici." *
at the sick man's eyes, trying to guess what he wanted; she pointed
at the sound of shouting had run in from an adjoining room.
at the sound of the disconnected talk, the rustling of dresses, and the
at the spreading flames of the second fire in the distance.
at the staff and went into hospital.
at the steaming boiler, waiting till the sample, which a quartermaster
at the tea table. The servants stood round the table--but Prince Andrew
at the very moment when the Emperor, having alighted from the sleigh,
at the very oak he sought. The old oak, quite transfigured, spreading
at the wolf, and seized it by its hindquarters, but immediately jumped
at them here," said he. "Don't go away," he added, turning to Prince
at them, began to disport themselves in the dark sky: now flaring
at things! Send two men? And who then would give us the Vladimir medal
at this fifth murder. Like the others this fifth man seemed calm; he
at this moment I were asked: 'Would you rather be what you were before
at this point, evidently not liking the officer's remark, interrupted
at three in the morning, but generally found her already awake. She was
at two o'clock that night he sent for his secretary, Shishkov, and told
at which Pierre had to be present unless he wished to spoil the general
at which there were always three or four guests; after dinner she played
atmosphere made itself so strongly felt in the Rostovs' house as at this
atmosphere of a large and active town which is always so attractive to a
atmosphere of an army, announcing the approach of something decisive
atmosphere that the eyes smart, when the lungs are strengthened and
atmosphere, to be unable to stir, and to await something unknown,
atmosphere. They marched with handkerchiefs tied over their noses and
atrocity for which a "great" man can be blamed.
attaching himself as an orderly officer to Prince Bagration. He now came
attachments? Could she, like other women" (Vera meant herself), "love a
attack a weaker one and annihilate him, or at least oblige him to
attack directed by Napoleon against our left flank had been several
attack instead of being attacked, and so render the whole of this
attack large detachments?" he added inquiringly. No one replied.
attack on our left flank took place in the evening after the retreat of
attack our center we, having the center battery on this high ground,
attack that night, he decided, with the rapidity with which young people
attack that nothing on my part has provoked. It still depends on Your
attack the French right wing.
attack very long. About Tushin and the battalion that had been in
attack with music and with drums beating, and killed and lost thousands
attack would be ruined by the absence of those two regiments, which
attacked and captured by a superior enemy force as a result of one of
attacked the Russians while they were marching beyond the Pakhra? What
attacked them at Smolensk? What would have happened had the French moved
attacker should concentrate his forces in order to be stronger than his
attacking French army was exhausted. Not that sort of victory which is
attain that knowledge and are still infinitely far from our aim; but
attain the knowledge of which you speak."
attained and all their efforts and losses were in vain. But the French
attained by the guerrilla warfare which was destroying the French, and
attained.
attaining to the art of integrating them (that is, finding the sum of
attainment of certain ends--the greatness of Russia or of France,
attempt at familiarity on the part of the Russian messenger.
attempting to break through and take the road Kutuzov took, but retiring
attempts made to keep in mind the difficulties of the actual position.
attend to the estate, and would be in better spirits and temper, and
attend to the voice of their commander, or would they, disregarding him,
attend, for what he was saying did not interest her at all. She looked
attendance on him, to the enemy camp. Wintzingerode was not merely
attendants and singers. Behind them soldiers and officers bore a large,
attended some lectures somewhere and imagines that the devil is no match
attending Helene's evenings, to have something to say in her salon, and
attending to trifles, went past Natasha and Petya who were trying to
attention and evidently submitting to him involuntarily.
attention as it passed the front porch. With the help of a maid she was
attention from the unfinished game.
attention is devoted to it.
attention of a relative. The count, pipe in hand, was pacing up and down
attention on the Masonic manuscripts, but was unable to do so) the idea
attention to her severe remark--and began to laugh. She laughed, and in
attention to his story.
attention to it. He did not know that it would become more memorable to
attention to something within her that is only seen in pregnant women,
attention to the sound of the prince's footsteps. "Stepping flat on his
attention to them. At the gate of one house three Frenchmen, who were
attention to these things. But when our artillery or cavalry advanced or
attention, and Anna Pavlovna felt that the novelty she had served up was
attention.
attention.
attention.
attention. Dohkturov, a little man, sat opposite Weyrother, with
attention. He screwed up his eyes showing that he was listening.
attention. Moreover, everybody knew vaguely of Natasha's engagement to
attention. Napoleon apparently remembered seeing him on the battlefield
attentively and fixedly at these prisoners, who presented a specially
attentively around at the circle of officers, recognizing several of
attentively to Bagration's colloquies with the commanding officers and
attentively to what Prince Vasili said, but kept glancing at Princess
attire appeared at the door. Willarski, stepping toward him, said
attitude in Moscow and instead of his opponent's rapier saw a cudgel
attitude toward him that had taken place in society.
attitude.
attract attention. "Wait a bit, Kuragin. Listen! If anyone else does the
attracted Rostov's attention. This man was speaking to someone in the
attracted by social activity and puffed up by pride. On this ground
attracted everybody's attention. With a facetious smile on his face, he
attracting everyone's attention, yet as much at ease as though he were
attracting general attention, stood a tall, handsome, black-haired
attraction is in inverse proportion to the square of the distance. At
attraction more powerful than that of beauty. But the princess never saw
attraction to the earth, because its stalk withers, because it is dried
attraction.
attractions of her arms, shoulders, feet, and hair and expressed his
attractive a woman is the more constant she is likely to be," he added,
attractive than in former days.
attractive to men and women. An Englishman is self-assured, as being a
attributed to any one man, that no one ever foresaw it, and that in
attributed to his being too weak to write or to his considering the long
attributed. As often happens with passionate people, he was mastered by
attributing to it qualities of genius it does not possess. The best
auction for half its value, and half the debts still remained
audible the whole length of the table.
audible through the closed window.
audible, broken whisper, and began kissing his hand more rapidly, just
audible.
audibly that the coachman asked him:
audience over his spectacles and continued.
audience, seeking in them the same sense of ridicule and perplexity she
audience, which produced an effect unfavorable to the narrator. Several
audiences, but he does not like talking himself and can't do it, as you
aunt on her mother's side, a rich, childless widow who always lived in
aunt wished to hear him.
aunt without waiting to hear her speech about Her Majesty's health. Anna
aunt's efforts to dissuade her--and not merely to go herself but to
authentic Scotch carpet and a charter that nobody needs, and the meaning
author's remark.
authorities to secure advantageous means of communication for herself
authorities, projects, counsels, threats, and deceptions and is
authorities.
authorities. 'I have taken six lives,' he says (he was a great sinner),
authority but on secure bases. The Emperor said that the fiscal system
authority of the kings and the "fate" of the ancients, to reach the same
authority of the monarch.
authority that this doctor is a very learned and able man. He is private
authority, "you wish to insult me, and I am ready to agree with you that
authority, by guile, and by entreaty, from useless attacks,
authority, was the packing of the carpets. The count had valuable
authority. Rostopchin was so pleased with the fine role of leader of
authorized either to accept or refuse a truce and sent his adjutant to
authors, reformers, popes, and journalists, to the extent to which in
authors, we ought to be shown the connection existing between these men
autumn and spring in the fields on his bay gelding, sitting at home in
autumn and which Dessalles called les fils de la Vierge. In front was
autumn day was in keeping with the news of victory which was conveyed,
autumn in Otradnoe with the hunting, and the winter with the Christmas
autumn. Pierre had gone to Petersburg on business of his own for three
available for the regimental commander.
available: some horses were carting for the government, others were too
avenged, that his rancor was still unspent, weighed on his heart and
avenue at a gallop.
avenue from the house at Bald Hills. "She, poor innocent creature, is
avoid doing certain things, and speak French. He was one of those,
avoid further importunity, saying that he would give a note of hand
avoid notice. Petya decided to go straight to where the Emperor was and
avoid seeing her unpleasantly irritated and irresolute face, and said:
avoid seeing the girl she ran toward the house.
avoid when it deals with separate elements of motion instead of
avoided inquiries and tried to assure himself that nothing particularly
avoiding gardens and enclosures, going over new and unknown ground, and
awaited the enemy unconcernedly, did not riot or become excited or tear
awaited the inevitable explosion. Until the doctor's arrival the morning
awaiting a reply, Prince Andrew rose and left the table.
awaiting a reply. He frowned.
awaiting him.
awaiting him. Kutuzov even imagined that Napoleon's army might turn back
awaiting his Serene Highness, as everyone now called Kutuzov. From the
awaiting the boyars so long in vain: that there were drunken mobs left
awaiting what to his mind was a necessary, if but formal, observance of
awaits..."
awake, but did not live. Life gave her no new impressions. She wanted
awake. He heard female voices overhead.
awakening.
awards they had received for the campaign, and made expeditions to
aware of his existence. At the quarters of the commander in chief,
aware of his weaknesses.
aware of it. In a word, we must found a form of government holding
aware of that smell of decomposing flesh that had been so strong in
aware that in front, behind, and on all sides, other Russian columns
away again, she rose frowning, and clasping her hands behind her paced
away and attend to your father with your own unpracticed, awkward hands,
away and begged to be left in peace.
away and conceal himself, but at that moment he saw Makar Alexeevich
away and gazed into the darkness. A prisoner, the Russian soldier the
away and not leave them with the enemy, and there is an order from the
away and perished at the same rate from Moscow to Vyazma, from Vyazma
away and was about to ask the countess again how to go to him, when
away and went down the side of the corridor.
away but that had seemed the only thing to do.
away by the process of research and can therefore regard the event
away from Moscow," they were told. In his broadsheets Rostopchin
away from Petersburg, where he had been spending twenty thousand rubles
away from her, and that though it would be a terrible thing he would
away from her, and was jealous of Natasha with whom he spent all his
away from my father, as I wanted to. Or I might have been sent to serve
away from the Petersburg and Moscow roads. The reason for this was
away from the fire.
away from the girls, who at once assumed an air of inattention. "His
away from the sight, shouting angrily at the men who, as is always the
away from them, and they both knew that this had to be so and that it
away her tears, went resolutely up to Mademoiselle Bourienne, and
away his plate, which Tikhon briskly caught. "Suvorov!... Consider,
away somewhere, so as not to be near her. Soon after the Rostovs came
away the men advancing on him, and snatching his cap from his head he
away the telescope through which he had till now gazed over men's heads,
away when she saw him, and to her too he was not the Nicholas she
away with Grekov whose men had quickly assembled. They disappeared into
away with an air of disappointment, as though they were not speaking of
away with them. Sventsyani was remembered by the hussars only as the
away, Sonya! I don't want to quarrel with you, but go, for God's sake
away, and the women in the house began to wail.
away, crowds of men could be seen through the shimmering mist. Their
away, the rate we flew. We came across a train of loaded sleighs and
away, to pursue its fatal path to Smolensk.
away," or, "The wind has brought up the clouds." And in the same way the
away.
away.
away.
away.
away.
away. "Go away, all of you; it's not true! Killed!... ha, ha, ha!...
away. "If you are determined to rob, I'll..."
away. Hippolyte is her brother... Prince Vasili is her father... It's
away. Put this on the seat and this to the right."
away. The Frenchman looked at the linen, considered for a moment, then
away. The hay and the spring corn, of which Alpatych said there had been
away...."
awful pain he suffered made him moan incessantly and piteously, and his
awful!" She looked into her lover's face and saw in it a look of
awful..." and he burst into tears.
awfully glad you're my brother." She touched his mustache. "I want to
awkward and uncomfortable, and her burden oppressed her now more than
awkward silence that ensued, that insufficiently patriotic person
awkward to attract everyone's attention and to be considered a lucky man
awkward, and yet the desire to speak is there and silence seems like
awkward.
awkwardness or intentionally (no one could have said which) after the
awoke in Natasha's soul.
awry on his head, so Moscow involuntarily continued its wonted life,
baby, an old woman, and a healthy German girl with bright red cheeks
bachelor circles in which he moved.
back again, and hastens its own end. Napoleon, under pressure from his
back and bounded off yet more swiftly. From behind Erza rushed the
back and the disordered rear of the army, weighed all the circumstances,
back at the place where the shot had been fired and the dog was howling,
back from the Tambov estate and told me they are already offering eighty
back her hair, kissed him full on the lips.
back his chair, he rose from the table.
back his ears and rushed off headlong. He had been lying in the stubble,
back his troops in their anxiety to overwhelm and cut off the enemy and
back in a rage. Will you have coffee?"
back in his white shirt, and his curly head, were lit up from both
back like cardboard figures. Oh, it was beautiful, Monsieur Pierre! Your
back of the house, to the room of the eldest princess.
back of their necks. In the midst of the outspread line of Cossacks two
back on the sofa.
back rooms where a cork and various dressing gowns and male garments
back seized him by the arm, pulled him through the wicket, and ran back
back she went downstairs.
back to Tatarinova had stopped where the service was being held. Pierre
back to gladden and comfort his old parents.
back to him in his designation as "the man who does not give his name,"
back to his place, and the rows of troops on both sides of the post
back to the Emperor retired two steps, twitching off the cloth at the
back to the Kolocha and could get no farther; while the divisions of
back to the fire, and immediately fell asleep. He again slept as he had
back to the zone of fire, where under the influence of fear of death
back with their prisoners. Rostov galloped back with the rest, aware of
back!" he almost shouted, putting the child, who began screaming, on the
back, Cadet!" he cried angrily; and turning to Denisov, who, showing off
back, and between the two rows, which separated, the Emperor entered to
back, and bosom--which in the fashion of those days were very much
back, pulling down her tucked-up skirt.
back.
back. Her bust, which had always seemed like marble to Pierre, was
back. That part of the line was not entrenched and in front of it the
back. The French doctor held no taper; he was leaning against one of the
back."
back."
background. She was so ill that it was impossible for them to consider
backward and forward, made efforts to control himself and not become
backward movement. Adjutants and generals galloped about, shouted, grew
backwardness compared with Europe only heightened Pierre's pleasure.
backwardness of a people," said Napoleon, turning to Caulaincourt for
backwards and forwards and was at last brought to the doors of the
backwards and kept glancing uneasily around.
backwards down from the oven, her bare little feet catching at its
bad business."
bad form, but here he felt it incumbent on him to astonish them all by
bad language, came out of the drink shop, and, under the sign of the
bad man?"
bad people but of people such as myself," thought she.
bad temper, and in the morning Tikhon had already advised the architect
bad way of deciding whether a battle was won or lost. Those who retreat
bad...." he reflected, but while he was thinking this (the reflection
badly daubed pictures in clear daylight and without a glass. "Yes,
badness of the road from Petersburg to Moscow and of his Petersburg
baggage train should orders come for it to move, and to talk to no one
baggage train, the artillery, and columns of troops were defiling
baggage wagon, piled high, leather covered, and hemmed in on all sides,
baggage was already being dispatched to Olmutz. Near Hetzelsdorf Prince
baize-covered tables and their pigeonholes of documents in small rooms.
balalayka on which someone, who was evidently a master of the art, was
bald head he looked good-naturedly at the officer and the orderly and
bald head with its gray temples. He went on reading to the end, without
bald head, over which she again looked at the letter and the portrait,
ball at General Kikin's and that Ermolov was probably there too.
ball dress. She and all the Rostov family welcomed him as an old friend,
ball flew past, rose in the stirrups and sank back again. The soldiers
ball flew past. Evidently they were firing at the hussars, but the balls
ball in 1810, with her slender neck and arms and with a frightened happy
ball was even happier. They were both dressed in white muslin with pink
ball, flying close to him, caused him to duck and bend over his horse.
ballroom an old lady in a hooped skirt--this was Nicholas. A Turkish
ballroom.
balls at the village of Schon Grabern visible just opposite, in front of
balls, the same French theater, the same court interests and service
band immediately struck up "Conquest's joyful thunder waken..." All rose
band struck up in the gallery, and the guests settled down in their
band, came up and in angry tones asked the artillerymen for water.
bandaged seemed to him an hour. His arms felt numb, his legs almost gave
bandolier, while another smoothed and refolded his leg bands and put
bands and scour the countryside and put everything to fire and sword.
bands and two choirs of singers. Rostov danced the Trepak with Major
bands for us. Well, never mind."
bandy-legged domestic serf in a peaked cap and sheepskin coat.
banging the table--very little to the point as it seemed to his
bank by unseen hands. Prince Andrew and the officer rode up, looked at
bank, hesitating to step onto the ice. The general on horseback at the
banners gone astray and found on a wrong path," and his brow became
banners, cannon, and two enemy generals. For the first time, after a
banquet. On his way back, he noticed Rostov standing by the corner of a
bare arm and went on talking incessantly, attracting general attention
bare chest. He was conducted from that room along passages that turned
bare feet a smile of animated self-satisfaction flitted across his face.
bare feet. The boards of the floor creaked. Stepping cautiously from one
bare hand as red as his face.
bare legs and thin arms, separating from the others, went behind the
bare-legged Duport, in a tinsel-decorated jacket, jumped about to the
bare. In the midst of the song cries were heard, and fighting and blows
bare. The other, whose appearance particularly struck Pierre, was a
barefooted Frenchman in the blue coat went up to the Armenians and,
baring his yellow teeth and snapping at his hind legs.
barking in front of the harnessed horses.
barn and its snow-covered roof, that looked as if hewn out of some
baron, "we will finish this conversation elsewhere--at a ball one
baron.
barrel."
barrier except the barrier of his own will.
based on the consciousness of freedom.
based on the predominance of moral strength, for, not to mention heroes
based upon it, Pierre felt it necessary to disillusion him.
baseness become evident.
baseness! What meanness! I know you understand Fedya, my dear count;
basis of the sympathy he felt for, and the interest he took in, other
bass guffaw as he munched a piece of bread and cheese. Gervais laughed
bass, now piercingly shrill. His voice seemed to fill the whole wood and
bast matting and cover it with hay--that's the way!"
bast were hanging on the broken and withered branch of a magnolia.
bastards!" he cried, suddenly lifting his head.
bataillons ont toujours raison. *
batard!" * she added, as if supposing that this translation of the
bathe.
bathed in moonlight and motionless spread out before them glittering
bathhouse, a lodge, and a large brick house with semicircular facade
battalion came onto the bridge. Only Denisov's squadron of hussars
battalion commander's horse. The horse first, regardless of whether it
battalion, and when a brave officer was needed he was chosen.
battalion.
battalions re-formed, and the French who had nearly cut our left flank
battalions. While he was speaking, the curtain of smoke that had
batteries of the enemy.
batteries ranged on the slopes of the Pratzen Heights, directed at our
batteries should be set up by the morrow to act against the Russian
battery still with that same smile, trying not to obstruct the soldiers
battery when two balls, and then four more, fell among our guns, one
battery, those who had given him food, and those who had prayed before
battery. Prince Andrew followed with the suite. Behind Prince Bagration
battery. Several men were lying about who had not been removed. Around
battery; two guns were smashed and cannon balls fell more and more
battle and were engaged in peaceful occupations, the cavalry feeding the
battle and, in spite of the remonstrances of his courtiers, at twelve
battle but was always found where the situation was most difficult.
battle of Borodino, and if this or that other arrangement depended on
battle of Borodino, there was a soiree, the chief feature of which was
battle of Shevardino were fought, there also exists a definite and
battle of the three Emperors--that is to say, a slow movement of the
battle that has been won.
battle the soldiers excitedly try to get beyond the interests of their
battle there.
battle was fought had not been foreseen and that the Shevardino Redoubt
battle will depend and not on those others.... Success never depends,
battle would have taken place where we expected it. In that case
battle would still not take place. It would not take place because the
battle, Kutuzov left Krasnoe and went to Dobroe whither his headquarters
battle, and while we were looking for the French--having lost touch with
battle, but with his great tact and military experience carried out his
battle, while Napoleon, who was said to be a commander of genius,
battle--suddenly without any reason turned off to the left onto the new
battle.
battle. Pierre saw that there was a bridge in front of him and that
battle. With a minimum of effort and insignificant losses, despite the
battlefield galloped up.
battlefield.
battlefield. On the field between Borodino and the fleches, beside the
battles four times more men than the French army; the burning of Moscow
battles. He did nothing harmful to the progress of the battle; he
battles. He saw that what he was feeling was felt by all the men about
bayonets and cloudlets of smoke in the morning sun, there now spread a
bayonets and guns.
bayonets. But whether they were moving or stationary, whether they were
be a pity to entrust to a chit of a girl. "Fourthly and finally," the
be a square--for they are not drawn up for that."
be abandoned, and that they ought to get away as quickly as possible and
be able to resist calling him out, any more than a ravenous man can help
be able to understand himself and all he had seen and felt. But such
be accepted. He was told that it would not, and without waiting for the
be adjutant general to His Majesty...."
be an only son, to challenge him and shoot so straight! It's well
be angry with her without any reason, and she felt unhappy. She asked
be announced had passed straight through the glass porch between the
be anything but like other men, and we shall not be obliged to have
be appointed chief of the artillery, Kutuzov replied: "Yes, I was
be arranged, it is all very clear; but when applied to history that
be ashamed to do it, and suddenly everything vanished. And I awoke and
be at stake. But this one is too light, it's not becoming!"
be away in a foreign land amid strange surroundings, a manly warrior
be before he met Kuragin, despite his contempt for him and despite all
be better dressed than others, and would rather deprive himself of many
be better first to send for the military?
be brought before Napoleon himself. But instead of that, at the next
be brought to a head. The day after tomorrow will be Lelya's name day.
be called back to life from that realm of sorrow in which she had dwelt
be carried back with it oneself. Bolkonski only tried not to lose touch
be caught of something black--probably men--and at times the glint of
be clearly seen glittering as though freshly varnished. Down below,
be completely upset.
be convinced that the will of the historic hero does not control the
be corded up. Thanks to Natasha's directions the work now went on
be crossed and you will have to find out what is there, just as you will
be dead, or something so extraordinary may happen to one that honor and
be decided very shortly.
be defended, and an officer sent to inspect the locality comes in and
be defined, especially when the strength of the acting forces cannot be
be difficult to return to the old regime."
be distributed to those who had been burned out. But as food was too
be divorced from her husband (had such a report spread many would have
be done now, at that very moment, or it would be too late. He looked
be done, just as a quarter of an hour before it had not seemed strange
be done; he felt that everybody, including his mother and sisters, was
be ecstatic about it. But he retrieved his mistake at once. "Now, is
be either Mary Nikolievna's or the Ivanovs'!"
be explained in what this new force consists, for the whole interest of
be fixed in the sky and felt that something new was appearing on his own
be fond of him--for being his father--and of her--for being his
be forgiven him, for he enjoyed much."
be found, especially around young sovereigns, and of whom there were
be gentle and kind to his cousin. She thoroughly realized the wrong he
be given." To give that terrible order seemed to him equivalent to
be good as a Minister, but as a general he is not merely bad but
be granted. Pierre will get everything as the legitimate son."
be guiding. Ever since the enemy's entry into Smolensk he had in
be happier with her than with some doll-like Julie. I can always
be happy about!" thought he.
be heard from all sides. A carriage that followed the escort ran
be heard, subdued by suffering and broken by sobs.
be heard.
be heard. On the Arbat Square the troyka caught against a carriage;
be heard. Pierre offered the use of his carriage, which had overtaken
be historical, and it seemed to him that it would now be best for
be in a more prominent position," continued Berg, "and vacancies occur
be in doubt, even for a moment, you will see your Emperor exposing
be in me what there is now. But perhaps he'll come today, will come
be in! Kutuzov was a traitor, and Prince Vasili during the visits of
be indubitably man's highest happiness. Here and now for the first time
be killed," a sergeant was saying angrily and reproachfully.
be kissed, and again Prince Andrew noticed tears in the old man's eyes.
be left behind and making a list of them as the countess wished, and she
be long? Are things ready?"
be loved by them, it is not my fault that I want it and want nothing
be my teacher..." And lowering his big arm he offered it to the slender
be nothing, or mere content without form.
be of any use or no. Danger, cannon balls, and bullets were just what he
be of no use to you; they are worth nothing and have shown it by making
be on intimate relations. He had never missed a carousal at Danilov's
be on the chest in the passage. The chest in the passage was the place
be overthrown by the angel whom it has pleased the Almighty, in His
be paid for anything taken from them. As proof of this the peasant had
be parted from her) would be gained, so pacifying himself with this
be passed on to headquarters.' I go to the commissioner. I enter, and at
be pictured, and of whom he never thought without a swelling heart and
be possible?" she thought, not daring to look at his face, but still
be present at the battle out of curiosity. The accountant, a stout,
be prompted by the governor's wife and not asking himself whether or not
be punished as he deserves," said he with the vindictive heat with which
be put to shame and perish, and may all the nations know that Thou art
be rumpled.
be scraped together, others disputed that opinion and maintained that
be seen from the hill on the opposite bank but was not yet visible from
be seen, as the military scientists might convince themselves by the
be seen.
be separated from its supplies by the broad river Oka, which cannot be
be settled. In that circle the Moscow enthusiasm--news of which had
be shaken in her determination.
be simply: Maison de ma Mere, *(2) he concluded. "But am I really in
be so good as to set off for Kaluga on receipt of this, and there await
be so, but for all that he would be forever bound to Pierre by gratitude
be stopped and the countess herself would lean out of the window and beg
be superseded by Bennigsen all will be lost, for Bennigsen showed his
be sure to arouse him.
be surprised to hear that the reason for this is Buonaparte! The case
be taken, but the command of the armies became still more confused and
be taken... where's the hurry?"
be talked over at length. At last the conversation gradually settled on
be talking to a staff officer of such importance. "It's a lovely place!
be that afterwards, ashamed of their false accusations, they will make
be there. His having moved his troops there is only a ruse; he will
be they what they might.
be to blame if, without ever speaking of it to anyone, she continued to
be transferred to the Guards at once?" said she.
be troubled, while he on his side promised not to undertake anything
be unable to live for a single moment.
be well."
be with him better than with the others, and when alone with him she
be with you!'" shouted Tikhon, waving his arms with an angry scowl and
be worse if he fires the bridge. See, here's an officer jammed in
be worth! It is not to be! Everywhere, at cards and in war, I am always
be written out which the former commander in chief, to avoid personal
be your husband." (He rose and kissed Vera's hand, and on the way to
be your skirmishing at Durrenstein, or gunpowder at all, that will
be your worthy helpmeet in Masonry." And after a pause, he added: "But
be) who had crushed him.
be, I'll tell them all to hold their tongues and will hide it from the
be, and there are, many more such girls somewhere whom I do not yet
be, and which, as Nicholas soon found out, was due to the bad state of
be, but no me...."
be, pretty--so rapturous were their smiles and so sparkling their eyes.
be, whatever he engaged in, the evil and falsehood of it repulsed him
be.
be. Now listen! Give this letter to Michael Ilarionovich. * I have
be? That's right! The great thing is the serving, that's it." And with a
beaming smile to his head.
beams of mild and majestic light around, and already he felt himself
bear malice or enmity toward thy brother. Be kindly and courteous.
bearing down on them from behind, and an unreasoning hurry and alarm
beast.... In Poland, if you please, he nearly killed a Jew."
beaten too--they say he's nearly done for.... Oh, the people... Aren't
beaten, flogged, or sent to Siberia, I don't suppose they are any the
beaten, that the enemy was flying and must be driven out; but at the
beating the ground in unison, one seemed to hear left... left... left.
beating us. One can't walk in the streets. But, above all, the French
beats!" He took Dolokhov's hand and put it on his heart. "What a foot,
beaucoup d'estime, and again her face clouded over with sadness.
beaucoup de merite), a newly appointed maid of honor and her mother, and
beautiful Helene, whose eyes several times met those of the handsome
beautiful bosom, on which she readjusted a diamond necklace. From time
beautiful feeling, such a..."
beautiful out in the fields, the little town presented a particularly
beautiful, and majestic city; and a strange and majestic moment! In what
beautiful, expressionless face. Amid the scattered property and the
beautiful, radiant eyes. It was as if joy--a supreme joy apart from the
beautiful, thoughtful eyes, then his uplifted, rosy upper lip trembled
beautiful."
beauty and her dress. Soon after their arrival Mademoiselle George went
beauty and love which it was worth living for. Whatever worldly baseness
beauty as she glided away. "And how she carries herself! For so young a
beauty, and in a word--an old woman; and secondly because Pierre in his
beauty, of which he had heard much.
became an empire and French armies went to Russia at the will of one
became animated. The Guardsmen told Rostov of their march and how they
became confused in his speech and stopped in the middle of what he was
became disorganized, many were drowned and many surrendered, but those
became frequent visitors at the Rostovs' house in Petersburg were Boris,
became her best. Before and behind them other visitors were entering,
became his enemies and their forces advanced against the fresh forces he
became more and more excited, "A man who's a better man than you in
became possible, inevitable, and very near.
became quite pleasant again.
became semidark, and the sharp rattle of the drums on two sides drowned
became silent. The raft had long since stopped and only the waves of the
became strange, confused, and misty in Pierre's eyes.
because I have exerted myself on his behalf, befriended him, and helped
because I love. Everything is united by it alone. Love is God, and to
because Kutuzov had paid no attention to his offer to take part in the
because Mademoiselle Bourienne was in the way, and because, without
because Moscow, the capital, was no more and only the army remained.
because Napoleon had a cold, and that if he had not had a cold the
because Napoleon wished it and a man who says that this happened because
because Pierre pointed her out to him and because she was the first
because at the broken bridge across that river the calamities their army
because fifty thousand corpses lay there, but even on the island of St.
because he could not. In the middle of a figure he beckoned to Rostov
because he had not been invited to attend the council of war, and
because he has been a benefactor to them both. As Sterne says: 'We don't
because he knew that everyone has friends, "you see, I have considered
because he lacked the power to do so but because he understood something
because he liked the things they liked. With others Balaga bargained,
because he ordered it; strange as these suppositions appear, yet human
because he wanted to be appointed director of one of the educational
because he was suffering and others were suffering and that man near him
because her nose had to be cleared, and so on. What for people in their
because his advice was useful and the Emperor Alexander held him in high
because his line was not straight, he reached the third company.
because it concerned not himself but another, his daughter, whom he
because it harmonized with any idea of right and wrong, but because he
because it involved him in too much expense, but still his affairs did
because of me.' So he confessed and it was all written down and the
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
because of the emotions that choked him. Meeting at large gatherings
because other Russians, sitting in warm rooms, proposed that they should
because she said something in French."
because the boy standing below wants to eat it?
because the mere sound of her tender, caressing tones soothed her
because there was nothing to reproach her with. She had all that people
because they had to leave billets they had grown accustomed to, or some
because to marry her, a girl almost without fortune, would mean ruin to
because we have to seek our bread in the sweat of our brows, but because
because while an adjutant was riding more than a mile to Napoleon
because..."
because..." but Murat interrupted him.
become a habit. Schemes and devices for which he never rightly accounted
become a pilgrim herself. When Theodosia had gone to sleep Princess Mary
become an Emperor he again went out to kill people in Italy, Austria,
become as I used to know him when a child: kind, affectionate, with that
become completely changed, and had quite left behind his former habits
become everything to me?" she asked herself, and immediately answered,
become golden and bright-red islands amid the green winter rye. The
become habitual to him and, his handsome head held high, entered his
become her social vocation and, sometimes even when she did not
become intimate with him, and finally make his request.
become more friendly than ever. Denisov never spoke of Rostov's family,
become not merely meaningless but contemptible and ridiculous, and to
become of him if Natasha didn't keep him in hand.... Have you any idea
become rosier, had curly dark hair, and, when merry and laughing, quite
become thoroughly conversant with that unwritten code with which he had
become three times as rich as before.
become translucent when the brilliant sun appeared and magically colored
becomes.
becoming dangerous. He had told her that after the sixteenth he could
bed as before, but the stern expression of his quiet face made Princess
bed on the top of the chest, crumpling her gauzy pink dress under her,
bed to be set up in the glass gallery, another day he remained on the
bed with his head lower than the pillow, and was smacking his lips in
bed, a stout Uhlan, continued to sit on his bed, gloomily frowning and
bed, and appeared to be meditating as he looked contemptuously at his
bed, ran all disheveled out of the mud hut to embrace him, and the
bed.
bed. "Ugh, how hard it is! Oh, that this toil might end and you would
bed. He felt that only in the ordinary conditions of life would he
bed. He realized from the first that he would not get up again, despite
bedroom in his dressing gown, where he found his wife still at her
bee helps in this work, and may say that in this lies the purpose of the
bee sucking from the chalice of a flower and says it exists to suck the
bee. But the ultimate purpose of the bee is not exhausted by the first,
been a vagrant and had done nothing. So they asked the old man: 'What
been able to analyze his feelings he would have found that his steady,
been able to arouse in her such an incomprehensible and terrifying
been able to retain the old prince's favor for twenty years had long
been administered in time and she was now out of danger, though still so
been appointed commander in chief. So Prince Andrew, having received an
been as good as Weyrother's, but for the disadvantage that Weyrother's
been at work on the battery, threw down their spades and ran to meet the
been attacked by French cavalry and that, though the attack had been
been avoiding Natasha because it seemed to him that his feeling for her
been bewildered. At that time, the Russians were so used to victories
been brought from Smolensk and had since accompanied the army. Behind,
been brought up in the most aristocratic circles.
been cleared of the enemy were most diverse and personal, and at first
been conscious of ever since the appearance of the comet, and especially
been cut down and a piebald mare and her foal were wandering in front of
been denied. They do not see that the role of the natural sciences in
been destroyed by the Cossacks and the peasants, who killed them off
been destroyed or not. And if they have somehow been overlooked, you
been devoted to describing the actions of various kings, commanders,
been dislocated by the capture of the Shevardino Redoubt on the
been doing, as though it were all an old-time story, and he listened not
been dreadful for him, but he understood it differently. He thought it
been dreaming since he met Joseph Alexeevich. Loud knocks were heard at
been due to her need of children and a husband--as she herself had once
been dug. Within the entrenchment stood ten guns that were being fired
been expressed in his dream at Mozhaysk.
been for his thin, compressed, twitching lips and dull, gloomy, fixed
been foreseen, the Russian army of thirty-five thousand men commanded
been fulfilled long ago. I should long ago have joined the archduke. And
been going about the house all the morning finding fault with everyone
been happy, weariness of life overcame him with its former intensity,
been he was a most worthy man. You don't meet such men nowadays.... And
been her lady's maid before her marriage and now performed a sort of
been hitched on in front, rumbled over the tree stumps and branches and
been holding it up by the linen bands attached to it were relieved by
been in disorder, no better wife for Nicholas than Sonya could have
been in other days, and which, as he learned from the talk of the
been inactive, without food, in constant fear of death, and their pale
been intriguing!"
been issued by the Austrian commissariat, and the regiment had marched
been killed or not and whether the cannon had been captured or saved.
been killed. All I know I heard at second hand from others. I only know
been liberated and raised to the summit of her glory, there was nothing
been looking at.
been lost if he had not died. He stormed fortresses with thirty thousand
been lying there for nearly a month, and says the peasant, 'they lie
been made earlier and that a battle should have been fought two days
been mentioned among the officers found on the field of battle, a list
been minutely described. Princess Mary was sitting alone in her room,
been misled by their governor. And these ruined inhabitants, setting
been of it: Prince Andrew's coming to Otradnoe and their coming to
been on his way back to Russia long ago had not his wound unexpectedly
been ordered to attack Forminsk. But only Broussier had been there at
been playing cards with the majority of the more distinguished and older
been preparing for it, and with a low bow offered it to Kutuzov.
been put on a level on which the question itself cannot exist. In our
been reassigned to his former squadron, had been on duty and had gone
been recommended to Prince Andrew he had already risen above the general
been refused. He asked in a hesitating, piteous voice.
been seized, that the peasants were rioting and robbing people on their
been senseless, it was impossible.
been sent about with counterorders--when it had become plain that the
been settled once for all till death and that to change it was not in
been shaved for a soldier, Michael would have had to go.' called us
been shown in and out of the minister's room by the adjutant on duty,
been sitting with the old aunt rose hurriedly and overtook Prince Vasili
been so many less men in Napoleon's army and the war could not have
been so pleased at Olmutz and according to which an ensign might rank
been staying at her brother's with her husband and children since early
been taken by the French as a trophy.)
been taken out everywhere, and though she was certainly good-looking
been taken out of the cases, they recommenced packing, and it turned
been taken out of the churches and everybody was to be ordered to leave.
been there at seven in the morning," returned Bilibin with a smile. "You
been thinking.
been till then. At that time Dokhturov had under his command, besides
been to his captors; and in fact the guard of the second day did not
been told that Anatole was married, with some arsenic she had stealthily
been told to report.
been told to, and the Emperor Francis merely looked fixedly into his
been treated in the same way, and so have others who on the plea of
been trying first one remedy and then another. Worn out by sleeplessness
been unable to pass because of a drunken crowd rioting in front of
been very kind to me. As you see" (he glanced with an amused air and
been waiting.
been wished for, and that no one but himself with his Mitenka and
been won. To speak of what would have happened had Napoleon sent his
been written was only one intermediate stage in its destruction, and
been written. He took the letter from Michael Ivanovich's hand, put it
bees, by force of habit and custom cleaning out the brood cells, with
bees. They have almost all died unawares, sitting in the sanctuary they
beetles, Prince Andrew noticed that there was not a soul about and that
befallen his son.
befitted a grownup man and an officer--without hinting at their previous
before December. What can be keeping him? Illness, probably! His health
before Ilagin's red-spotted Erza passed them, got within a length, flew
before Nicholas heard one he knew, Voltorn, giving tongue at intervals;
before Prince Andrew and flattered him with that subtle flattery which
before Rostov had time to make out what the black thing was that had
before an enemy who, after losing HALF his men, stood as threateningly
before and the path to the hothouse, along which the prince was in the
before any of the others. Behind, along the riverside and across the
before coming to the dinner he had had his hair and whiskers trimmed,
before commencing negotiations, but in just the same way two months ago
before could be, and without solving this problem, or at all regretting
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
before going down she went into the room where the icons hung and, her
before going to her father. The doctor came downstairs and went out to
before he could reach Znaim. Hence Bagration with his four thousand
before he died?" thought Pierre. He recalled Karataev and his death and
before he felt the bed rocking backwards and forwards beneath him as if
before he had not understood how the idea of leaving the quiet country
before heard Speranski's famous laugh, and this ringing, high pitched
before her eyes, began singing again, and again began walking up and
before her whom he loved and who loved him? Had he expected to live he
before him a Frenchman hitting a peasant with a blunt saber and trying
before him and around him and was supposed to be directed by him and to
before him from the hill, and with his whole soul followed the movement
before him with such vividness, clearness, and charm that it seemed as
before him with the force of reality and drew nearer. Prince Andrew
before him, and he looked at the fallow field, the bushes, and the sky,
before him, that he was out of humor, as was sometimes the case when he
before his Old Guards, renounced the throne and went into exile. Then
before his eyes and he lost consciousness. When he came to himself, a
before his shelter, had been tasted.
before his shop which opened onto the street. On seeing Alpatych he went
before it left Moscow, affirm that all was in order in the Grand Army,
before it was halted facing the enemy. Again, as at the Enns bridge,
before leaving, Prince Andrew went to his son's rooms. The boy,
before loving them; his heart was now overflowing with love, and by
before she was married, but then came the maneuvers, and considerations
before tears gushed from his eyes and he concluded in a trembling
before the battle, the figure of the insignificant little Napoleon, and
before the heights on which the Russian batteries stood guarding the
before the icon. All the others did the same. Then the count embraced
before the icons that had been left here and there hanging on the wall.
before the portrait. At a single gesture from him everyone went out on
before the ranks.
before the wind. It was growing lighter and lighter. That curly grass
before this happened I did for some reason mean to go to Petersburg,"
before we are turned out of Petersburg."
before when she was present, Nicholas went up to her without waiting to
before with proposals and demands for him to join up with the army
before yesterday during my daily walk through the village I witnessed a
before you, everything. And you..."
before, Natasha had been in a constant state of alarm, depression, and
before, a soldier was lying athwart the rows of scented hay, with his
before, and a group of Russians, both men and women, gathered about him.
before, and immediately continued:
before, and on both sides, crowds of militiamen with bared heads walked,
before, but never so strongly as now. When similar doubts had assailed
before, he had given a neighbor three families of house serfs. "So in
before, he wished to do what the young man wanted. Having been sent with
before, interlarding their talk with the same aimless expletives.
before, just as he never could repeat to Pierre the words of his
before, others simply enjoyed hearing how the master talked, while the
before, some playing cards (there was plenty of money, though there was
before, somehow it had always happened that we did not meet. And as long
before, were now visible in the distance. And farther still, beyond
before, when I had a nap and told Bennigsen to issue orders? Or was it
before, with his head in his hands. His face expressed suffering. He
before, yet when under the same conditions and with the same character
before--presented a well-ordered array of two thousand men each of whom
before--she felt a need of being angry and would choose as the handiest
before. "How often we sin, how much we deceive, and all for what? I am
before. Having taken a kerchief from the cupboard, Willarski bound
before. He is a second autocrat," he concluded with a victorious smile.
before. I am in love, my friend!"
before. Ilyin tried to imitate Rostov in everything and adored him as a
before. It was a German cart with a pair of horses led by a German, and
before. Others again spoke of the battle of Salamanca, which was
before? And how happy I am to have found it at last! Yes! All is vanity,
before?" She recalled her love for Prince Andrew in all its former
befriend him."
beg him to forgive, forgive, forgive me for everything...."
beg you all to help me. Brunn's attractions must be shown him. You can
beg you to consider yourself free, and to be assured that, in spite of
began crossing himself. The postilion and all the other servants did the
began for the first, second, and third columns, which had gone down
began giving orders. A light footstep and the clinking of spurs were
began has a war been fought under such conditions as those that obtained
began her speech.
began jumping and striking one foot rapidly against the other. In the
began laying out his cards for patience.
began living for others. I experienced just the reverse. I lived for
began looking through a lorgnette at his elevated legs.
began making happy plans for the future. He decided that he must attend
began popping corks and filling the champagne glasses. After the fish,
began pressing it to different parts of his breast as if trying to find
began proving anything, or talking argumentatively and calmly and she,
began reading. The old prince, now and then using abbreviations, wrote
began reciting some French verses describing her guilty love for her
began refuting his spiritual daughter's arguments.
began riding downhill to where the roll of musketry was heard but where
began running hither and thither in the passage like a frightened hen,
began shouting with uncalled-for wrath, and therefore much to the
began singing her solfeggio. When she had finished her first exercise
began speaking in a voice that faltered and trembled with emotion. This
began taking him with him when he went out on expeditions and had him
began to beat on both sides of them, and at that sound Pierre felt as
began to cry.
began to devise and carry out a plan of how Princess Mary should be
began to disperse as soon as Denisov began reading his answer. Rostov
began to doze. Suddenly a feeling of happiness seized him.
began to expound his plans to a general sharing his quarters, until
began to express their opinions of him as people always do after a new
began to fall. Prince Andrew turned away and began pacing the room.
began to grow depressed or who lost strength were sifted out of the army
began to hum to himself, producing a queer sound which immediately broke
began to make the countess anxious and she glanced uneasily at the
began to prepare for their night's rest. They all appeared angry and
began to read. From reading he passed to sleeping, from sleeping to
began to set. The baggage carts drew up close together and the men
began to sob. "My child, my dear one! Burned, burned!"
began to speak eagerly, occasionally lapsing into French or expressing
began to speak:
began to spread in Moscow; people spoke of an appeal by the Emperor to
began to talk about her.
began to talk to him and make him admit that there was no cause for his
began to tell of how at Potsdam the impious Bonaparte had stolen the
began to think of him, the recollection of the old prince, of Princess
began to try to invent a name and to say something about his reason for
began to wail as they looked at the fires--the smoke and even the flames
began unexpectedly to talk about Princess Mary, blaming her for her
began weeping and kissing Prince Andrew's knee.
began wiping her eyes and explaining.
began writing in pencil on a page he tore out. He wrote to his sister:
began, had an opposite effect: the longer it continued and the greater
began, that is, an event took place opposed to human reason and to human
began. Count Ostermann with his suite rode up behind the squadron,
beggar's sack!"
begged Natasha to believe that she could not help loving her as the one
begged him to begin. Everyone became silent.
begged them to walk up. The first person who came to meet the visitors
begged to be allowed to swim across the river before the Emperor's
begin proceedings, but I advise you to ride over to the staff and settle
begin shouting, but I am not one to be shouted down. I said what I had
begin the engagement.
begin the explanation Sonya expected.
begin. And he says Buonaparte is in Braunau! Shows you're a fool. You'd
beginning of security. A new horizon and new labors were opening out,
beginning of the nineteenth century lies in the movement of the mass of
beginning to cry.
beginning to feel for the pretty and provocative Mademoiselle Bourienne
beginning to guess what love is, derived the notion that his father had
beginning to make plans for marrying one of the richest heiresses in
beginning to scatter, and the young wolves were bigger than dogs. It was
beginning, Anna Pavlovna gave one of her soirees. The "cream of really
beginning. But even had the aim of the Russians been to drive the French
begins to remember what happened before one was in the world..."
begun by no wish of mine may finish as quickly as possible!" said he,
begun by the will of one man, Napoleon, that argument seems not merely
begun to get used in the corridor, was still stronger here. It was a
begun to improve.
begun to talk, and wanted to express what had brought him to his present
begun to think of the last station and was still pondering on the same
begun to understand too much. And it doesn't do for man to taste of the
behalf of the whole family I beg you to come, mon cher!" These words he
behave here as you did in Petersburg, you will end very badly; that is
behaving very well in this matter. "Youth, frivolity... well, God be
behind a liveried footman who cleared the way for them, she heard a
behind a long narrow cloud that hung above it. A few minutes later it
behind a newly dug pond filled with water to the brink and with banks
behind by that terror, opened and closed again.
behind each chair--stood waiting for the prince to enter. The head
behind felt, though they did not show it, that Moscow would certainly
behind him and brightly lit up the enormous panorama which, rising like
behind him as if to take something. The members of his suite, guessing
behind him not venturing to distract his attention. He looked now at the
behind him.
behind his back. His old sister-in-law popped in a small bundle, and one
behind moved infantry. The commander in chief was standing at the end of
behind the Emperor. The Apsheron men, excited by the Tsar's presence,
behind the carriage he stepped onto the pavement.
behind the cavalry. He was armed with a musketoon (which he carried
behind the chair, held it in position. By the chair stood the priests,
behind the door. Ten minutes later, all the young Melyukovs joined the
behind the pineapples at her husband whose face and bald head seemed
behind the scenes something metallic was struck three times and
behind the times, and had sunk, as he expressed it to himself, into
behind them, another fell in front and splashed Dolokhov with blood.
behind them, in a large group, blue French dragoons on gray horses could
behind them. The wagons escorted by the hussars drew up to the picket
behind, and the monotonous tramp of thousands of feet resounded. The
behind, though more than a hundred perished in that way. He did not
behind, where his French valet and others were packing the last of his
behind.
behind.
behind. And now here we stand hungry."
behind. We had a little girl, but God took her before I went as a
behindhand. She was still sitting before a looking-glass with a dressing
being accustomed to the respect due to his rank in the service, Balashev
being alone and despondent! A strange face may seem unpleasant or
being beaten and finally feeling that his hands were bound and that a
being bombarded by a hundred and thirty guns which Napoleon had ordered
being carried by. She looked out. The men servants were carrying the
being carried out or moved about, and the mirrors and pictures had been
being deceived, my instinct tells me of negotiations with France and
being done there.
being dragged along by his armpits through the garden at Bald Hills,
being dragged away and the wounded carried off.
being drenched by the rain, all looked black whether chestnut or bay.
being formed. But now they have had him transferred to my regiment and
being free, for it is irrevocably linked to the moment at which it was
being given out, everybody was escaping--going away somewhere, and
being gloomy. For the same reason they are always hard at work and in a
being here, what would it matter?" thought he, looking at an officer who
being imposed on him which he could not fulfill, and pleased him as an
being is seized with pain, suffers, and ceases to exist.... Why? It
being loved by her. At times everybody seemed to him to be occupied with
being moved, and the probing of his wound at the dressing station.
being occupied with serious matters. In winter, except for business
being only two miles off the Smolensk highroad. During the last three
being paid to her, read the last words:
being plowed a second time.
being punished for my own and other men's sins. But I have not killed
being received by the count.
being reminded by the smell of burnt cork of the sensation of her kiss,
being revealed, and were designed only to form a channel through which
being rose in her imagination, and carried her into a totally different
being said, thought, and felt that day by its rider.
being shaped. From the irritation of the older men, the curiosity of the
being so bright: that's because she's living through the last days of
being stronger than the enemy at a given moment. That's all."
being tested.
being the center of our position and where rows of fragrant new-mown hay
being told she sat upright, glancing now at her beautiful round arm,
being too much loved; and besides, you are free, you could throw it
being uncorded and the luggage taken out of the carts to make room for
being used as a guardhouse, Pierre was placed apart under strict guard.
being well disposed toward Boris, who had managed to please him the day
belief is natural and agreeable to traders, agriculturists, and soldiers
believe in the efficacy of that plan, was directing the whole business
believe it, I have literally not a penny and don't know how to equip
believe me on my honour that to me personally it would be a pleasure
believe me, wouldn't drink their vodka! 'It's not the day for that!'
believe me," he went on, growing warmer and beating his chest, "I'll
believe me..."
believe that she could live when her beloved boy was killed in the bloom
believed implicitly. Yet strange to say Boris' presence in his wife's
believed in the possibility of peace and worked zealously to that end,
believed it without any mental reservation. The absence of suffering,
believes, in the speaker's tone of conviction and earnestness, or the
bell clanging. The side horses, pressing against the shafts of the
belle." *(2) The distinguished Prince de Ligne wrote her eight-page
bells was heard from the gateway as a little trap passed out.
bells, and of the wind. History must do the same. And attempts in this
belong to the province of Smolensk."
belonged to. They belonged to a column that should have been far in
belonged, thought and said what men who have no convictions but wish
belonging to members of the family, there were about a hundred and
belonging to that escort, but when they reached the supply stores they
belongings did not arrive till the thirtieth.
beloved Russia; to defile Thy temples, to overthrow Thine altars, and to
beloved and intimate human being that is dying, besides this horror at
beloved features that were so deeply engraved on his memory. The Emperor
beloved nobility and my good peasants and so use the last resources of
beloved, and was happy in regard to it.
below his throat rushed to his face and eyes. He could not draw breath.
below the high note. "Ah, God! How fine! Did I really take it? How
below the horizon and an evening frost was starring the puddles near
below the knoll, with head bowed and elbows on his knees. Berthier
below the shoulder. Pierre went with Anna Mikhaylovna into the small
below, but higher up at the village of Schlappanitz where Napoleon stood
below.
belt and handed it to them, as if to aid them.
belying Peronskaya's remarks about his rudeness, and approaching Natasha
bench and put it beside the table. Ermolov, Kaysarov, and Toll, who had
bench formed the center of the gathering) and to speak so that he might
bending down a finger.
bending his forehead to hers just touched it, and pressed her hand so
bending over his saddlebow and hardly able to control his shying horse,
beneath his dignity to give me satisfaction, then..."
beneath the bow over its head, with no thought of slackening pace and
benefactor was heard speaking all the time and the sound of his words
bent forward, the hussar started and bent forward in exactly the same
bent his head, and told Tushin that he could go. Prince Andrew went out
bent on him confused him. "You are flurried--compose yourself!" Napoleon
bent over her frame to hide a smile probably evoked by the amusing scene
bequeathed his great deeds to posterity. But in Europe a reaction
beringed fingers. "Tell me, as you would a sister, what I ought to do.
beset the new arrivals. Count Ilya, again thrusting his way through the
beside "Uncle," begging him to play something more.
beside Dolokhov, nudging with his elbow in a friendly and offhand way
beside Mavra Kuzminichna.
beside Vereshchagin.
beside a long row of unharnessed French guns. At the approach of the
beside him.
beside the farthest of the four unlimbered cannon. Before the guns an
beside the fence. And even that ruined and befouled house--which in
beside the sofa.
beside whom sat only one elderly lady, who with her thin careworn face
beside you?"
beside, and behind him. Pierre ran down the slope. "Where am I going?"
besides all this something creaked, there was a whiff of fresh air, and
besides the look of joyful emotion it had worn yesterday while telling
besides, Drubetskoy, who says he is an old friend of yours, is not at
best families in Russia, but she was poor, and having long been out of
best for him to retire more to the left and more to the south, worrying
best moments of his life suddenly rose to his memory. Austerlitz with
best of officers could do in his position, he was in a state akin to
best way."
betook herself to the ballroom, picked up her guitar, sat down in a dark
betray her agitation, while to decline their offers to dress her would
betraying by every word and movement that they none of them forgot what
betraying us! Russia alone must save Europe. Our gracious sovereign
betrothed comes here now--there will be no avoiding a quarrel; but alone
betrothed, of Princess Mary, or of life in the country did not once
betrothed, seeing, hearing, feeling her nearness, her breathing, her
better and roomier part of Andrew Savostyanov's hut. The men, women, and
better listen more carefully!"
better now. Natasha had not left her room that morning. With compressed
better opportunity."
better to shoot such rabble," and burst into loud laughter, so strange
better understood by them. "By rights I am a militia officer, but my men
better view of the whole crowd. The tall lad was standing in front,
better, than previous dispositions by which he had won victories. His
better-looking.
better. But Bogdanich, without looking at or recognizing Rostov, shouted
better. Oh, she is certainly the most charming woman in the world," she
between Mikulino and Shamshevo there were large forests, extending in
between Nicholas, Pierre, Natasha, and Countess Mary was the common
between Ruza and Mozhaysk. Napoleon himself was in Moscow as late as
between Semenovsk and the Knoll Battery, where thousands of men perished
between a despairing wail and a tender murmur, so that the wail fell
between a man who says that the people of the West moved on the East
between forefinger and thumb, and an old servant, bending over from
between his effort to arrange his life by his own sense of justice, and
between life and death, in which death gained the victory. It was
between the dining and drawing rooms, hastily greeting the important and
between the officers, came close to Denisov, and said:
between the person commanding and those who execute his command.
between the various plans that were proposed had even increased after
between them gleamed blue infinity. He did not turn his head and did not
between them if Pierre followed a line of logical reasoning. When he
between two fires."
between two rows of birch trees.
between women was established between Princess Mary and Natasha. They
between you two? It's all nonsense!"
bewail disasters they feel they have themselves occasioned. Marya
bewails it and calls down curses upon him...
beware, dear brother, that these gloves do not deck hands that are
bewildered look and passed by without a word. A woman rushed out and
bewildered. They unlocked their shops and locked them up again, and
bewilderment. "Only so could I be completely happy; but now I have to
bewitching as her cousin. The old countess sat with a blissful yet sad
bewitching smiles: "But I think that having espoused the true religion I
bewitchingly tender that he had not seen in her before. "Natasha, it's
beyond Moscow. And the troops retired one more, last, day's march, and
beyond death, none of us would be afraid of it. That's so, friend."
beyond the Dnieper--which was the only reasonable thing for him to
beyond the Niemen."
beyond the Vistula, and not ordered his troops to advance, there would
beyond the pleasure of the moment, nothing troubles him and so he is
beyond the river, and the same stern and serious expression that Pierre
bickering with one another.
bien pour un garcon de rien comme cet individu dont vous avez fait un
big beards as soon as they are of age and go on unchanged till they
big blazing campfire, around which sat several men talking noisily.
big reddish belly. She ran without hurry, evidently feeling sure that
billet troops in the villages of any district and the number of fires in
biography of Napoleon and of certain people favorable or hostile to him;
birch forest growing on both sides of the road. In the forest it was
birchwood table and a sofa, and finally into his private room where
birds.
biretta on his head, adjusted his hair, and knelt down with an effort.
birth, wealth, or rank. Secondly, Prince Andrew was no longer as young
birthday, we shall receive news. I have a favorable presentiment!"
biscuits were being doled out at the rate of half a pound a man and the
bit," said Marya Dmitrievna, touching her goddaughter and favorite,
bitch that caught it! Go to law, indeed!... He snatches at the fox! I
biting her underlip. At sight of Pierre her expression showed an
biting me. I lifted it up, but the higher I lifted it the bigger and
bits he turned and went out.
bits, and he told me of it himself at once! I never knew him to tell an
bitter it is to love someone near to you and to feel that..." she went
bitter tone, "but you challenged me, and I have said, and always shall
bitterly that in spite of repeated orders, the soldiers continue to
bitterly. "Ah me! I believed in some ideal love which was to keep her
bivouacking here and have just come to look round. I am going back to
black beard looked angry.
black curling clouds of smoke rose and spread from the fires. Through
black eyebrows and the extraordinarily soft, bright color of her long,
black eyes and peculiar mouth, and something near to him, long forgotten
black on one side and with a silvery light on the other. Beneath the
black roofs, stretched the dark starry sky. Only looking up at the sky
black table on which lay an open book. The book was the Gospel, and the
black woolen gown, her plaited hair negligently twisted into a knot, was
black-agate eyes at the frightened and happy Natasha.
black-eyed three-year-old Natasha, her father's pet, having learned from
black-spotted one of yours is fine--well shaped!" said he.
blackened to the wrists. There were sounds of men slapping one another,
blackest ingratitude--in this house..."
blame and wished to justify himself.
blame her for it at all. I know how she loves and respects you. Since
blame. The troops meanwhile stood growing listless and dispirited. After
blamed," he said, "both for that war and the peace... but everything
blasphemies; and power was given unto him to continue forty and two
blazing briskly. The walls were all on fire and the back wall had fallen
bleed Denisov. A deep saucer of black blood was taken from his hairy arm
bleeding corpse begin rapidly to change places. Each one came
bleeding hand with a handkerchief tied round it) "and I remained at the
bleeding head and no cap was being dragged along by two soldiers who
bleeding human bodies that seemed to fill the whole of the low tent, as
blessedness. And such a state of obligatory and irreproachable idleness
blessing on Thy humble people, and graciously hear us, spare us, and
blessing, that those who hate us and our Orthodox faith may see it and
blew a small round ring of tobacco smoke, perfectly embodying his dream
blindfold.... Yes, our body is just a machine for living, that is all."
blindfolded) questioned him as to who he was, when and where he was
blinding light of history focused upon him; a character exposed to those
blindman's bluff, in which two players are blindfolded and one of
blinking at the light.
blissful face "like a vewy devil," as Denisov expressed it.
blissful feeling such as he had not experienced for a long time. All
blissful smile.
block the road to Moscow as before, the aim of the French had not been
blocked, it could not carry across the frontier more than it actually
blocking the way for everyone. The countess tried to make him talk, but
blonde. One is sorry for the husband, really...."
blood from it was streaming over his greatcoat as from a bottle. He had
blood rush to his heart and had again to get up and move about and break
blood rushed to his face and his fists began to clench, Nicholas would
blood under his arm. "No, I am wounded and the horse is killed." Rook
bloodshot eyes. Several approving voices were heard in the crowd. "We
bloodstained face of "the traitor" in the fur-lined coat.
bloodstained hands, so as not to smear it. He raised his head and looked
bloodstained men in various garbs stood, sat, or lay. Around the wounded
bloodstained post, he leaned back and, not being comfortable in that
blotch to the right was the watchman's hut, and the red blotch below to
blow it up. Otherwise we should long ago have been in the mountains of
blow or the death of Napoleon, but with extraordinary vividness and
blow!"
blow. "Thought... Blackguards..." shouted the prince rapidly.
blubberers and understand nothing."
blue cap behind him on the crupper of his horse. The boy held on to the
blue mountains beyond the river, the nunnery, the mysterious gorges, and
blue sky, and the sun's vast orb quivered like a huge hollow, crimson
blue-gray dog, with a long body and short bandy legs, that jumped about
blundered looks at an examiner.
bluntly--staining the honor of a soldier?"
blush that looked very strange on her thin, dignified, elderly face, and
blush.
blushed continually and was irritable. It seemed to her that everybody
blushed crimson, and it was plain that he had made a great effort to say
blushed so that tears came into her eyes and, unable to bear the looks
blushed.
blushed. She felt all the time that by talking to him she was doing
blushing and dropping her eyes.
blushing and looking anxiously at the officers to see if they appeared
blushing--"of asking the commander in chief. He has had a letter from
blushing.
blushing.
blushing:
boasting that it was a little better than at Ulm..."
bobtailed ambler accompanied by his Guards, his bodyguard, his pages,
bodice, with black curls tossed backward, thin bare arms, little legs
bodices and white skirts. One very fat girl in a white silk dress sat
bodies from the largest to the smallest have the property of attracting
body already. Here is one I got at Wagram" (he touched his side) "and a
body could hasten the process of decomposition.
body of a coach standing before the porch, the small glow of another
body so as not to slip out of the ramshackle old vehicle, Pierre,
body with the sheet as he huddled up on his bench.
body, but no shirt. He was evidently afraid the prisoners looking on
body, the direction of its motion cannot coincide with any one of those
body.
body. Drowsiness was irresistibly mastering him, but he kept awake by
boil for your grandfather."
bold, free, and easy tone, while in his soul he regarded himself as a
bold, tall, close handwriting.
boldly and hurriedly, in a husky but melodious bass voice.
boldly and lightly made plans for an extended future, said he could not
boldly as she took the letter, and her face expressed a cold and angry
boldly, as was evident from the expression on the faces of the listeners
boldly, it seemed to Prince Andrew, from one to another. Now he would
bonfires of our infantry who were felling wood. The French line was
book from the high desk.
book of sheets of drawing paper; I said, "I drew that," and he answered
book.
bookcases with keys in the locks, the high desk for writing while
booked against an infantry regiment, there will be a row and the affair
books, Prince Andrew was at this time busy with a critical survey of
books, as she herself was leaving for the country.
books."
boots and shakos.
boots or overcoats and crowding round the boilers and porridge cookers.
boots were in holes. But this defect was not due to any fault of the
boots--and wearing a star Rostov did not know (it was that of the Legion
boots. Then he took off his nightcap, combed his hair over his temples,
booty fell in with the Emperor and very nearly captured him. If the
bore all the prisoners forward onto the road, and Pierre, thanks to
bore that expression of condescending respect for their elders which
born, and so on. Then he was again led somewhere still blindfolded,
borne by the waves from one shore to another as before. They now seemed
borzoi she is," and turning to his groom, he said he would give a ruble
borzoi's slower pace made it plain that Karay had miscalculated.
borzois and the hare and fearing only to lose sight even for an instant
borzois! That's it, come on! Yours are worth thousands. Try yours
borzois, nor the ground over which he went: he saw only the wolf, who,
borzois. He hoped to become better acquainted with the count and invited
borzois. That's it, come on!" said he, panting and looking wrathfully
bosom and solemnly pointing to the floor at Dron's feet. "I can see
bosom, saying: "Now you are all mine, mine! You won't escape!"--from
boston at the clubs. With an incessant hum of voices the crowd advanced
both Rostov's hands and led him into the next room. His eyes, looking
both arms as if carefully lifting some invisible but precious object
both equally impossible. But with that one nothing is spoiled. But am
both hands, went down as far as the first landing. The hall porter was
both he went out.
both his arms about rapidly and strangely, slipping farther and farther
both knew, an expression thoughtful and sad. This expression in Princess
both paused while the orchestra played and the man fingered the hand
both shone with satisfaction and a confession that besides sorrow life
both sides of Pierre.
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
both the magnate and the prince were there, and both claimed their
both those who knew and those who did not know deceived themselves, and
both to rebuke him (for daring to speak he had done of a man recommended
both...." He lifted his head and again the thick vein in his thin neck
bothering about such trifles now! And they actually say he is not honest
bottle was emptying perceptibly and rising still higher and his head
bottle was lifted higher and higher and trembled with the effort. The
bottle. I'll do it.... Bring a bottle!"
bottles, cloaks, and overshoes were lying about; there was a smell of
bottom of his heart he had felt that relief from his despair and from
bottom step upon which snow had fallen gave a ringing creak and he heard
bound by family, official, or business duties, seem certainly less free
bound by her marriage?
bound them to the post.
bound to happen. The countess looked with sad and sternly serious eyes
boundary of what they might not mention--brought before their minds with
bounded by the will of the prince, and he never went beyond that limit.
bounds," said the countess, "so that it even becomes absurd."
bouquet and dropping his voice, he added, "You will be the prettiest
bow would ask them to help him. The gentlemen always made him sit down.
bowed head, seemed also to be waiting. The silence lasted for about a
bowed head.
bowed his white head with a deep sigh. Behind Kutuzov was Bennigsen and
bowing and scraping. Everything was just as everybody always has it,
bowing to the ground in prayer, her door creaked and Natasha, also in
bows and trying to escape as quickly as possible from the glances fixed
box. On seeing Natasha Pierre grew animated and, hastily passing between
boy of thirteen, merry, witty, and mischievous, with a voice that was
boy ran after them angrily, as if vexed that their program had been
boy to come downstairs.
boy! Make way, make way!" pushed through the crowd more energetically
boy's tutor, and how and where to let him know immediately. Before
boy... Lelya... I am very pleased." (His voice trembled.) "I loved your
boyars.
boys!..." but despite their united efforts the wattle hardly moved, and
bracelets, plumes, necklaces, and gold embroidery, who was galloping
braggart and his son, no doubt, is a fine specimen," he grumbled to
bragging of having been frightened.
brain suddenly began to work with a vigor, clearness, and depth it had
brain--that's all that's left me!" And at the same time he said in a
brains over it. Had he been asked what he thought of the state of
branches of the service, who all looked with astonishment at his white
branches of trees heavy with hoarfrost.
brand-new uniform, with his hair pomaded and brushed forward over his
brandishing the slab.
brave, kind friends," and he leaned his head against the shoulder of one
bravest of your soldiers," said a sharp, precise voice, articulating
breadth the solution of the question, which has another, opposite, side,
breaking in through that door, and had to be kept out. He seized the
breaking off of her engagement to Prince Andrew (which they explained by
breaking rank, mingled with the French Guards and sat down at the tables
breaking something in the master's apartment, and he hastened to say all
breaking the silence and pointing to Natasha. "She looks after me all
breaking, the rain had ceased, and the clouds were dispersing. It felt
breaks that handle off, as Buckle did, without finding some other method
breast and said, "Let us commit ourselves and our whole lives to Christ
breast at the words "Russian army"), "I tell you frankly that we, the
breast, and stooping down pulled up the left leg of his trousers to
breast, and then pushed him back and gazed at his ruddy, happy face,
breast, the husband standing by and gazing tenderly at her and the
breast."
breath and beating heart he moved toward the Rhetor (by which name the
breath and the smell of him, and could think only of how to get away
breath, as a man does at the coming of something long hoped for. The
breath, was returning to her seat when another dancer chose her. She was
breathe a word of what has passed between you and Countess Rostova.
breathed still more quickly, but did not shed tears.
breathing deeply and watching the other dancers.
breathing heavily and noisily.
breathing of that great and beautiful body.
breathing. He was not at the ice hills, nor at the gypsies', nor at
breathing. Then the countess called to Natasha. Natasha did not answer.
breathless cry of children's voices filled the room. "Two, two!" they
breathlessly gazing at him and the regimental commander did not exist.
brick buildings, built to plan, were being built by serfs whose manorial
bridge Nesvitski found the colonel to whom he had to deliver the order,
bridge across the Kolocha between Gorki and Borodino, which the French
bridge and the officer ran out into the square.
bridge because he had not brought any burning straw with him like the
bridge did not take his eyes off the women till they had passed. When
bridge he saw two unlimbered guns, the infantry crossing the bridge,
bridge is taken! But what is best of all," he went on, his excitement
bridge leading to the village, not more than five hundred yards
bridge not knowing what to do. There was no one to hew down (as he
bridge was at times veiled by a diaphanous curtain of slanting rain, and
bridge, and they laughed at and slandered him, flinging themselves on,
bridge. But this time Nesvitski could not see what was happening there,
bridge. From different sides came whistling sounds and the thud of
bridge. Petya, his heart in his mouth with excitement, rode by his side.
bridge. Sometimes through the monotonous waves of men, like a fleck of
bridge. The crowd, crushing one another, upsetting carts, and shouting
bridges over the Niemen, deafened continually by incessant and rapturous
bridges to the farther side, turned sharply to the left, and galloped in
bridges to the other side.
brigands!..."
bright and cheerful.
bright firelight stepped two strangely clad human figures clinging to
bright green stood out sharply against the brownish strips of winter rye
bright home, his fluffy fur coat, his quickly gliding sleigh, his
bright sun, rising slightly to the left behind Pierre, cast upon it
bright, sparkling blue eyes into his antagonist's face. His mouth wore
bright-blue Sevres tea cup with shepherdesses depicted on it and with
bright. Sonya ran away, but Natasha, taking her brother's arm, led him
brightened into a happy, grateful, childlike smile.
brightened. He kissed the countess' hand and Natasha's, and sat down
brightening everything around by his glance. He spoke a few words to
brightening more and more with a rapturous smile as if what he now had
brighter and more energetic. He was slightly flushed after galloping two
brighter than before. The light was so strong and the snow sparkled with
brightly illuminated stairs between the flowers. Only then did she
brightly lit up by the blaze, he felt a painful prick at his heart. His
brightly. "I only wanted to tell you about Petya: today nurse was coming
brilliant aged eyes grown old in this conviction, or the calm firmness
brilliant suite of aides-de-camp, pages, and generals, who were waiting
brilliant suite surrounded him.
brilliant, joyful light poured from her transfigured face.
bring himself to part from his daughter and give her to a husband. The
bring in any plan of his own. He will not devise or undertake
bring into the world, nurse, and bring up.
bring me seven hundred rubles, yes! But mind, don't bring me such
bring them the keys of the city.
bringing him a letter from Kutuzov. This letter requested the count to
briskly exchanging shots with the enemy in the dale.
briskly from corner to corner of the room, looking straight before him
broad cheekbones, sunken cheeks, and listless tired expressions, and
broad face expressed pity and sympathy. This expression irritated Prince
broad in the hips, and with prominent shoulder blades. His face was
broad-boned reddish hands with hairy wrists visible from under the shirt
broad-browed head hanging down and the bitten stick between her jaws,
broad-haunched, black-spotted Milka and began rapidly gaining on the
broad-shouldered soldier asked Pierre, with a grin that disclosed a set
broadsheets, and some liked the way Karpushka jeered at the French,
broke down, unarmed soldiers, people from Moscow and women with
broke the silence. All eyes were gazing at him. Malasha too looked at
broken glass and everybody sat down again, smiling at the noise they had
broken glass remained in that position without taking his eyes from the
broken leg, that lay screaming piteously beside the harnessed horses.
broken off and its bark scarred. With its huge ungainly limbs sprawling
broken up, but the Russian army retreated immediately after the
brooding on the past.
brothels," and with these words Marya Dmitrievna, turning up her wide
brother Rhetor, and awaited his further commands.
brother a small, oval, antique, dark-faced icon of the Saviour in a gold
brother and Natasha together amused her.
brother and a hard drinker.
brother who prepared a seeker for entrance into the Brotherhood was
brother, and that Anna Mikhaylovna was preparing them for it. Bold as
brother, had five little ones, while I, you see, only left a wife
brother, kissed him, and unable to restrain her tears any longer began
brother, settling in a new house, meeting new people, and attending to
brother," she said. "How do you find Andrew?" she added hurriedly, not
brother-in-law Bezukhov to pay off debts he regarded as genuinely due
brother-in-law had proposed to her and been refused. It seemed to
brother-in-law, Nicholas tried to hide his wretched condition from him.
brother.
brother; I think you know him, he married Lise Meinen lately. He is an
brother? Mademoiselle Bourienne put that question for her.
brother?" And in all this Princess Mary saw the hand of Providence.
brotherly love, wagged their heads in token of their mutual affection,
brotherly tenderness, almost lover-like.
brothers more worthy than he would test him and that Pierre had only to
brothers, and burned with impatience to set to work with them.
brothers, on to glory, led by Father Kamenski." This song had been
brothers," said he. "Mother Moscow, the white..." his voice faltered,
brothers-in-law. Everything is done to deprive him of the remains of his
brought back French clothing and weapons, and when told to would bring
brought by Lauriston, saying that there could be no question of peace.
brought for the Emperor to be carried before him and entered the first
brought for the night to a large house on the Zubov Rampart that was
brought from Italy, representing an angel with outspread wings ready to
brought from Switzerland, was wearing a coat of Russian cut and
brought from Visloukhovo a hundred rubles in notes (he did not know that
brought her up. To sacrifice herself for others was Sonya's habit. Her
brought here well wrapped up in felt. I must have two hundred pots here
brought him in contact with, particularly with man--not any particular
brought his face close to hers.
brought his snuffbox to rest and, without looking at Weyrother or at
brought in by the Dorogomilov gate and taken to various parts of Moscow,
brought in next. The wounded men awaiting their turn outside the tents
brought in prisoners.
brought into Wischau from our outposts. This officer was Savary. The
brought into the room had vanished; and as if answering a question no
brought nearer to the destruction of their whole army--which they feared
brought salvation might have proved disastrous.
brought the army as far as the Sparrow Hills without giving battle; if
brought them to his quarters, placed them in his own lodging, and
brought them together again, but after that they never spoke of the
brought to Napoleon. He mounted it and rode at a gallop to one of the
brought, looked dumbly around as a wounded beast looks at an approaching
brought, with some wine which the French had taken from a Russian cellar
brown morose face with frowning brows was clearly visible by the glow of
brows and a straggly beard, was saying.
brows stood a hundred paces away from them in his helmet and Horse
brows. This gaze disturbed and confused Boris more and more. He looked
brushed on the temples and sticking up in tufts behind. Though he
brushed smooth in front of the temples, but stuck up behind in quaint
brushed, and buttoned, held his pipe in the middle of his mouth and with
buckwheat porridge and vodka for both of them.
buckwheat porridge, and choke themselves with cabbage soup. They are all
buffoon, who was coming toward her in a woman's jacket.
bugler and two Cossacks, Balashev reached the French outposts at the
build Prince Andrew could endure physical fatigue far better than many
building up the temple of Solomon have tried to destroy the temple of
buildings and the shrill yells of some animals. And if this is really
built lodge close to the pond. Anton, a man who had looked after Prince
bulges, but when you've drawn it out it's empty! That's how it is."
bulk with evident ease.
bullets could not kill him, and his half-closed eyes gave still more
bullets killed many of his men. And his division remained under fire for
bumblebee without knowing why they do it. In another corner two old bees
bump of paternity."
burden as quickly as possible, on the third day after his arrival he
burden on his shoulders. Fancy what he had to go through! It's true he
burdening his conscience with an evil deed, but now he saw in him a
burglaries, incendiarisms, and murders as in whole centuries are not
burn the bridge! I know the service, and it is my habit orders strictly
burn which is left by its owners and in which strangers are allowed to
burning among the French Guards, and in the distance those of the
burning of Moscow, dont les flammes eclairaient sa route. *(2)
burning of an arm with a ruler as a proof of love did not seem to him
burning sense of jealousy of "the favorite" agitated him now as strongly
burning, and pillaging, and always receives orders for these actions
burning. The count donned his dressing gown and went out to look. Sonya
burnt his boats, and I believe that we are ready to burn ours."
burst into convulsively painful sobs that distorted his soft round face.
burst into sobs. "I shall die, waiting a year: it's impossible, it's
burst out into a fit of his broad, good-natured laughter, so loud that
burst out laughing.
bursting into tears.
bursts of anger in the presence of Kurakin and then of Balashev.
bursts of song and music and the inconsequent but friendly prattle of
burying the dead--where the battle was you know--well, those dead had
bushes and were firing at the Cossacks who crowded at the gateway.
bushes he glanced round once more. The French had fallen behind, and
bushes parted behind the hounds and Daniel's chestnut horse appeared,
bushes while the field was coming up on both sides, all trying to head
business and I'll go away."
business letters, and walked over to the granaries, cattle yards and
business like seriousness--leaving home for a month, or even two, with
business! It won't be you, but I, who'll suffer. Leave me alone, leave
business!"
business, his place, what he had to do. As soon as they had passed the
business," he said coldly.
business--in which his wife included his intellectual pursuits, which
business.
business. I am old. I..."
business. She felt he had a world apart, which he loved passionately and
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
bustlingly searching for something.
busy among the provisions, and in the yards unlocking or breaking open
busy causing him annoyance.
busy making his father comfortable, while evidently he, Pierre, was only
busy with similar peaceful affairs--near the shelter of the regimental
but Austria never has wished, and does not wish, for war. She is
but Frise had, and Mudrov had diagnosed them even better? What would the
but Helene, tortured by the fact that the old count suspected her and
but I am still so weak that I love my life, the meaning of which is only
but I don't understand it and can't even pwonounce it," interposed
but I say definitely that you must let me enter the army, because I
but I think it would now be better to stay here," said Mademoiselle
but I who moved you?"
but Kutuzov accompanied that column. He well knew that nothing but
but Rostov had no chance of being present at the review he held at
but a German, who moves the locomotive. Only then, as a result of the
but a few days later the countess sent for Sonya and, with a cruelty
but a moment before he had been galloping to get at them and hack them
but a roll of volleys of musketry from the slopes of the hill before
but admit that the time and place are very badly chosen. In a day or two
but also disbelieved in the nearness of an engagement. Bagration,
but as it is..."
but as soon as one gets to business nothing is ready, and the enemy,
but as things are now one can't answer for anything."
but asked him meanwhile to remain on his staff. Anatole Kuragin, whom
but asked him not to be too hard on the poor old man. "What do the
but at irregular intervals, and grapeshot cracked and rattled onto the
but at that moment the thought occurred to her that her fate would be
but because he knew that the enemy was beaten, as everyone who had taken
but because of everyone, it must inevitably come about. They are all
but by its mysterious significance: by the rapturous joy that lit up
but by promotions.) "My comrades are still nobodies, while I am only
but by something within him stronger than reason, of the justice of his
but by the tender friendship his commander showed him, Rostov felt
but cabs were still driving about, tradesmen stood at their shops, and
but cold apartments known to Pierre only from the front approach, but
but compared to the thoughts that now occupied him it was a matter of
but could not, express in words. The account Pierre gave of the incident
but could only spoil and lower the glorious position that Russia had
but did not behave to Natasha as an affianced lover: he did not use
but distinguished from them all by its nearness to the earth, its white
but dwink. If we could only get to fighting soon. Hullo, who's there?"
but eccentric, and a bore. The poor girl is very unhappy. She has a
but everybody understood that the old man was blameworthy and
but everywhere--on the slopes and on the roofs. As soon as Petya found
but evidently the crisis was over and he was convalescent. Prince Andrew
but extremely attractive.
but from all sides came the same news of generals killed and wounded,
but had begun the attack next morning, no one would have doubted that
but had it pleased the commander in chief to look under the uniforms he
but had never spoken to her of love. Now he felt that it was inevitable,
but had now handed it all completely over to his son's care, being in
but had on one of her best dresses. Her hair was carefully done and her
but had to shield his mother from knowledge of their poverty. The
but he always persistently refused public appointments, passing the
but he could not make up his mind to take the final step. He felt
but he did not know how to remedy it). "No, I beg you to attend to the
but he did not share their interests. His heart was not in the mystical
but he even dreaded to recall them and the bright and boundless horizons
but he had to have a biscuit from the Tsar's hand and he felt that he
but he probably was not even aware of it.
but he was rudely interrupted, pushed aside, and people turned away
but helpful to the success of the service, but not a class or court
but her love for her mother unexpectedly showed her that the essence of
but her pleasure did not cause her for a moment to forget her aim. And
but here on the one hand the local nobility have done me the honor to
but here, in this wretched Moravian hole, it is more difficult, and I
but him she could not see, she only saw something large, brilliant,
but his aim to consider, and he reached it. But tie yourself up with
but his character..." said Timokhin.
but his silence irritated her.
but how can I harness everything?" and Pierre felt with horror that the
but if you formed a secret society and began working against the
but in Anna Pavlovna's presence no one dared to think of this or even
but in front of him was the autumn sowing where the ground was soft.
but in the center where the men with a flag of truce had passed that
but in which five beds now stood, and furniture of various kinds: a
but it is a beautiful voice that must be trained." Only they generally
but it lifted all the more sweetly, and was especially charming when she
but it was too late. She was looking at them with an expression they
but it won't do...not that... but as a friend, I shall always love you."
but it would in fact have been difficult to give any other answer than
but it's only now that I feel such love. It's not the same as before.
but like a priest's benediction, approached the general. Though Tushin's
but looked at him with a contemptuous smile, waiting for the valet to
but managed meanwhile to look round repeatedly at his neighbor, the
but most of the gentry were strolling about the room.
but no, I will talk to you later on," and with a strange light in his
but not concealing the fact that she would not be distressed if they now
but not deciding to do so. Though he did not speak, Princess Mary saw
but not one fell close by, they all flew over. Alpatych was getting into
but not the army staff. Besides these, there were in attendance on the
but not yet sure what stirred him or what he would say. Scarcely had he
but now from lack of officers a battalion commander, shyly entered the
but now that he has become a wretched comedian the Emperor Francis wants
but of angry resolve.
but often in quite contradictory ways. One historian says that an
but one thing disconcerted her. "Can a man so important and necessary to
but only by the pleasure that just perceptibly lit up her whole face.
but only changed character. The horses were replaced by others from a
but only that he would be with the army. The Emperor, moreover, had
but only to let them sit on the top of the things. But the work of
but opened them again on hearing the bedstead creak. The countess was
but powerful influence exerted on them while he lived by the count's
but powerful. Nicholas had been struck by the peculiar moral beauty he
but remained in deserted Moscow ever in the same state of agitation,
but returned at once and dropped into an armchair in front of Dolokhov
but sang with her for a long time and then at last dragged her off, and
but select company, and why this would give him pleasure, and why though
but send a courier to Petersburg with news of a victory, and General
but she looked straight into his handsome face as it came near to her
but she was too excited to eat anything and kept wriggling about on her
but so softly that I could not hear it. Then it seemed that we all left
but still with that naive air that made it impossible to know whether he
but suddenly he glanced down at Vereshchagin who continued to stand in
but that and live only for that. Yes, for that alone! I shall never
but that he'll marry Julie. You see how he's been with her all day...
but the corner behind the piano in the sitting room was better than
but the doctor had said the fever was not very serious.
but the feeling is stronger than I. Yesterday I tormented myself and
but the love which I--while dying--first experienced when I saw my enemy
but the majority marched all night and arrived at places where they
but the next day the following communication was received from Count
but the officer sternly checked them.
but the official who had questioned him opened the door, and Rostov
but the question "How?" that interested him. What the diplomatic matter
but the sense of his words spread everywhere because what he said was
but the shouting which accompanied him everywhere disturbed him and
but then he cannot know what I think of him and may imagine that I do
but then he suddenly jumped up and cried: "Be off, be off! Let not a
but there was no other fire, and Pierre sat down, trying not to look at
but there was no second report as he had expected. He only heard
but these did not impress him. What struck him most was the sight of a
but they all were involuntary tools of history, carrying on a work
but this dreadful incessant moaning made her sob. The countess exchanged
but thought of other things.
but to help England and Austria against the greatest man in the world is
but to prove my devotion to you and how I respect your father's memory,
but to the whole regiment--all of us--you're to blame all round. The
but tried to guess what he was saying and inquiringly repeated the words
but very early we said to ourselves that we were losing the battle,
but was himself a new arrival. The lieutenant colonel turned to a smart
but was not yet in print, and Pierre, who was at the Rostovs', promised
but was told (it was chiefly Karp who did the talking, Dron not showing
but went limping up the hill.
but were (in his opinion) men he had brought there, feels que c'est
but what she does say is always clear and simple, so she is not stupid.
but when Princess Mary had drawn the blinds and was going away she
but when she understood its meaning it grieved her. "Can she have loved
but which only wounded the self-love of both sides, and millions of
but which yet aroused involuntary horror in him was drawing near.
but while one has life one must live and be happy!" thought he.
but who for that very reason appear to be the warmest partisans. Hardly
but will be a dancer. Only don't tell anyone."
but with his whole being, by life itself, that man is created for
but with the feeling of a hare fleeing from the hounds. One single
but without proper feeling. Brother Urusov came and we talked about
but would probably never even inquire and would never know that the
but you have no grounds for telling me so. And that is the whole point."
but you have no sense about women. What an argumentative fellow you are,
but you wouldn't believe what a special feeling I have for you after a
but, like Napoleon, did not take part in the actual fighting and only
but, on the contrary, tried to reassure Balashev. It was evident that
butler who was handing things round. "That's not forbidden by his law."
butler, napkin on arm, was scanning the setting of the table, making
buttermilk cakes, such aromatic jam, such honey-and-nut sweets, or such
buttoned up their coats, buckled on their swords and pouches, and moved
buttoning up his uniform. It seemed that he had quite forgotten Pierre.
buy something. I went in out of curiosity, you know, and there is a
bweak thwough. Give me five hundwed men and I will bweak the line,
bwing the first one?"
by Alpatych to the Provincial Governor at Smolensk, asking him to let
by Anna Pavlovna, was about our diplomatic relations with Austria and
by Divine Providence," he continued, raising to heaven his fine eyes
by Genlis and the French proverbs, and because his voice shook when he
by Kutuzov was hurriedly retreating along the Danube, stopping where
by Napoleon at a review, evoked in him a desire to punish the Russians
by Paul Ivanovich Kutuzov:
by Pierre's rupture with his wife, was the talk of society. Pierre
by Russian and French troops. Because it was summer, when it is so
by a German student in Vienna, and knew that the student had been shot.
by a cannon ball--struck in the breast before our regiment."
by a far more serious matter than a desire to show his contempt for
by a great effort got away to the left from that flood of men, Kutuzov,
by a movement of peoples from west to east. Several times it moves
by a pale young officer who, letting his sword hang down, was walking
by a scarlet-liveried footman that morning, ran as follows:
by a sense of horror and repulsion such as he had experienced when
by a strange caprice of his employer's was admitted to table though the
by a sword.
by all legislative codes. The responsibility appears greater or less
by an act worthy of himself and of the French army, he let relief
by both hands, he cried, "Now I've got you, so take the sleigh and pair
by bowing his head. I opened the book, and on all the pages there
by brotherly love--let us pray!" thought Natasha.
by cares for the present, seemed already to belong to the past. Now she
by comparison, (2) Self-perfecting, which can only be attained by
by cunning, she would have spoiled her case by acknowledging herself
by distributing arms and broadsheets had taken steps to remove all
by divine love. That is why I experienced such joy when I felt that I
by finding husbands for me (most of whom I don't even know), the
by her bare arm and kiss her on the neck. They spoke of most ordinary
by her father's nervousness, and by the unnatural manner of the princess
by her presence made remarks about her as though she were some prodigy
by her self-satisfied talk, but that Prince Andrew seemed embarrassed, a
by her thoughts, was crossing herself for the last time before leaving
by her. This pleased her, yet his presence made her feel constrained and
by his clothes and manner of speaking Pierre at once knew him to be a
by his comrades, was sent to obtain remounts and brought back from the
by his home circle as the best of sons, a hero, and their darling
by his love for him. The feeling of pain and fear he had experienced
by his side and began questioning him.
by his sleeplessness: his soul was as fresh and joyful as if he had
by his talk with Murat, he did not rise or even stir, but scowled still
by important personages. At the moment the Emperors went into the
by individual men, and (2) the existence of a known aim to which these
by little began to pass into a state of intoxication she had not
by love. But she could not pray that her enemies might be trampled under
by mad kings. Their king was insane and they changed him for
by memories of the Italian campaign with the name of Suvorov.
by men who adored him: and he felt convinced that, after his dinner,
by one half, could help swerving. By impetus gained, the French army was
by one or ran away, and drove or walked toward the "warm rivers." Many
by one persistent thought. He did not know how or when this thought had
by order of the Higher Command. If they noticed anything remarkable
by praise from this brilliant beauty that she blushed with pleasure.
by reason of the joy with which it can all be renounced.
by reference to the mass only: stating that momenta are equal or unequal
by six horses at a smart trot. Behind the caleche galloped the suite and
by so calling it they have explained its meaning. But such a war does
by some rule unknown to him decided what should or should not be done.
by someone's order, the battery had continued firing and was only not
by step a group was formed of larger dimensions with new customs and
by that gesture Rostov instantly recognized his lamented and adored
by the Emperor to discuss the general course of affairs, he respectfully
by the Nikulins'!"
by the Russians in 1812.
by the arm, "I believe that intervention will be stronger than
by the authorities at that time was Napoleon's attempt to stop the
by the back stairs, yet judging by Anna Mikhaylovna's air of assurance
by the burning of Russian towns and the hatred of the foe this aroused
by the candlelight and was evidently struck by the troubled expression
by the change. Probably Prince Andrew's thought interested him.
by the clouds, over the roofs of the street opposite, on the
by the collar of his uniform with his big hand and shook him from side
by the commander in chief. Despite the un-Russian appearance of the
by the cut of his hair. The man lay on his back, his huge arms and legs
by the death of Count Bezukhov (everyone constantly considered it a
by the disorderly movement of the Russian columns, and from all
by the disorganized crowds of the French when it was numerically
by the drawingroom window all the morning as if expecting something and
by the expression of regretful sympathy on his face.
by the fact that Kutuzov evidently could not or would not understand the
by the fire. One of them stumbled.
by the guerrillas in Spain, by the mountain tribes in the Caucasus, and
by the guns shouted some words of command to the officer, and the latter
by the insoluble question whether she loved Anatole or Prince Andrew.
by the law of coincidence thousands of minute causes fitted in and
by the movement he had made in sitting up, fluttered under the dark roof
by the news of this loss, he knew what a relief it would be to escape
by the owner of the manly voice, a dashing infantry officer who hurried
by the poetic feelings that had attracted him to her, but by something
by the roadside.
by the same thoughts ever since the day he returned from Sokolniki after
by the sun, because it grows heavier, because the wind shakes it, or
by the talk of the maids in the next room (which was theirs) and by the
by the terrible pallor of the princess' face that looked out at him from
by the very nature of the case those who command take the smallest part
by the way, Bagration came out on the Vienna-Znaim road at Hollabrunn
by the whole of the count's plump figure, in Marya Dmitrievna found
by the will of a man but at the will of Him who governs men and worlds
by their redness to contrast more than usual with his gray hair. At the
by their surnames), and she touched his coat sleeve with her white,
by them.
by then. Well, let's go now."
by this new science you call 'strategy.'"
by those troops that they were themselves in the front line and had
by two hussars. The officer, the soldiers, and their horses all looked
by vainly awaiting the infantry columns that still did not appear, as
by which Dolgorukov had entered--a short man in civilian clothes with a
by which the prince was to enter. Prince Andrew was looking at a large
by, tried to make a joke, saying that Kutuzov had evidently failed to
by, who heard him muttering.
by. Pierre caught a glimpse of a man in a three-cornered hat with a
by. The shouting in the tavern had died down; only the moaning of the
c'est une femme," * said Prince Andrew to Pierre.
cabbage," said Natasha, "and I remember that I dared not disbelieve it
cabman had told her that the people were breaking open the barrels at
calamities of Moscow to him or to himself? Still less could it matter to
calamitous condition was the sending of Lauriston to Kutuzov's camp with
calamity. Everything that is young and strong is being enticed away and
calculated and reckoned, and by morning the regiment--instead of the
calculated to frighten Pierre.
calculated, and I don't like that. But Denisov..."
calculations of the cabalistic number of the beast of the Apocalypse now
caleche. She knew it was right in front.
calf served up with sauce. They talk to us of the rules of war, of
call on Prince Nicholas Bolkonski. The count did not set out cheerfully
call, he wanted to see that original, eager girl who had left such a
called Berthier.
called Bogdanich) "shuts you up."
called Kutuzov) "is making himself very comfortable," thought Wolzogen,
called culture--in mental activity.
called genius that people are so apt to ascribe to Napoleon; yet the
called her back.
called her nephew--and playing with him.
called his peasant existence. The proverbs, of which his talk was full,
called out to Denisov.
called out to him: "Viva il re!" * he turned to his wife with a pensive
called power. This relation consists in the following:
called the colonel of the regiment and said a few words to him.
called the room for the hunt servants.
called the spirit of the army, and he watched this force and guided it
called up before a large audience for an examination in which he feels
called up from ten villages around and they carted for twenty days and
called, but in the fact that he alone understood the significance of
calling and there's nobody there; go and gather the clothes together."
calling him Monsieur mon frere, and sincerely assured him that he did
calling is the most highly honored.
calling on the Rostovs for that purpose. The idea of throwing her
calling on the principal Austrian dignitaries. Between four and five in
calling on them as old acquaintances and benefactors of the monastery.
calls it--has disagreed with me."
calm and careless an air as though he were merely out for a ride. He
calm and contented now. Not at all as before."
calm and, as always happens, as soon as he became physically tranquil
calm, and penetrating, a look I loved so well and seem to see before me
calm, his eyes closed, and they could see his regular breathing.
calm, indifferent crowd of people unaware of what was going on in his
calmed down, not taking his eyes off her for some seconds. Then his lips
calmer since I began to live only for myself."
came Daniel the head huntsman and head kennelman, a gray, wrinkled old
came a letter from Kutuzov informing the prince of the fate that had
came a solitary human cry from the gateway and amid the smoke appeared
came among a huge and closely packed train of artillery mingled with
came and began relating various adventures. His coming vexed me from the
came and leaned on his elbows, facing her and beside Mademoiselle
came at the right time. Tout vient a point a celui qui sait attendre. *
came down to earth and told us that this life is but for a moment and is
came for water and went back into the hollow, but perhaps he had simply
came from the adjoining room. The door was opened a crack and there was
came from various sides of the crowd.
came galloping up on a Cossack horse that could scarcely carry his
came in from his Club, cheerful and contented. Nicholas, hearing him
came in to dinner straight from the farm--especially before the soup.
came into her head, but what she had invented then seemed to her now
came into the ballroom where candles were hurriedly lighted. The
came into the room and sat down on the broad benches in the corner
came on, chromatic scales and diminished sevenths were heard in the
came out into the frost and got into the sleighs, talking, calling to
came out--wearing a velvet coat with a single star on his breast, as
came over his face. He said nothing to her but looked at her forehead
came rebukes from all sides addressed to the jesting soldier.
came the deep tones of the wolf call from Daniel's hunting horn; the
came the strange sound of a few voices shouting. Instantly as at a
came to him and, after talking a great deal about his exploits,
came to inform him that the money needed for the equipment of his
came to me to ask for a few carts for the wounded. After all, ours are
came to the conclusion that he would not find Bald Hills dull either.
came to the prince's front door but he gave orders to admit no one
came to town and wanted to invite me to dinner--I gave him a pretty
came together and crowded in the large drawing room by the door of the
came two more, and many more running behind. One of them said something
came up and kissed the waxen little hands that lay quietly crossed one
came up panting, slackening his pace as he approached.
came up to Pierre. "Ah, Kaysarov!" said Boris, addressing him with an
came up to him smiling. Boris was elegantly dressed, with a slightly
came up to the Emperor and ventured respectfully to suggest lunch to His
came up to them, called their carriage, and helped them in. As he was
came, the pretty, fair haired Frenchwoman, Mademoiselle Bourienne,
camp at Drissa; the second army was retreating, trying to effect a
camp to find his old playmate. Rostov had not yet had time to get his
camp to you. You will see everything best from where Count Bennigsen
camp, and himself a young general without a wrinkle on his ruddy face,
camp, and his keen-sighted adjutant confirmed this.
camp, now just visible in the deceptive light of dawn and the dying
camp.
campaign but had subsequently been removed from the army by Kutuzov.
campaign by occupying Moscow as he had ended a previous campaign by
campaign he had prevented their vanquishing Napoleon, that he thought of
campaign is over?"
campaign of 1807 which seemed to him so recent. "Bennigsen should have
campaign over the whole map of Russia.
campaign that ended in Jena and Auerstadt, but he did not see the least
campaign, I should feel dishonored, not only in my comrades' eyes but
campaign, and everywhere are described Napoleon's arrangements, the
campaign, but of Dokhturov nothing or very little is said and that
campaign, had returned to Petersburg and come to him. Availing himself
campaign. It had been neither at Pultusk nor at Preussisch-Eylau and,
campaign. The Frenchman, confusing the Austrians with the Russians, was
campaign?" he asked.
campaigns he had been in, told as by an old soldier. He did not himself
campaigns, and battles, now reflected the restless movement by political
campaigns, periods of war) into such equations, a series of numbers
campfire blazed brighter than others. For leave to sit by their wattle
campfire was blazing brightly in the midst of the snow, lighting up the
campfire, thought it would be impossible to walk on them; but when
campfires dimly glowing in the fog, could be seen behind him; in front
campfires to the other side of the road where he had been told the
campfires, or wattle fences to serve for shelter.
campfires--the soldiers' kitchens.
campfires. Our columns ought to have begun to appear on an open
camps, but that does not prevent my esteeming her as she deserves. She
can I, an insignificant mortal, show His omnipotence, His infinity, and
can any event that is not prescribed, decreed, or ordered by monarchs,
can be defined and everything depends on innumerable conditions, the
can be done?"
can be happy and entirely free, so there is no condition in which he
can be no doubt about the victory for the battlefield remains in the
can bweak Napoleon's line of communication!"
can circulate and fulfill their purpose without harm to anyone and even
can digest, and not having more wives or husbands than are needed for
can do no good either for himself or for me."
can do nothing. I understand nothing. I have nobody! I want to go away
can do." And his fancy pictured the battle, its loss, the concentration
can exist, nor any conception of historical events.
can explain how the cruel Arakcheev, who tore out a grenadier's mustache
can go in your carriage. Ah! I was nearly forgetting," he added. "You
can make a face pretty.
can one serve with assurance of being useful."
can order bread to be brought up at the right time and say who is to go
can read him like a book. At present he is hesitating whom to lay siege
can see everything from there; let's go there, Prince."
can tell you for myself..."
can tell you quite clearly, because I constructed nearly all our
can't agree with you! To live only so as not to do evil and not to
can't be done."
can't decide or think properly about anything. One's head aches, and one
can't let our men starve."
can't make head or tail of it. That's for you--I haven't brains enough.
can't wait a moment! Don't you see the general wants to pass?"
can't, but if I want this--want glory, want to be known to men, want to
can't," replied Bolkonski, smiling.
can't."
can't... that's all...."
can't..."
can, and the suggestion of merriment in that floundering mass rendered
can," thought Pierre. "Only not to see it, that dreadful it!"
candle beside him, the wick of which was charred and had shaped itself
candle. Yes, it was he, pale, thin, with a changed and strangely
cannon and the crowd were dragging it out. A cannon ball killed someone
cannon ball. All this was possible. In former battles he had only
cannon balls and bursting shells falling on the town. But these sounds
cannon balls and slow whistling shells flew unceasingly. At times, as
cannon balls at the French with both hands.
cannon! But this sort of thing seems done on purpose to vex us. The
cannon, and a stick called a "marshal's staff," and disputed as to
cannon, and meanwhile a French battalion gets to the bridge unobserved,
cannon, was a small, newly constructed wattle shed from which came the
cannonade was dying down, but the rattle of musketry behind and on
cannot be bound by what a false religion laid upon me."
cannot be imagined or adequately praised!" said Berg, glancing round
cannot be regarded as the cause, for the same thing would have happened
cannot be that there is no answer. And I believe there is.... That's
cannot believe that the strongest and wisest of its people have no
cannot get on with him at all. The cause of this is my egotism. I set
cannot imagine how it shocked me. We were not an exemplary couple," he
cannot leave the estate to Pierre. Pierre is illegitimate."
cannot regard "power" as the cause of events.
cannot say why this occurs, and we say that it is so because it is
cannot stand this. It seems to me that it is chiefly because of his
cannot tell us that it does not feel the law of attraction or repulsion
cannot vanish, since nothing vanishes in this world, but that I shall
cannot, cannot live, because..."
cannot, disappoint them. But how will it be? I do not know, but it will
cap and said he much regretted what had occurred and would have the man
cap) "from his animal condition and awaken in him spiritual needs, while
cap.
capabilities as well. These men, though enchanted with the sovereign
capable of applying the standard of reason to everything. Everything
capacity and information, and like Dokhturov he never made plans of
capacity of those who had chosen it. Others argued that a mistake had
capital of the Tsars would perish. But my clemency is always ready to
capital one from our sutler! He has splendid things. And he's very
capital, but according to your last report you have even retreated
capital. Moscow, abounding in provisions, arms, munitions, and
capitals, he still continued to live in the country, remarking that
caps, distinguish the officers from the men, and see the standard
captain and his drawn-in stomach, and mimicked his expression and pose
captain of the 13th Light Regiment--was undoubtedly a very great deed.
captain restored the wife to the husband, saying as he did so: "I have
captain went out into the porch and gave some orders in a loud voice.
captain wiped his eyes and gave himself a shake, as if driving away the
captain's voice began to tremble. "You have been in the regiment next
captain, who was a good fellow, who a bad one, and most of all, who was
captain.
captivity he had learned that in Karataev God was greater, more infinite
captivity was gradually led on to do so.
capture him alive. Count Orlov-Denisov consulted his fellow officers.
capture of transport trains on the Smolensk road, and by the battle of
capture them all?
captured by the French because the enemy could not surmise that anyone
captured from the French beside which horses were tethered, that under
captured or left behind. Some of Junot's wagons also had been captured
captured several hundred prisoners in the course of a month; and there
captured, of his deposition, and of the choice of a new ruler for
carabineers.
card and, instead of the six thousand he had intended, carefully wrote
card, putting a small stake on it, and beginning to play.
cardinal virtues in her gave her lessons in algebra and geometry
cardplayer, and who, also transformed by his uniform, came up to Pierre,
cards, holding them in his hand, and lifting his head, "if it comes out,
cards. They broke off and rose as she entered.
cards.' Your cousin is in love with you, I know."
care not a hair of man's head can fall?
cared about; Anna Pavlovna observed these greetings with mournful and
cared more than for anyone else in the family, should be lost to the
careful as he went not to inflict any accidental injury on the young
carefully back, because he wished to support his right hand with it and
carefully guarded their open wounds from any rough and painful contact.
carefully to cherish within himself the gloomy mood which alone enabled
carefully, surprised at its thinness, and in the morning noticed her
careless good nature, all proceeded to enforce their claims at once. As
careless manner, spoke casually of how she had enjoyed yesterday's ball,
caressing look that it seemed strange to be so near him, to look at him
caressing word such as he had never used to her before. "Why didn't you
carpets. "Now press, Petya! Press, Vasilich, press hard!" she cried.
carriage as pale as anything. How they made the four black horses fly!
carriage at full speed about an hour before along that very road and
carriage drove out of the house, he mounted and accompanied her eight
carriage horses on their heads, turning them aside, others fought among
carriage to Moscow, to Petersburg, to those ministers and great people,
carriage to drive to town:
carriage window and looked back and then forward at the long train of
carriage, and set off with it to visit some actresses! The police tried
carriage, and the count himself, his coachman, and his dragoons
carriage, and the solitude of the road, all had a gladdening effect on
carriage, her husband was adjusting his saber; Prince Hippolyte, under
carriage, moved forward and, not noticing the general, looked out
carriage.
carriage.
carriage. A Cossack who accompanied him had handed him a knapsack and
carriage. She understood all that awaited her only when, after stepping
carriage?" he asked his mother with a smile.
carriages in which soldiers were riding and remarked that it was a very
carriages, and carpets from the Polish proprietors. Rostov remembered
carriages, the Rostovs' carriage drove up to the theater, its wheels
carriages, the caleche, and the phaeton, all crossed themselves as they
carriages--see how comfortably they've settled themselves!"
carriages. In April the Pavlograds were stationed immovably for some
carried away a threatening cloud during the hay harvest he would return
carried away by passion. Oh, only my poor mother..."
carried away, and the ranks closed up. If any soldiers ran to the
carried far beyond out into the open field.
carried forward--and you did not look at the other page."
carried herself, how well!'" And Nicholas heard her spontaneous, happy,
carried on stretchers. On that very meadow he had ridden over the day
carried out, was forgotten. Now, entering into Weyrother's plan, Prince
carried the sick man dispersed. Anna Mikhaylovna touched Pierre's hand
carried the sovereign at reviews in Russia bore him also here on the
carried their loot with them, yet to abandon what they had stolen was as
carries us past the turn to the Kaluga road. And after the adjutant
carry disorder and confusion into the enemy's ranks, but should victory
carry her off to the ends of the earth.
carry it unnoticed in his belt or under his arm. Besides, it had been
carry out all the doctor's injunctions with precision, and that she
carry out his intention. He struggled against the confession of his
carry out the old ones. Nowadays everybody designs laws, it is easier
carry to the Russian works, and those 102 guns shot into the air until
carrying Petya with it, streamed forward into the Kremlin Square which
carrying a load of wood.
carrying her burden so lightly. Old men and dull dispirited young ones
carrying pails, came running downstairs, their boots clattering. These
carrying them off their feet and engulfing them all. The dragoon was
cart and remained motionless a long while sunk in thought. Suddenly he
cart there would be no reason to refuse another, or all the carts and
cart, shouting and scolding a soldier with coarse abuse. In each of
cart.
carters removing valuable goods, such as cloth, and receiving in payment
cartloads he sold for the prince, nor a single shock of the whole corn
carts should not be provided. Without saying anything of this to the
carts to pillage the town, and in general personally failed to manifest
carts with wounded stopped by the side of the road close to Pierre. The
carts would not be forthcoming.
carts, and their calls to one another, could be clearly heard.
carts, guns, artillery, and again baggage wagons and vehicles of all
carts, in each of which three or four wounded soldiers were lying
case is this: you ought to have thought the matter over and taken
case of any commander in chief) to prevent an attack.
case proofs were needed; he had waited a whole month for them and grew
case will not have a family.
case with his bony fingers, tuned the guitar and settled himself in his
case, hesitated about lifting the injured or dead. The soldiers, for the
case.
case.
case. They say Platov took 'Poleon himself twice. But he didn't know the
casement. The cold wind flapped the ends of her kerchief and her loose
cassock, sat on the sofa beside her, behind a samovar. Near them, in an
cast down his eyes and hurried out as if it were none of his business,
catches it and obeying the impulse that wheel begins to creak and joins
catching at a biscuit; the old woman did not consider herself defeated
catching the curtain of the cot. Each made the other a warning gesture
cathedral and crossing himself. Another, a young lad, a fair-haired
cathedral doors. "Hurrah! hurrah!" shouted the crowd again.
cathedral, and after them others in a more leisurely manner: caps were
cathedral, and its bridge, on both sides of which streamed jostling
cattle keeps well together when crossing a barren field, but gets out
caught but a glimpse of this, his whole attention was directed to the
caught her up. It was lucky the maids ran in just then..."
caught up the object of contention and ran into the bedroom. The eldest
cause a rupture between father and son.
cause is the cause of my action.
cause no phenomenon is conceivable. I raise my arm to perform an action
cause of events, history shows that the expression of the will of
cause of the confusion, turned away with indifference, as if to say, "Is
cause suddenly felt it impossible to go on living as before. Firmly
cause, kind and noble beings able to find happiness in life--not merely
cause, which by the fact of its being unconditioned and unlimited would
caused by anything, for the Divinity is not controlled by an event. But
caused by the Emperor's presence, he danced, and had chosen Natasha
caused by the position of the hands of the watch.
caused her to protrude her chest and stomach and throw back her head,
caused him to moan (he had dysentery) as his fear and grief at being
caused his mother to await with terror, and which would perhaps have
caused the floods to abate.
causes him to kill him--thereby convincing the mob more forcibly than
caustic expression softened, as if admitting that what was being done
cautious of undertaking any decisive action and avoided giving battle.
cautiously and glanced into the room, Sonya standing beside her at the
cautiously descended the carriage steps which were let down for them
cautiously took one step and then another, and found herself in the
cautiously.
cavalier of St. George, the hussar remount officer, the good-natured
cavalry baggage and Russian prisoners separated from the rest of the
cavalry saddle, with a merry, and tipsy face. Napoleon told him to ride
cavalry saddles or Junot's baggage. They understood that the saddles and
cavalry, and artillery. How was it that two guns were abandoned in
cavalry, on entering a merchant's house that had been abandoned and
cavalry, unnecessary baggage, and artillery material that is no longer
cavalrymen were espied they were taken for Frenchmen, the coachman ran
ce jeune homme." *
ce sont les jolies femmes, * isn't that so? But now I like it very much
cease firing and re-form, so as to give room for the two approaching
cease seeing you; and if you won't do this, I will. I will write to him,
ceased. Mitka tuned up afresh, and recommenced thrumming the balalayka
ceaseless hum of labor--that used to hang in long clusters down to
ceases to exist, but the French army of six hundred thousand, and
celebrated miniaturist, and he leaned over the table to take the
celebration of the season.
censured, should not be held to blame.
censuring his father for the first time in his life), "I did not wish to
center or on the right, and the engagement would have taken place on the
center, and secondly, to withdraw the cavalry to the other side of the
center, the reserves, and Bagration's right flank had not yet moved, but
center--destroy him and his army.
center. Our right flank is over there"--he pointed sharply to the right,
centered round a single incident: Kutaysov's death. Everybody knew
centralization of power, resistance to Europe, and so on. Men went
centuries looked down upon his grandeur--for his great exploits there
centuries, and only the Deity, independent of everything, can by His
century had been the aggrandizement of Russia, that aim might have been
ceremonies and meaningless prayers and are now instructed in a
certain Khandrikov--is up to; till now the additional men and provisions
certain definite dependence exists between the two.
certain marshal when approaching Moscow. He gazed at the caleches and
certain mode of government was established or certain migrations
certain of what ought and what ought not to be done. The first time he
certain or at least probable, Rostopchin instead of exciting the people
certain period of time (in the first case the unknown quantity is the
certain words, seems to us senseless. He had the power and so what he
certain. I write all this to you, dear friend, only to convince you
certainly acquired a taste for war, and it is just as well for me; what
certainly come. If you love somebody, my charmer, that is not a reason
certainly happen!" thought Pierre, glancing at those dazzling shoulders
certainly have been lost; but not only did she show no signs of secrecy
certainly is communicated very surely, and flows rapidly, imperceptibly,
certainly never touch a card again." At that moment his home life,
certainly not her; and this is why: first, I know that though he rarely
certainly should not, speak like that," their glances seemed to say.
certainly..."
chaffingly, but without getting angry.
chair beside him.
chair for her.
chair for himself, and Berg and Vera immediately began their evening
chair regardless of her governess' remarks. After dinner, she rushed
chair, and began deliberately with a smile:
chair, wrapped in a powdering mantle, entrusting his head to Tikhon.
chairs and invited her to go with them. She sat down and played with
chairs and pushed them up again. Pierre unfolded his cold table napkin
chairs made a scraping noise as the gentlemen who had conferred rose
chairs, the orators spoke one after another and sometimes two together.
chaises!... See that fellow there sitting on the trunks.... Heavens!
challenges him to a duel will that be all right? Eh?"
challenging those who did not agree with him to duels, thereby proving
challengingly into Pierre's eyes.
chamber who have not considered themselves offended by the new decree
championship of the doctor's wife in her queer trap might expose him to
chance and genius become superfluous.
chance and genius.
chance of delay and flight when the longed-for moment comes and he is
chance!" remarked one.
chance. I see a force producing effects beyond the scope of ordinary
chances presented themselves, and he expected them all. Yes, it was like
chances--from among all the seething French parties, and without joining
change being that the words "Father Kamenski" were replaced by "Father
change his mind she would fight him with his own weapons.
change in her as at something extraordinary. Only the old countess with
change in her.
change in the dressings, turning the wounded man over so that he groaned
change that had come over her since the ball. She was silent, and not
change the other's views and without condemning him, but with the quiet,
change their views, that the general, whom he had greatly respected till
change.
changed his sleeping place every day. One day he would order his camp
changed since Prince Andrew had seen them last. The household was
changed their wet things for dry ones.
changed, his brow became smooth, and he listened gladly to Prince
changed," she thought as she sat with the letter she had begun before
changed; there was no longer the former poetic and mystic charm of
changing from one thing to another had never accomplished--were carried
changing his tone or attitude, "it must seem to you that everyone is
changing into a Polish uniform, he drove to the riverbank in order to
changing the expression of her eyes. "I am a woman, and you think we are
changing unconsciously from Russian to French as he went on--to explain
changing with the narrative, watched Pierre with an attention that never
chanter--was holding him under the arm with one hand while warding off
chapel, for, as if expecting something to happen, many wealthy families
character and resignation," remarked Boris, joining in respectfully.
character of solemn fitness. He liked to hear the folk tales one of the
character recurred to her mind; and while thinking of her nephew she
character, but more so recently, since in the new reigns of Paul and
character. The faces of the unimportant people awaiting their turn for
characteristic of genius. Even that final running away, described in
characteristic of him, was building a little pyramid of chessmen with
characteristic of homes where there are very young and very
characteristic of people employed in a country not their own--there were
characteristically noble wrinkles of his handsome, ruddy face. He lay
characters (that is, re-establish the inevitable condition of all that
characters and nations.
characters and social positions. On the faces of all was one common
characters of his patients in general, and especially of the ladies.
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
charge, then he ought to retire from the service and go abroad, and see
charged Murat to find Kutuzov. Then he gave careful directions about the
charged with them beside him. Rostov heard the story and not only said
charging twenty-five rubles for a two hours' drive, and rarely drove
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
charm and poetry of love, yet he told his story with such sincere
charmant. Even if Anna Pavlovna did not say so, he could see that she
charming age when a girl is no longer a child, though the child is not
charming girls. Every young man who came to the house--seeing those
charming she is," she went on, speaking of herself in the third person,
charming this Natasha of mine is! I have no other friend like her and
charming--should give up Bolkonski for that fool Anatole who was already
charming... You are very kind... Countess Apraksina..." was heard on all
chasseur regiment and in the lines of the Kiev grenadiers--fine fellows
chat. A third person rode up circumspectly through the wood (it was
check suddenly broke. The crime had begun and must now be completed. The
checked any attempt to ridicule him to his face.
checked himself.
cheeks sunken.
cheerful in her own separate--probably foolish--but bright and happy
cheerful remarks in her agreeable voice. Princess Mary hastily wiped
cheerful smell of smoke.
cheerful voice:
cheerful were the troops. The greatest disorder and depression had been
cheerful, self-assured old man; now he seemed a pitiful, bewildered
cheerful.
cheerful. "What's the good of making so much of it? Things are nice as
cheerfulness (it seemed to Countess Mary that he did it on purpose to
chemical elements of dissolution.
cher," he paused, "abstiens-toi" *(2)--he articulated the French proverb
chessplayer having lost a game is sincerely convinced that his loss
chest to back than across the shoulders. He had on a brand-new uniform
chest tones in which she had been wont to sing, and listened attentively
chest) "and go and eat potatoes with the meanest of my peasants, rather
chestnut Donets, and whistling to his own leash of borzois, set off
chevalier of St. George, Shinshin told them the town news, of the
chevalier," and who was going with her to Nizhni.
chickens, where he engaged in looting till the French took him prisoner.
chief as a reward for his victory, does not give up the command of
chief gendarme's duty for her, came to say that Madame Schoss was much
chief himself needs sleep and refreshment to maintain his energy and
chief informing him that he had resolved to remain at Bald Hills to the
chief of which was a mysterious person he did not know, but who
chief steward wrote every year telling him of fires and bad harvests,
chief thing in his eyes was not the nitrogen in the soil, nor the oxygen
chief thing," said Natasha. "Do you remember?"
chief's feet without upsetting the old man by informing him of the
chief's office were gathered Kutuzov himself, Weyrother, and the members
chief's orderly speaks to officers, replied:
chief's rival, the man who is undermining him (and there are always
chief's room.
chief.
chief. "Be he what he may" (they always began like that), "he is an
chiefly belonged, including, Pierre thought, Joseph Alexeevich himself,
chiefly from the Emperor's presence in the army with his military court
chiffonier like that and how we had a dispute about it." (At the mention
child gets up after a long illness with a changed expression of face.
child, unattractively like her mother, began to yell and run away.
child. "But no, it is impossible, I am too ugly," she thought.
child. Her smile for him was the same as for everybody, but sometimes
child. I have grown so fond of her."
childhood, when he used to be undressed and put to bed, and when leaning
childhood.
childhood.
childhood. He has a heart of gold. I beg you, Natalie," Prince Andrew
childhood. Riding past the pond where there used always to be dozens
childhood; that same Julie Karagina who had been at the Rostovs'
childish bare shoulders which after her run heaved and shook her
childish state of love for all men, and consequently of confidence that
childlike smile which had not once appeared on his face since he left
children are all illegitimate. I think Pierre also is illegitimate."
children are the bane of my life. It is the cross I have to bear. That
children had interrupted. Countess Mary sat down doing woolwork; Natasha
children of the large peasant family crowded into the back room across
children who were with the French transport, all--carried on by vis
children's property! You said yourself that we have a hundred thousand
children's ruin, and she tried to find means of remedying the position.
children's voices and laughter from the next room. Evidently some jolly
children," she said, in her loud, full-toned voice which drowned all
children. And really you appreciate them less than anyone, and so you
children. The German tutor was trying to remember all the dishes, wines,
children. The nearer the time came for Petya to return, the more uneasy
children."
childwen of the dust... but one falls in love and one is a God, one is
chill ran down his back. Again he glanced at the ranks. Probably many
china, bronzes, pictures, and mirrors that had been so carefully
chirped from across the passage; someone was shouting and singing in
chivalrous, noble, and gentle.
chivalry, of flags of truce, of mercy to the unfortunate and so on. It's
choice delicacy a piece of meat that no one who had seen it in the
choked her: tears of remorse, tears at the recollection of those pure
choked him, and leaning his elbows on the window sill be began to cry,
choking him. When he saw Natasha he waved his arms despairingly and
choking, hot dust that never cooled even at night. Some of this dust
choose me to be their marshal; it was all I could do to get out of it.
choose, and I can't be happy without either of them. Only," she thought,
choose. I give you freedom. Only remember that your life's happiness
choosing me for your second, if at this grave, this very grave, moment I
chords with his short fingers, his legs thrown back and his eyes rolling
chosen by her brother, for whose happiness she was ready to sacrifice
chosen, criticizing not the position itself so much as the mental
church procession. Following the battalion that marched along the dusty
church, walking about the room singing. She had her back to him when he
church. "That's where one crosses the Kolocha. You see down there where
church; but because the bells begin to ring when the hands of the clock
churches, and books--no one and nothing met with a refusal from him, and
churches, and cathedrals. The longer the French remained the more these
churches, and she seemed to be living her usual life, her cupolas
churches--but yesterday a deserter was knouted to death and a minister
circle and, as he supposed, of similar interests.
circle of Helene and Rumyantsev the reports of the cruelty of the
circle of the man he so admired had greatly interested Prince
circle, ran back to their places as the companies passed by.
circle, then at the corner of the room he caught Helene's left hand
circles where the future, on which the fate of millions depended, was
circular room. Around the table all who were at Count Bezukhov's house
circular, memorandum, or report, skillfully, pointedly, and elegantly.
circumspect silence of people who are leaving, after a funeral.
circumstances I may be placed. But if you want to know the truth... if
circumstances and persons he met. Of these plans he had not merely one
circumstances as those I am in now, my action appears to me undoubtedly
circumstances changed and the news he brought was already becoming
circumstances, and his mother having at one time mentioned her to him as
circumstances, he nevertheless delivered the definite order that the
circumstances, society, and race--by that elemental force against which
circumstantially and with evident satisfaction.
citizen of the best-organized state in the world, and therefore as an
citizens are returning every day to their homes and orders have been
citizens nor soldiers but what are known as marauders. When five weeks
city articles kept falling, so that by midday there were instances of
city is taken; the Russian army suffers heavier losses than the opposing
city so long in appearing?" he wondered.
city where peasants can bring their surplus supplies and the products of
city with its comforts and plentiful supplies. As a hungry herd of
city, while walking through the streets with his wife, some Italians
city.
city. Fires were visible on all sides. He did not then realize the
city. Pierre had warned his brother-in-law that Prince Andrew was on
civilians drew near merely to see him. A rumble of Russian and French
civilians, and again, after two years, saw those features he adored:
civilization, and culture. Postulating some generalization as the goal
civilization, culture, ideas, are all indistinct, indefinite conceptions
clambered onto it, seized it by the mane, and turning out his toes
clamored for action.
clanking sabers and subdued talk, their horses' hoofs splashing in the
clapping Rostov on the shoulder with his big hand.
clatter among the audience, and with rapturous faces everyone began
clatter of plates, knives, and glasses mingled with the animated hum of
clavichord and harp. Julie by general request played first. After she
clavichord and that there would be dancing, and so everyone had come as
clavichord stood.
clavichord.
clean handkerchief to wipe her charming hands, another spread a jacket
clean shirt on the feather bed with its warmed and fragrant pillows, he
clean-shaven and in a full-dress uniform he had not worn for a long
clean-shaven cheek for Pierre to kiss and would say: "Till tomorrow,"
clean-shaven cheek to kiss. The whole expression of his face told her
cleaned pairs with spurs had just been placed by the wall. The servants
clear but windy evening.
clear idea of Nicholas' circumstances. Having borrowed money from his
clear to Kutuzov that by accepting battle and risking the loss of a
clear to all what could be ventured against the French and what could
clear, and in all corners of Moscow the same things began to be
clear, bright expression, as if asking them to notice how calmly he sat
clear, insolent eyes in the general's face.
clear, motionless brilliance.
clear.
cleared and which a dresser was washing down. Prince Andrew could not
clearer think of me!" He took her hand and kissed it. "I shall be happy
clearly and definitely. Reasons were found for the incredible,
clearly and distinctly.
clearly and sharply from everyone else.
clearly for the first time that the French would enter Moscow. The
clearly perceive that just as one cannot imagine a blossom or seed for
clearly see, that ladder leading from plant to man, why should I suppose
clearly seen against the white snow. From that sleigh one could hear the
clearly through his mind. "Only once in my life to get an old wolf, I
clearly what chiefly concerned her about her father's illness. On waking
clearly worded the day before, namely, that the commander in chief
clearly, her pulse beat a hundred to the minute, and the blood throbbed
clearly, impressively, and majestically. But can it be true that I am in
clenching his small hand and striking the table with it, "and what luck
clenching his vigorous fist. "And fairness, of course," he added, "for
clerk. "The Kiev Grenadiers, Podolian..."
clever and so good!" said Natasha. "Don't you cry, Sonya, dear love,
clever conversation that was to be heard. Seeing the self-confident and
clever face and sharply projecting jaw which, without spoiling his face,
clever with Vera," said the count. "Well, what of that? She's turned out
clever."
clever.... Oh no, she is simply enchanting, and that is all."
cleverest among them, including the chief steward, understood from this
cleverest, and best man in the world, and were free, I would this moment
clicked her teeth (Karay no longer had her by the throat), leaped with
clinking of spurs that came to a stop, and a respectful cough.
cloak and saddlecloth.
cloak and sheepskin cap, and riding a large sleek Don horse.
cloak looking timidly at me," he thought. "And what does she want the
cloak, he asked whether they wanted the count or the princesses, and,
cloak, waiting for the conversation to finish. They listened to
clock.... Don't you understand? Narrow, you know--gray, light gray..."
close at hand, and a voice of naive terror barely two steps from Prince
close by, when it yelped, tucked its tail between its legs, and darted
close to her, began to whisper something.
close to her; the red patches on her face came and went, and it was
close to his eyes.
close together had to stand for some hours at that crossway. From all
close up to them. So many different eyes, old and young, were fixed
close was the bond that united him to Denisov and the whole regiment.
close-cropped hair, spectacles, the light-colored breeches fashionable
closed and was covered just with a pink quilt, and that his hands were
closed eyes.
closed eyes. Then he opened them and whispered softly: "And the tea?"
closed his eyes, silently let Mack enter his room before him, and closed
closed his eyes. One of his suite beckoned to the soldiers carrying
closed their eyes. At the same instant they heard a report and
closed them, finally pushed them away, and resting his head on his hand
closely connected with others in a thickly populated district, or of one
closer and he daily discovered fresh spiritual treasures in her.
closer bound he involuntarily became to the order. When he had joined
closer to him, paused for an instant as if asking herself whether she
closing up more firmly at the danger, continued, while steadily melting
cloth coat over a sheepskin.
cloth covers carefully tied with tapes.
cloth, which contrasted with the others. "What have you been after? The
cloth-covered, sheepskin coat and new boots, an old woman of similar
clothes in which he had slept without undressing felt uncomfortable on
clothes, another boots, and a third bread. Pierre sobbed as he sat
clothing. "What of Sweden? How will they cross Pomerania?"
cloud over the troops, settling in eyes, ears, hair, and nostrils, and
cloud rose from the hill and was borne in a streak to the left by the
cloud that had concealed it, was shining, with rays still half broken
cloud, and the cupolas and crosses, the hoarfrost, the distance and the
clouded with smoke, through which, high up, the sickle of the new moon
cloudlets that had no time to become balls, but had their little echoes
clouds of dust they raised and making the air ring with a deafening roar
clouds, but no rain. The ground was damp but not muddy, and the troops
clown--Dimmler--and the lady--Nicholas--started a dance. Surrounded by
club were one of the greatest pleasures of both mother, and daughter.
clucked his tongue and let his horses go.
clustered around him; all eyes turned on him, and he felt at once that
clutched at his head. "Who is going to get me the flowers? Dmitri! Eh,
clutched the crupper of his saddle and, spurring his horse, galloped to
clutching the handle of a lance that had been aimed at him.
co-operate in promoting all that is reasonable."
co-operate with him for the public welfare! Lay your respect and
co-ordinated to produce that movement and war: reproaches for the
coach house and stable doors, lighting fires in kitchens and kneading
coachman's, was teasing Kutuzov's old cook whom Prince Andrew knew, and
coachman, and two orderlies.
coachmen, and ferrymen, still stood on the raft and talked.
coarse evergreen color of the small fir trees scattered here and there
coat and supported himself with it. His frowning face was pallid and
coat and trousers, the prince undressed, sat down heavily on the
coat as he always did when he mentioned the prince.... "He has ordered
coat of arms on the table. He explained this to her with as much gravity
coat, going down the street with head bent and a serious face beside a
coat, the traveler sat down on the sofa, leaned back his big head with
coat. "Even wormwood grows on its own root."
coats.
coats.
cochon he had found in the kitchen. But as the captain had the wine they
cock, but the elder members glanced severely at the wit, making him
cocks, goats, and in general for the animals that live with the
code, but under this unwritten law. He felt now that merely by having
coffin about his right to kiss her hand.
coffin, a pall was spread over it, the floor was strewn with sprays of
coffin, the Gospel--it seemed to him that he had expected all this and
coiffure nor of how she would go in nor of what she would say. What
coiled it up and immediately set to work on the other leg, glancing up
coin in his palm. "She will soon be singing and frolicking about. The
coincided with it.
coincidence of occurrences such as happens with all the phenomena of
cold expression.
cold from outside and a feeling of gaiety, crowded, at first timidly,
cold has no more historic interest than the cold of the least of the
cold tone and supposing that it was due to the condition of his
cold white light of this morning which I feel is dawning for me." The
cold, stern, and above all unpleasantly logical.
cold, when half the army perished in a single month--it is of this
cold-shouldering him as at first when they considered him a newcomer,
coldly and vindictively. "Did you see her?" she added, after a pause.
coldly it seemed to Natasha. "Go... go," said the mother, sadly and
coldly.
coldness of late, had all combined to make her decide to release him
collapsing and again slowly rising to the sound of whispered rhythmic
collar and cap, went out for his usual walk. It had snowed the day
collar to look like a grown-up man. He frowned before his looking glass,
collar which he had arranged so well at home to seem like a man's.
collar--whom everyone had forgotten--gazed at Pierre with even greater
collected his men and with shouts and quarrels forced his way in among
collecting a library and has made it a rule not to buy a new book
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
collective action which cannot find its justification in political
collective will of a people to certain historical personages is an
collective will of all the animals is transferred from one leader to
collective will of the people transferred to one person. Under what
collision as inevitably as a ball recoils after colliding with another
colonel and carried them out. It was pitiful to see them, boys," put in
colonel in alarm. His face twitched, as often happens to soldiers called
colonel of hussars who, growing more and more flushed, ate and drank so
colonel of hussars with the same order. After him the stout Nesvitski
colonel told them that the declaration of war had already appeared in
colonel who was standing in the meadow, he gave him some message and
colonel's athletic back, his nape covered with light hair, and his red
color; its undulating outline was silhouetted against the horizon and
colors, who were shouting something in shrill voices.
column advanced into action.
column coming up to meet the Apsherons.
column himself. When he had reached the village of Pratzen he halted.
column marches..." and so on, read Weyrother.
column moved forward without knowing where and unable, from the masses
column to the measure of "Left... left!" "Close up!" came the company
column, Miloradovich's, the one that was to take the place of
column, with its officers leading, appeared from below the hill.
columns and guns. Our advanced line, already in action, could be heard
columns in a respectful attitude implying that he, a foreigner, in spite
columns of French should show themselves.
columns would have been visible quite far off, they were not to be seen.
columns, their bayonets glittering, were moving continuously in one
columns, went on as a single group. The symptoms of disorder that Pierre
columns, with a high silk-curtained mahogany bedstead on one side and
combination of incongruities giving the chief charm to the feeling.
combs, but no longer in their former state of purity. All is neglected
come and brought his pupil with him" (for some reason Prince Bolkonski
come and wanted to put up their horses in the yard where the captain's
come back! We've been into the French camp."
come directly," Pierre replied to the major-domo.
come for her too soon. After a casual pause, such as often occurs
come from Moscow; and also his cousin the eldest princess, who had been
come from Prince Andrew, from Rome, in which he wrote that he would have
come from the left flank where their regiment was stationed, with his
come from their Ryazan and Moscow estates to remove their household
come here.... I will be frank with you. Have you heard she has broken
come here? What do you seek from us? Wisdom, virtue, enlightenment?"
come in a large crowd to the barn and sent word that they would not let
come in."
come in?"
come into the hall. Prince Hippolyte stood close to the pretty, pregnant
come off their heads.
come on!" said "Uncle." "You see it's damp weather, and you could rest,
come on!..."
come out from the merchants' hall with tears of emotion in his eyes.
come over because he had been slighted in the service: that he ought
come over them. "You are as like him as two peas--like the boy." (She
come this evening."
come to Moscow.
come to Pokrovsk at the beginning of his operations and had as usual
come to look after him.
come to see her.
come to see him that evening: the secretary of a committee, the colonel
come to the governor to ask how they were to deal with their various
come to ze front and see dat zis position iss no goot? I don't vish to
come up to him.
come with my mother to see the count, but it seems he is not well."
come, quick, quick!" And with a glance round, she smiled at Tikhon, at
come. He was alone now, except for a soldier who was sitting naked at
come. Pierre got up and left his new companions, crossing between the
come. There were other guests and the countess talked little to him, and
come.... But I'm sorry to leave you."
comedian."
comes the commissary general asking where the stores are to be taken,
comes to despoil our beloved country."
comet of 1812--the comet which was said to portend all kinds of woes
comet, 666, L'Empereur Napoleon, and L'russe Besuhof--all this had to
cometh!'"
comfort so often, and fussed over him so much, that she overfed him and
comfort. It was evident, too, that he was in the best of spirits that
comfortable somewhere in a house... in ours, for instance... the family
comfortably, clasped his arms round his lifted knees and fixed his eyes
comforting belief in future life, retribution, recompense, and
comforting. This something was a most subtle spiritual deduction from a
comforts of life. Others consisted solely of Cossack cavalry. There were
coming action from Dolgorukov. He felt that Kutuzov was upset and
coming battle and the victory that would certainly result from it--no
coming closer to Pierre. "In token of generosity I ask you to give me
coming down upon them and that his regiment was in disorder and was
coming from the study. The prince walked in quickly and jauntily as was
coming from the window and giving Rostov a large envelope. In it was
coming home. Denisov was a small man with a red face, sparkling black
coming movement and bear the responsibility for all that had to be done.
coming out from the dining hall into the anteroom, and he added: "If
coming out of a gate close by.
coming out upon a broad trodden track across a meadow, near a river.
coming out.... But the oaks show no sign yet. Ah, here is one oak!"
coming to us of their own accord," incautiously remarked the little
coming toward him with a smile. But Rostov had noticed his first
coming up.
coming!" Alarmed voices were heard, and a stir of final preparation
coming. I'll come out to you in a moment, but we must first settle
command as long as he could. Bagration was slow in effecting the
command can be executed without some preceding order having been given
command entrusted to Barclay. But as Barclay did not inspire confidence
command of the army in these difficult circumstances, and that in all
command of the first army, and a request to the duke--whom he said he
command, I shall let my beard grow to here" (he pointed halfway down his
command, and Barclay was unpopular; but from this confusion, division,
command, and in a like order.
command.
command. "Sergeants major!... How soon will he be here?" he asked the
commanded by Bennigsen and directed by Toll, had started in due order
commanded from attacking and a battle had taken place.
commanded was in an almost hopeless position. The spy reported that the
commander in chief and Lanskoy, who was in charge of the commissariat
commander in chief and of his own luggage. Very sinister reports of the
commander in chief could, on the first of September, quite freely decide
commander in chief from among such a mass of troops!
commander in chief here, and if all is lost it is for me to perish with
commander in chief is expected and you leave your place? Eh? I'll teach
commander in chief the buzz of talk ceased and all eyes were fixed on
commander in chief with that news.
commander in chief would otherwise be dissatisfied. On hearing this the
commander in chief's carriage, and he sat down on the bench at the gate
commander in chief's one sound eye showed him to be so preoccupied with
commander in chief, and presented arms.
commander in chief, nor the place where the troops are stationed, nor by
commander in chief.
commander in chief.
commander in chief. Bagration knew that as the distance between the two
commander in chief. He interrupted him, talked rapidly and indistinctly,
commander in chief. He was convinced that he alone could maintain
commander in chief. That same day Kutuzov was appointed commander
commander in chief. The activity of a commander in chief does not at all
commander in chief."
commander of all the forces, and the Emperor did not assume that
commander of the left flank of the infantry of the first army, a place,
commander was occupied in giving instructions to Major Ekonomov, he
commander were to give orders to fight, confusion would result but the
commander with a tone of suffering in his voice, while there were still
commander's face now that the inspection was happily over beamed with
commander's voice in jaunty tones. The soldiers passed in a semicircle
commander, awaiting the word of command. A second and a third cannon
commander, but now that the commander in chief addressed him he drew
commander, higher than and different from the others, Prince Andrew came
commander, overtaking the third company on its way to its quarters and
commander, who was fetched, conducted him into the village to Marshal
commander.
commander. Rostov charged the French because he could not restrain
commander. The commanders met with polite bows but with secret
commanders not merely all recognized the position to be impossible, but
commanders of columns were summoned to the commander in chief's and with
commanders of divisions the right to shoot marauders, but I much fear
commanders was done, if not by his direct command, at least in accord
commanders who smilingly pressed forward (it was plain that they both
commanders, and with a consciousness of being too late spreading through
commanders, far from having to urge the men on or anything of that kind,
commanders, in order to find this unknown quantity.
commanding both sides of the Danube, so that should the enemy not
commanding officer's quarters, the regiment began to move: the soldiers
commanding officer, to hand in a complaint about it."
commanding officer. The young officer, his hand to his shako, ran up to
commanding.
commands dependent one on another. Napoleon could not have commanded
commands were issued, the event does not take place unless there are
commands with events we must restore: (1) the condition of all that
commands, letters, reports, and orders of the day; called one another
comme il faut and in the latest fashion. This Natasha noticed at once.
commence on the right wing.
commence the action, and wishing to avert responsibility from himself,
commencement and conduct of the battle and thought it was done
commiserating tone.
commiseration and perplexity.
commiseration on Rostov, who saw that Tushin with his whole heart wished
commissariat affairs of his detachment, and could never be found when
commissariat did not always keep up with the troops)--they would have
commissariat, and so on and so on--millions of commands, which formed
commissariat, the treachery of the Pole Przebyszewski and of the
commissaries or captains of wards have been appointed to the different
commit crime, die, or perform deeds of highest heroism, and so he could
commit nuisances in all the courtyards and even under the very windows
committed in conquered countries. The first people to go away were the
committed. Can I lift my arm? I lift it, but ask myself: could I have
committee. I do not approve of it," said Arakcheev, rising and taking a
common fatherland. I should have demanded the freedom of all navigable
common good turned out to be useless and foolish--like Pierre's and
common impulse which bound the whole crowd of French into one mass and
common soldier prisoners were stationed. He wanted to talk to them. On
common: a desire to get to the place that had been called Moscow, to
commonplace occurrences. A battery of artillery was passing in front of
commune, by which the Elder had already been carried away. But he also
communication still more. If it is said that he expected to end the
communion was administered to the dying man, preparations made for the
commuted for a quitrent. A trained midwife was engaged for Bogucharovo
compact ball, and in its place already were balloons of smoke floating
companies, crowds of whom set off to the neighboring villages, or
companies, of various sizes and characters. There were some that adopted
companion was found robbed and with his throat cut. A bloodstained knife
companion's face, saw her attentive and kindly gaze fixed on him, and,
companion. "You know, you see right through people. Anatole is no
companions' not having the least conception that it could be otherwise.
company that assembled at her house, without incurring any obligation.
company the insignificance of those people was so definitely accepted
company, a head and shoulders taller and twice as broad as their
company, chiefly of men, gathered there every day, supping at midnight
company." Dolokhov breathed heavily from weariness and spoke in abrupt
company? If you were cleverer and more agreeable, I should prefer
compared her feeling for them with her feeling for him, and felt
compared to the lofty, equitable, and kindly sky which he had seen and
compared to the magnitude of the events, and by its impotence--apart
comparing it with the movement of the ship do we convince ourselves that
comparison with that smile.
compartment of Napoleon's tent, where he began opening the box while
compassion.
compassionate eyes.
compassionately, and with joyous love. Natasha's thin pale face, with
compatriots of the province entrusted to your care till our efforts
complacency and gaiety. Though the performance was proceeding, he walked
complacent sigh he would return to the drawing room.
complain of depression. A few days later he fell ill and took to his
complain, and often mentioned that he had not been flogged once during
complete necessity.
complete victory over the French. *
complete, joyous sense of freedom which constituted his happiness at
completed.
completed. He lay with his head propped high on the pillows. His hands
completely accomplished as that to which all Kutuzov's efforts were
completely altered. He was not rich, but would spend his last groat to
completely filled by three officers who sat playing cards by the light
completely happy if the thought of the separation awaiting her and
completely kind and good and does not believe in the possibility of
completely, and, leaving the room without crying, went silently up
completely. The count was not angry even when they told him that Natasha
complex feeling restrained him. He could not utter them, though he
complicated; and he replied to his mother in cold, formal letters in
comply. Anna Pavlovna arranged a group round him, inviting everyone to
components, another unexplained force affecting the resultant action.
composed in the Turkish campaign and now being sung in Austria, the only
composed of Dutch, Belgians, men from the borders of the Rhine,
composing an army, quite independently of whether they are, or are not,
composure and imperturbable self-possession. If a man lacking in
composure, waiting for a display of the eccentricities his father had
comprehend, so each individual has within himself his own aims and yet
comprehensible than gratuitous self-sacrifice, and therefore seems less
comprehensible--it was what any one of them might have said and
comprehension.
comprehension.
compressed, and producing by the rapid vibration of their wings an
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
compromise the young Countess Rostova and so he wanted to meet Kuragin
compromised her completely, they say. Pierre took him up, invited him to
compromising her and committing himself, would now go boldly every day
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
comrade Berg's best wishes for success, rode to Olmutz to see Bolkonski,
comrade Nesvitski, a tall staff officer, extremely stout, with a kindly,
comrade and officer--in a word, a splendid man altogether, a thing which
comrades fully understood.
comrades in destiny, as he pitied himself.
comrades of mine struggled just like me and sought something new, a
comrades of the Guards by his appearance--that of a fighting hussar who
comrades with mud.
comrades' impression. Every face, from Denisov's to that of the bugler,
comrades, talking of women, began chaffing Rostov, saying that he was
comrades, the French, and Pierre who was his neighbor, but Pierre felt
comrades.
comrades.
conceal her delight. "She is so kind and Mamma is so fond of her!"
conceal its effects--the surroundings in which he had been happy became
conceal the facts of the case, insisted that he had gained his victory
concealed depression on the faces around him and heard reports of the
concealed from Natasha. Natasha guessed they were talking about the old
concealed from them but comprehensible to us. Such is the inevitable
concealed the fact under a show of irritation and contempt, he was
concealed the hollow, driven by a rising wind, began to move from right
concealing his name and station.
concealing his unvarying emotion he would press his cheek against his
concealing it, but the Frenchman hastily interrupted him.
concealment, or tried to extricate herself from her awkward position
conceit prevents your apologizing, and you wish to make the whole
conceivable occurrences, and declare this abstraction to be the aim of
conceive of a man being free we must imagine him outside space, which is
conceive of existence remained unchanged. There was still the hunting
conceive that a stupid chance, letting the seven be dealt to the right
concentrate. "There we shall encounter difficulties, and there," thought
concentrated readiness for strife and suffering. To all of them from
concentrated. Twice they had attempted to attack this point, but on each
concentration of batteries on one point, an attack by reserves to break
concentration on some one thought.
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
conception of "greatness." "Greatness," it seems, excludes the standards
conception of freedom and inevitability themselves from the immense
conception of some one man who saved Russia and destroyed Napoleon. In
conception of the ancients as to the direct participation of the Deity
conception of the existence of such an incomprehensible Being? didst
conception of the expression of will, referring it to man and not to the
conception of the movement of the heavenly bodies any longer exists. If
concern for the safety of the arsenal at Tula, and especially the
concern myself about his personal qualities: he has been commissioned
concern was to obtain a greatcoat and a conveyance), proved useless;
concerned with, or he wanted to give the Russian special messenger that
concerning herself and Rostov--their looks and words at times seemed to
concerning his share in the affair--this man did not understand the
concerning the queer husband of "the most distinguished woman in
concerning the ranks allotted to courtiers, which is causing so much
concerning you," said the superintendent of police. "Go on!" he ordered
concerning... you know. Well my dear child, you know how your father's
concerts in the choir? I don't like it, it's just self-indulgence!"
conciliation were discussed. In that circle they discountenanced those
conclude our campaign and we can return to winter quarters, where fresh
concluded by making what amounted to a demand that Pierre should give
concluded that the battle was lost, and sent his favorite officer to the
conclusion by another road, that is, to recognize (1) nations guided
conclusion from all that had been said. Prince Andrew, listening to this
conclusion involves a contradiction, since the series of French
conclusion which he had arrived at from his interview with Napoleon.
conclusion: if this marriage is invalid," he went on, crooking one
conclusions in the form of commands. Having listened to a suggestion
concurrently with, action on the front to bar the advance of the French,
condemned according to whether they conduced to progress or to reaction.
condescension and patronage in his treatment of Berg and Vera. After
condescension.
condition and the pain he suffered, but at Troitsa that had passed
condition is the will of the people delegated to one person? On
condition of his consent that the wedding is not to take place for a
condition of the first man's blessedness before the Fall. Fallen man has
condition that that person expresses the will of the whole people. That
condition! It's very hard."
condition, and immediately after that informed them that she had left
condition.
conditions are unknown to us. They say that historical personages have
conditions exists--the facts of history almost always contradict that
conditions for fighting.
conditions of life to which its people were accustomed to submit would
conditions of life was but little noticeable. As to the serfs the only
conditions of life will arise, which will seem quite ordinary to others
conditions on which the will of the people is transferred from some
conditions the Russian soldiers were in at that time--lacking warm boots
conditions under which their power was entrusted to them; or (3) that
conditions, and that certain relations of population to soil produce
conditions, and to show that all limitations, conflicts, and even
conditions, now had as it were an additional setting of external
conditions, whose action was performed very recently, and the causes of
condolence paid to him on the occasion of his daughter's death said of
conduct that enormous orchestra.
confess I do not understand: perhaps there are diplomatic subtleties
confess everything, and intercepting the note to Natasha she read it and
confession. So Natasha tried to solve what was torturing her by herself.
confession; he felt himself in the presence of one socially a complete
confided in you...."
confided secrets to him, elected him to be a justice and to other posts;
confidence at his feet and do not delay to unite with us!
confidence of many highly placed persons, had been initiated into many
confidence, and love as I have for you. Then I am young. Mamma does
confidence," said she, repeating the mistake of so many parents who
confidentially.
confined frame, when life, all life with all its joys, is open to me?"
confirm this supposition--then she told herself that only she, with
confirmation in Anna Mikhaylovna's face.
confirmed Natasha's assurances that nothing had happened. From
confirmed the order to give up all the carts to the wounded and take the
conflict of magnanimity between the mother and the daughter, ending in
conflict with the French, (2) to defeat them, and (3) to drive them out
conflict, and (3) The attainment of the chief virtue--love of death.
conflicting and intersecting intrigues that eddied about the Emperor's
conflicts of various wills!
conform. However painful it may be to me, should the Almighty lay
confound and put to shame those who have devised evil against us, may
confronted one another as before.
confused happened there amid the smoke, and five minutes later our
confused him still more. He stood before Bagration with his lower
confused when Denisov asked him whether he could stay. Before they had
confused when she saw Prince Andrew. He covered his face with his hands
confused, blushed like a child till tears came to his eyes, began
confused, lifeless scene of plunder.
confused, which he could not at all account for, had come over him with
confusion and fear that showed itself on Prince Vasili's face.
confusion and obscurity would result from such an account of the duel.
confusion and silence, but was afraid even to think about it.
confusion and stopped short from the sudden fright, but then they
confusion what did or did not happen?
confusion would come of this battle undertaken against his will, and as
confusion, and cross-purposes, fell into a rage to everybody's surprise
congratulate him! I can't make out what the commander at Korchevo--a
congratulate him, offer them refreshments, and talk about the elections
congratulated on his approaching wedding that same Boris with whom she
congratulations and greetings from acquaintances that met him on all
congratulations and happy faces, announcing the trophies taken, the
conjecture, but the colonel did not once glance at Rostov, and looked as
conjure..."
connect the effects with the causes. If we examined simple actions and
connected in his memory with Prince Andrew.
connected with a world of eternal, solemn, and calm thoughts, quite
connected with him, or ever to have attributed importance to what
connected with the Montmorencys through the Rohans, one of the best
connected, in his eyes, with evil and deception. Whatever he tried to
connecting link between these two circles. He visited his "good friend
connection appears to be free. How should the past life of nations and
connection may be found between the movements of humanity and commerce,
connection that existed between himself and this man who was dimly
connection with the matter in hand. His haggard face was yellow. He had
connection.) But if you marry the old count you will make his last days
connections and some means. In our times that is worth something, isn't
connections and wealth. Are there no women living unmarried, and even
connections... Well, then, you just..."
conquer that fear, all his dreams of distinguishing himself as a true
conquered everybody everywhere--that is, he killed many people because
conquered, settled down in an armchair, inviting Prince Vasili to take a
conquered, theology established itself just as firmly on the new
conqueror, but at the moment of trial, without asking what rules others
conqueror? Was the will of the Confederation of the Rhine transferred
conquerors appear there have been wars, but this does not prove that the
conquerors caused the wars and that it is possible to find the laws of
conquerors were masters in it and were patronizing him. Painful as
conscience..." Pierre paced the room several times in silence.
conscientiously studied the dispositions and the unfamiliar locality. He
conscious in himself is impossible, and that his every action depends
conscious of himself as living. A man is only conscious of himself as
conscious of it, but in the eyes of reason it in no way differs from
conscious of it.
conscious of the movement of his lips and the snuffling of his little
conscious of this unseen line, and the question whether they would cross
conscious of. "The vibration of my left calf is a great sign with me,"
conscious, is intelligible to us only in as far as we know the laws of
conscious--as were others--after the words were uttered that his remarks
conscious.
conscious. After receiving communion and unction he quietly died; and
consciousness as well as the muscular and nervous activity.
consciousness of man's will in the present moves in space, time, and
consciousness of performing a magnanimous deed--interrupted several
consciousness of the impotence of his once mighty arm, produced an
consciousness of the impropriety of such silence and an anxiety to find
consciousness that he was not a bad man, and he felt this because he saw
consciousness that something great and mysterious was being accomplished
consciousness that they had captured part of the battlefield and had
consciousness.
consciousness. Inevitability without content is man's reason in its
conscripted for the army.
consecutive series of commands corresponding to a series of events, and
consent.
consented to go, and in half an hour four troyka sleighs with large and
consequently I am outside time. (3) I am beyond cause, for I feel myself
consequently I include space. (2) I measure flowing time by the fixed
consequently some thought him proud and others thought him stupid. The
conservatories and the beauty of a flower that had just opened, and
conservatory to the place among the tubs where she had been hiding.
conservatory. There she paused and stood listening to the conversation
consider characteristic of the country--rumors of war are heard
consider everyone his friend. It seemed to him that he was surrounded
consider himself happy to be acquainted with her, he did not wish to
consider my sympathy misplaced, but I was mistaken," and suddenly her
consider that this suited them, since death by hunger and cold awaited
consider the movement of those hundreds of thousands of men who took a
consider yourself bound by your promise--it will seem as if she had not
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
considerable pause which made Pierre feel uncomfortable.
consideration was given to the question whether it would be better to
considerations concerning the terms of the anticipated peace.
considerations the Russian armies--just those which might have destroyed
considerations.
considerations. Similarly profound considerations are given for
considerations: his wife's guilt, of which after his sleepless night he
considerations: to maintain tranquillity in Moscow and expedite the
considered good and bad, and only pretended to direct them and give
considered him conceited, cold, and disagreeable. But among these people
considered himself to be, in the following words:
considered important.
considered it desirable to be in alliance (a conviction he repeatedly
considered it her duty to nurse him--felt to her surprise and vexation
considered it his duty as a doctor to pose as a man whose every moment
considered it his duty to inform his Friend and Brother that Rostopchin
considered it his duty to visit him and waited in the lofty antechamber
considered right was right, so now, after a short but sincere struggle
considered the possibilities of success, but now innumerable unlucky
considered the resonance was best.
considered worthy to hear it had to come to the countess, for she
considering it his duty to rouse the courage of the men and to set them
considering nothing wrong that one does but in priding oneself on every
considering the multiplicity and complexity of the conditions any one
considering what impression his words would make on Natasha. He did
considering what the gratification of his tastes entailed for others,
considers himself bound to maintain his position worthily."
considers his action after twenty years have elapsed than to one who
consist of the contents of a book of funny anecdotes. Before Magnitski
consisting of a very handsome old man of Oriental type, wearing a new,
consists in these historians do not say, or if they do they continually
consolation I can."
consolation? What evil and error are there in it, if people were dying
consolations the one true Catholic religion affords in this world and
consolidated. At Borodino a collision took place. Neither army was
conspiracy and without soldiers. Any guard might arrest him, but by
constant composure and complacency and lack of all interests or desires,
constantly decreased. In the middle of the day Murat sent his adjutant
constantly divined. Once she began questioning him about his son. Prince
constantly interrupted her story to say: "No, I can't! I'm not telling
consternation she detected in herself in relation to little Nicholas
constitute a power, then honest folk must do the same. Now that's simple
constitute the most essential part of the machine.
constitutes men's happiness--the comforts of life, wealth, even
constitutes the essence of freedom) he cannot imagine life. He feels
constitutes the essence of the conception called power.
constitution to Poland and forming the Holy Alliance as praiseworthy in
constitution. A municipality was established and the following
constrained and ill at ease.
constraint that had prevented her taking part in life. The sight of her
constraint was evident, as if they were ashamed of not having loved Vera
consult you seriously."
consultations very valuable for the proprietor and troublesome to
consultations were detached from real affairs and did not link up with
consulting him as to how to remedy this unfortunate affair. It seemed to
consulting his sergeant major, Zakharchenko, for whom he had great
consuming what was set ablaze?
consummate coquette, she could not have maneuvered better on meeting a
containing information about the orders to the French army had been
containing lessons in geometry written by himself and drew up a chair
containing the Sacred Host, which was left at her house for her to
contemplate a man's life.
contemplate it. The commander in chief is always in the midst of a
contemplated between Anatole and the little princess' sister-in-law.
contemporaries who so condemn this measure which merely reestablishes
contemporaries, were carried on with a sincere desire to attain peace,
contemporaries, were more clearly and strongly noticeable than among
contemporary event seems to us to be indubitably the doing of all the
contempt. Pierre, however, he adored. He did not want to be an hussar or
contemptible because their aim was the welfare of himself and his
contemptuous look that showed itself on his face.
contemptuous smile, evidently prepared beforehand to meet all objections
contemptuous though affectionate attitude toward her.
contemptuous. Everything that reminded him of his past was repugnant to
contemptuously and turned away, to show that he would never demean
contented fellows, satisfied with their position, "while I am still
contented with his life. Of late, in 1809, he found in letters from home
contention.
contingencies instead of two or three and based nothing on them. The
contingencies... and foresees the adversary's intentions."
contingent, and with increasing numbers plundering became more and more
continually absorbed his attention. And Pierre, without trying to
continually all his life--was now near to him and, by the strange
continually and rapidly touching her rosy nether lip when necessary
continually appearing followed by their solemn reports, while nearer
continually around them. He spoke in the tone of entreaty and reproach
continually changed about, now joining the moving column, now again
continually deplored the ignorance and poverty of Russia and its
continually driving round or coming upon wounded men, was out of range
continually fancied that either he would never come or that something
continually glanced at Prince Andrew; Prince Andrew rubbed his forehead
continually glanced at him. On growing used to the darkness Pierre saw
continually glancing at him with a more than cordial look, had reduced
continually he moved on. The soldiers squeezed themselves to make way
continually obliged to reply to innumerable questions addressed to him,
continually one after another with a deafening roar, enveloping the
continually receiving many petitioners one after another.
continually sought to find--the aim of life--no longer existed for
continually thought of how she ought to behave to him. First she decided
continually, bringing visitors to the Countess Rostova's big house on
continue long, that a catastrophe was coming which would change his
continue their flight? Despite his desperate shouts that used to seem
continue.
continued Dolokhov, as if he found particular pleasure in speaking of
continued Nicholas. "We must hope for the best, and I am sure..."
continued Paulucci, desperately, apparently unable to restrain himself,
continued Pierre, "shot Dolokhov because I considered myself injured,
continued Prince Vasili, returning to his theme, apparently not
continued Rapp. "The wine is drawn and must be drunk."
continued all through teatime. All the grown-up members of the family
continued his work.
continued its rhythmic murmur, something oppressed him and stretched
continued the vicomte. "I pity the poor husband, that little officer who
continued their flight.
continued their prayers without looking at him.
continued this man. "She is unusually intelligent, charming... and
continued to be correct though he was not now in any hurry to express
continued to explain his views in French, every now and then turning to
continued to explain how by exchanging into the Guards he had already
continued to shout.
continued to think aloud.
continued to turn over the pages and read. In the diary was set down
continued to walk to and fro.
continued what the French had begun. Trains of peasant carts came to
continued with a still more subtle smile:
continued, "we owe today's success chiefly to the action of that battery
continued, uniting them both in one glance. Pierre did not look at
continued, with that gay brotherly cordiality which goodhearted young
continued--remembering Dolokhov's conversation with Kutuzov and his last
continued.
continuing a conversation the subject of which had often been mentioned
continuing the conversation they had begun. And considering it polite
continuing to converse, and Prince Andrew involuntarily heard these
continuing. "That is not enough, I told them. Something else is needed.
continuous, varied, and orderly activity. The motion of the small foot
continuously in an atmosphere of campaigning and war--can understand
contradict himself, did not get frightened or run away from the field of
contradict one another.
contradict the specialist historians but contradict themselves.
contradiction like the possibility of performing two actions at one and
contradiction of her words.
contradiction to everyone else, declared till his death that Borodino
contradiction to such conjectures. During the whole period of the war
contradiction, will they see that they are both wrong. But the man who
contradiction: the general expectation of a solemn event, and at the
contradictions and possesses an unchanging standard of good and bad by
contradictory can only satisfy young children.
contradictory, except the feeling that guides the dream, so in this
contrary I continually reproach myself.... But this is not at all an
contrary alike to strategic and diplomatic considerations, ordered an
contrary one must try to make one's life as pleasant as possible. I'm
contrary opinion. Speranski smiled and, with an evident wish to prevent
contrary to the restless confusion into which he felt himself being
contrary were generally morally weaker than any of the millions they
contrary which were current then but have now been forgotten because
contrary, I ask you to go with all your belongings to our estate near
contrary, I can supply you with everything even if you want to give
contrary, he is probably pursuing you with detachments, or at most with
contrary, they stimulated his energy and determination.
contrary. What did it matter to him--who then alone amid a senseless
contrary..."
contrasted with his flattering words, "on the contrary, your
contrived to avail himself of a convenient opportunity to punish a
control in case of an engagement.
control of the army, and hoping that more decisive action would then
control yourself," she would reply sadly, trying to comfort her husband.
convalescence. Dolokhov lay ill at his mother's who loved him
convenient opportunity to detach themselves and to surrender on the
conveniently to keep them under observation, brought them into the
convent. This was Prince Shcherbitov's house, where Pierre had often
conversation always related entirely to himself; he would remain calm
conversation and began excitedly talking of the abuses that existed
conversation began Prince Andrew was struck by the fact that the Emperor
conversation broke up into insignificant small talk about the last and
conversation but think it necessary to move about and talk, in order
conversation from changing its ordinary character of gossip about the
conversation in which that venerable gentleman involved me," he said
conversation seemed interesting and he stood waiting for an opportunity
conversation to insignificant matters. Natasha, who, of the whole
conversation to take a fresh turn. But the abbe, though he evidently
conversation upon Pierre's matrimonial affairs, by way of fraternal
conversation very well, but at the very last moment, just when he rose,
conversation was very incoherent and Vera was angry at the intrusion
conversation with Captain Ramballe.
conversation with Karataev the day before.
conversation with him about marriage. She saw with sorrow, and sometimes
conversation would probably have been different but for the effect of
conversation, "almost all the aristocracy has already gone over to
conversation, but he had the faculty, so invaluable in society, of
conversation, evidently with no wish to take part in it. He answered the
conversation, gave no reply.
conversation--"I often think how unfairly sometimes the joys of life are
conversation--Count Rostopchin, Prince Yuri Dolgorukov, Valuev, Count
conversation.
conversation.
conversation.
conversation.
conversation.
conversation. But Berg, smiling pleasantly, explained that if he did not
conversation:
conversations, the count at last devised means to tranquillize her. He
conversing with Napoleon's aides-de-camp who surrounded him.
conversing with the Emperor less than three hours before, and in general
conviction and tried to behave morosely with Rostov. But the
conviction that all would be well, but that one must not trust to this
conviction that he alone had experienced and known all the charm of love
conviction that she was a quite unusual and extraordinary being.
conviction. "He's laughing."
convicts stopped when they reached the post and, while sacks were being
convince myself of this I do not lift it the next moment. But I am
convinced as he was of the truths revealed to him by his benefactor,
convinced that she spoke the truth.
convinced themselves that the hounds had separated into two packs: the
convinced you."
convincing.
convincing.
convoy officer, who said rapidly: "We must halt here: the Emperor
convoy with their own small forces. On October 22 it was moving from
convoyed by a sotnya of Cossacks. Evidently the affair was over and,
convulsions and that we know only the facts--that is, the murders, first
convulsively. Two doctors--one of whom was pale and trembling--were
cook themselves meals twice a day. In peacetime it is only necessary to
cook, about asparagus, fresh cucumbers, strawberries, veal, and fish
cook.
cooks were getting the supper, Count Bezukhov had a sixth stroke.
copied or distributed:
copse to take wood, how he had been caught by the keeper, had been
copse. He knew that young and old wolves were there, that the hounds had
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
coquet ever entered her head. She said and felt at that time that no
cord and went blue behind the ear, and suddenly his face flushed.
cordial tone suddenly seemed very strange to Natasha.
cordially though with dignity and restraint.
cordially, but even with a shade of deference due to her misfortune.
cords on his coat and took a card with that number and tried staking the
cords would soon get a bit rubbed," said an infantryman, wiping the mud
cords.
corn all night; or of the fact that his (Nicholas') sheaves were already
corner behind a bookcase, and began to run her fingers over the strings
corner of one of your carts! I have nothing here with me.... I shall be
corner of the room sat a chanter reading the psalms.
corner of the room, and went up to Dolokhov, holding out a small, black
corner to listen to what was being said.
corner, come to her, pull her wet hands from her face, and comfort
corner. And this someone was he--the devil--and he was also this man
corner. Horribly unlike a man as that body looked, she must see him.
cornice with a bit of plaster broken off, the porch, and the post by the
corporal's face when the drums were beating.
corporal... I saw him give the cross to one of the veterans.... Vive
corps I have had occasion to observe during different stages of the last
corps in a wood when it was already broad daylight, though the corps
corps of prisoners, bundles of enemy eagles and standards, cannon and
corpses, and the French soldiers, after dispatching the wounded, threw
corpulent, flaccid, and fat. But the bleached eyeball, the scar, and the
correct, others that it was not, and explained the false rumor that had
correct.
correct. Alpatych was not at home, he had gone to the police. Neither
correct. As soon as Bonaparte (who was at Schonbrunn, sixteen miles from
corrected himself) "has shown or displayed in the battle of the
correlation of cause and effect in people's actions, their actions
correspondence with her, wrote patriotic letters from Moscow.
corresponding decrease of the Russian army.
corresponding series of events. Restoring the essential condition of
correspondingly decreased or increased, according to the point of view
corridor the sound of several hands knocking at the front door could be
corridor to the cabinet where the Minister of War was at work. The
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
corset as she moved. He did not see her marble beauty forming a complete
cost correct, or remedy, the mistake if he had made one, so that he,
cost her no effort to forgive him. Could he be to blame toward her, or
cost money! How can you chuck it in like that or shove it under the cord
cost the lives of a hundred thousand Russians who died of cold and want
cost; another was saying that all silk goods had now got dear. The clerk
costume tournament, Countess? Do come!" and putting out his hand to her
costumes were so good that they ought to be shown elsewhere.
costumes, went into the drawing room. The count sat in the ballroom,
cot where she was standing, "better wait a bit... later..."
cotillion, having completed one of the figures, Natasha, still out of
cotillions before supper Prince Andrew was again her partner. He
couch he had so feared of late.
couch or on the lounge chair in the drawing room and dozed there without
couch was high, with a feather bed and five pillows each smaller than
coughed, swallowed, and said in French that she was very pleased to see
coughing of the musicians were heard from the gallery.
could all that matter in comparison with the will of God, without Whose
could all this have happened?" thought she. "If, after that, I could
could alone extricate us from the present uncertainty and from the trap
could and should be acquainted with people above one, because only then
could be faintly heard. The men were forbidden to talk out loud, to
could be felt, but the nearer Prince Andrew came to the French lines the
could be had even for the carriages, much less for the carting.
could be heard. It was there Prince Andrew thought the fight would
could be heard. On their left flank, nearest to Bagration, marched
could be heard. Others turned over and warmed themselves, now and again
could be heard. The shots came from the yard of the landowner's house
could be obtained in which certain laws should exist and might be
could be seen, and in three places to left and right the French troops
could be seen.
could be seen.
could be seen. Pitch-dark, brother! Isn't there something to drink?"
could be silent in this way for a very long time. "If anyone finds this
could carry no weight--"I give you my word of honor that I have five
could clearly distinguish their bandoliers, red epaulets, and even their
could decline so flattering an appellation, shrugged his shoulders and
could demand this, and she received what she demanded.
could disclose it to me."
could ever enter his head. It now seemed clear to him that all his
could fail to see it," the prince continued, evidently thinking of the
could find it out before others. In the figure in which he had to choose
could find nothing to reproach them with; but even they had their
could for himself and his army, as he had done previously and as he did
could get no farther. And again his handkerchief, and again: 'Sergey
could get them.
could get to know one another. Malvintseva expressed approval, and the
could give her. But until death came she had to go on living, that is,
could hardly restrain those... those... yes, those exploits of antique
could have done everything differently; let us say that with guidance
could have foreseen how the separation from her lover would act on
could have played such a prank on a policeman.
could have produced.
could have the effrontery to continue firing from four quite undefended
could he contemplate the burning of Moscow, and when our armies did
could he see the battlefield he had expected to find, but only fields,
could hear all that passed in the study.
could hear the footstep of someone in thick felt boots, and a voice that
could hear their distressing screams and groans, sometimes feigned--or
could her father, whom she knew loved her in spite of it all, be unjust?
could lead to nothing--and he smiled joyfully as he listened to him.
could make only one movement at that single moment of time, it could not
could no longer be averted but was taking its course independently of
could no longer restrain herself and wept while she gazed at his face.
could not admit the idea of his hero being disgraced.
could not answer. "Can something bad have happened to me?" he wondered
could not be called wars, they did not accord with the theory, and
could not be missed. The Rostovs' Moscow house had not been heated that
could not be sure what change there was in his face. All she could see
could not be. Napoleon did not give his Guards, not because he did not
could not bear her look but turned away with a sob.
could not bear them.
could not conceive the possibility of expressing sincerely in a letter
could not do so.
could not fathom whether it was curiosity, devotion, gratitude, or
could not grant my request, but I hope, Count, I shall be more fortunate
could not have a moment's peace and could not die quietly.
could not have said those words in that offensively cold tone. If he had
could not have taken place. It was necessary that millions of men in
could not help taking notice of the soldier.
could not know by the holy spirit!"
could not marry--he is married!"
could not move fast enough and a piece of gauze was torn off.
could not move it. He smashed a pane.
could not possibly be, and so did not deliver the order.
could not refrain from asking some more questions.
could not reply.
could not resist looking at them once more. Believing their danger past,
could not say with certainty whether the attack had been repulsed or his
could not scream like that--came from the bedroom. Prince Andrew ran to
could not see the smoke. In the passage of the small watchhouse a
could not spare at such an important moment--to return to him. When
could not speak and gasped for breath. When Rostov asked what was the
could not suppress, as they passed out of the palace.
could not understand them however much she might think about them. She
could not understand why he was so particularly animated and happy
could place her in such an embarrassing position and had spent half an
could reach, there were the rattle of wheels, the creaking of carts
could refrain from helping the poor. She had heard vaguely that there
could remember it and weep or pray.
could see what I was like without you, how I suffered!"
could see, beside the wooden fence, a row of thirty year-old birches
could she see him? But after she had been told that she could not see
could stop, but got no answer from anyone.
could tell a story very well), Natasha listened to him with pride; when
could tell them nothing definite about the troops in that column.
could that army--which had found abundant supplies in Moscow and had
could the architect Michael Ivanovich, who on being sent for came in
could to achieve it, Pierre hastily took the blunt jagged dagger in a
could understand all that she understood and all there was in her.
council was assembled.
counsels, his undertakings, and his work; strengthen his kingdom by
count and at Anna Mikhaylovna, the latter very adroitly turned the
count and countess respectfully conversing with the prior, who was
count began irresolutely to admonish Nicholas and beg him to abandon his
count felt this most. He would probably have been unable to state
count had drunk a silver cupful of mulled brandy, taken a snack, and
count moved to go out of the room, taking the papers, probably to reread
count never be able to find out whether all measures had been taken for
count thought of giving her the Ryazan estate or of selling a forest, at
count's fifteen-year-old niece, and little Petya, his youngest boy,
count's games of whist and boston, at which--spreading out his cards so
count's niece, entered with a cold, stern face. The length of her body
count's patriotism, Natasha jumped up from her place and ran to her
count's son," she added more softly. "What a terrible moment!"
count, bowing and looking round uneasily as if afraid the old prince
count, dying with laughter.
count, from his study where he was talking to Mitenka, heard her and,
count, money and all things necessary for the uniform and equipment
count, my uncle; but you, my dear, had better go to Pierre meanwhile
count, who was looking inquiringly at him.
count.
count." She entered the room with resolute steps. Natasha lying on the
counter movement reaches the starting point of the first movement in the
counteract it as far as they can."
countermarches, things of which I understand nothing; and the day
countess alike--turned to look at her as if wondering why she had said
countess and Sonya, and a fourth held the whole of the gossamer garment
countess and piloted the provincial Rostovs in Petersburg high society,
countess and that it was necessary to say something to her. Hardly
countess and you to do me the honor of coming to tea and to supper."
countess corrected her mistakes in spelling.
countess could not conceive of life without the luxurious conditions she
countess did not know where they were and were very anxious, said one of
countess had a headache brought on by all the noise and turmoil and was
countess had not yet come. But now steps were heard at the door, steps
countess has been to Mass at the Razumovskis' and heard the new prayer.
countess have done had she not been able sometimes to scold the invalid
countess in, while maids rushed with cushions and bundles from the house
countess knew so well and feared so much, and now she sat in the same
countess reflected a moment and took a pinch from a gold snuffbox with
countess resembled Diana in her passion for the chase as well as in her
countess say. "Why are you sitting there like conspirators?"
countess was to wear a claret-colored velvet dress, and the two girls
countess was writing to her son.
countess went into the oratory and there Sonya found her on her knees
countess will be here in a few days. The countess is in a dreadful
countess won't on any account leave Moscow till her son returns."
countess!"
countess" to have a rest, but remembering something else of importance,
countess' fears still more by telling what she had seen at a spirit
countess' house.
countess' voice from the drawing room.
countess, "but I always wanted Nicholas to marry the princess, and had a
countess, silently and minutely studied her childhood's suitor. He felt
countess, turning to little Nicholas who was coming in with Dessalles.
countess, who sat holding in one hand the snuffbox with its portrait and
countess.
countess.
countess. "I have never seen a handsomer man."
countess. Her son's growth toward manhood, at each of its stages,
countess."
country and the Tsar confer honors upon him, what does that matter? She
country house in the far distance.
country neighbor of the Rostovs, came to Moscow to pay her devotions at
country that summer of 1812.
country's sake? And how was he to blame, with his dimple and blue eyes?
country's welfare? Well, what is it? Speak!" Denisov blushed like a
country, but through the village. At one spot he stopped and listened.
countrymen. Thanks for the fire--we'll return it with interest," said
countryside--"See, our infantrymen have already got there. Look there
couple of acres. The wounded crept together in twos and threes and one
couple of bottles of wine by himself. The process in his mind went on
couple of strings inside a carriage, thinks he is driving it.
couples out of the circle. All but one rejoined their companies. This
courage and endurance--acknowledged even by the enemy--with which the
courage of the troops you command justify us in expecting.
courage shown in the Ostrovna affair, and in the same order the name
courier from Petersburg brings a letter from the sovereign which does
courier who carried the news of our victory at Pultusk to Petersburg
courier. "I have a sackful of letters to parents."
course and, not finding itself pursued, was naturally drawn toward the
course of events in the forthcoming action in broad outline. He imagined
course of events, and he can see them and grasp their significance,
course of ideas which guided his decisions merely gave them his final
course, and its course was so very usual that it was difficult to
coursing. But when it is, then look out!" his appearance seemed to
court circles the possibility of marriage between Napoleon and one of
court of the Dowager Empress, who was a friend and relation of the
court to her. Beautiful and clever... they say Prince--is quite mad
court weathercock and an old satyr.
court, but it was not much appreciated at Napoleon's dinner, where it
court, carefully abstaining from expressing an opinion of his own about
court-martial a noncommissioned officer on account of the escape of the
court-martial had been appointed, and that in view of the severity with
courteous bearing. This was Anatole Kuragin whom she had seen and
courtierlike quickness and tact habitual to her, Anna Pavlovna wished
courtiers accompanying the army were living in the best houses of the
courtiers), was clear to everyone. It was this: the Emperor did not
courtiers, and by the Emperor himself, it occurred to one of the Polish
courts only strengthened his desire to belong to that higher world.
courtyard and wished to see him.
courtyard in the old Konyusheny street. Marya Dmitrievna lived alone.
courtyard, turned the corner, and ran up into the porch.
cousin, evidently wishing to distract her mind.
cousin.
cousin. And we are only second cousins, you know. And Boris says it
cousinage est un dangereux voisinage. * Don't you think so?"
cover of the small box, and assumed his usual tranquil and impenetrable
cover that it was Les Chevaliers du Cygne by Madame de Genlis.
cover with their living verdure the grief that weighed her down that
covered by smoke clouds from the guns, and the slanting rays of the
covered her eyes.
covered her whole face.
covered her with two quilts, and herself brought her some lime-flower
covered his eyes with his hand and pressed von Toll's hand.
covered street and turned into the wide courtyard of Count Cyril
covered the lower part of his face, and a tangle of hair, infested
covered trap. Several times Rostov, covering his head, tried to go
covered with hoarfrost to his eyebrows.
covered with hoarfrost. "Yes, it is he, happy and contented..."
covered with melting snow, the frost having begun to break up during the
covered with powder. Behind them, wearing a smile and leaning over with
covering, and the harp gave out a jarring sound.
coward like Arakcheev, he was as precise, as cruel, and as unable to
cowshed nor Rostov back with his platoon from foraging for hay had any
crack in the wall. A cock crowed far off and another replied near
crackled, the snow was melting, and black shadows of soldiers flitted
crackling of campfires and the voices of many men had grown quiet, the
crackling of wood fires near and afar, merged into one tremulous rumble.
craft exposed, he should have appeared to them what he appeared ten
crafty conduct of Bismarck, and so on. The Napoleonic wars still seem
cramped dead firs, ever the same, and at me too, sticking out my broken
creaks or makes more noise than it should, and hastens to check the
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
creature."
creatures, and he so longed to find in someone the living ideal of that
credit (as he ironically called it), he found out how many cattle the
credit! And the people too are quite mutinous--they no longer obey,
creditors demanded from his father.
crept unobserved into his heart and once more bound him to life. And
cried Natasha with a happy yet frightened expression.
cried at each shot: "Fine! That's good! Look at it... Grand!" The fire,
cried from the window: "Come here; part the bets!" This was Dolokhov,
cried suddenly to her own surprise and with tears in her voice. "Ah, how
cried the old count. "My head's in a whirl!"
cried to the maid, angrily opening her mouth and still farther exposing
cried wildly: "They're fighting us, lads!"
cried with a feeling of loathing for herself.
cried.
crime one commits, ascribing to it an incomprehensible supernatural
crime, a good action, or even one that is simply nonmoral, we ascribe a
crime, which altered his whole life and were connected with Pierre, with
crimes, frauds, treacheries, thefts, forgeries, issues of false money,
criminal Bonaparte. Rostov was therefore unpleasantly struck by the
criminal and at the same time pacify the mob.
criminal court...."
criminal," came into Pierre's head, "and from their point of view they
crisis."
criterion of life.
criticism and was about to reply, when the expected footsteps were heard
criticisms of the present. For them all, that old-fashioned house with
criticize them, but remembered my rules and my benefactor's words--that
criticized--criticized for their very perfection, for their excessive
crockery," said he, and rising slowly he moved to the table. "Gentlemen,
crooked a third finger. "Ah, yes, hospitals, medicine. He has a fit,
crop on any single acre of the Bogucharovo fields.
cropped," something hidden and unknown to herself, but irrepressible,
cross and belfry of the Kolocha Monastery gleamed in the sun. Here and
cross by ferry. While the carriage and horses were being placed on it,
cross round his neck, approached the speaker.
cross the Lech, we can cross the Danube, throw ourselves on his line
cross to kiss before his execution." So thought Pierre, and the whole of
cross to the Kaluga road, but just then an adjutant gallops up from
cross, equally shabby cadet's riding breeches lined with worn leather,
crossed early in winter. This was the first indication of the necessity
crossed her path everywhere). "Andrew may wake him."
crossed herself, bowed low, and when she did not understand, in horror
crossed himself and kissed the icon. There was a look of tenderness, for
crossed himself three times.
crossed the Niemen and, thanks to this, was able to show certain
crossed the dam Prince Andrew smelled the ooze and freshness of the
crossed themselves.... "Forward, with God's aid!"
crossed.
crosses on their caps, who, talking and laughing loudly, animated and
crossing herself properly but in a cramped manner, and again she thought
crossing himself with the hand that held the taper.
crossing. And why are they dawdling there?"
crossness worried her. She got up and, walking on tiptoe with
crouched feet and all in the corner of her sofa, nervously crumpling and
crowd and caps were doffed.
crowd began at once to disperse through the village.
crowd by the gate, gone up to a cart with a hood constructed of bast
crowd had to wait.
crowd of French soldiers stood around him and were searching him.
crowd of tattered prisoners, buzzing with talk and wrapped and bandaged
crowd of wounded and stretcher-bearers was gathered.
crowd on the open space, she, in her rich satin cloak with a bright
crowd turned toward him and pressed round him. Those who stood nearest
crowd understood the whole tremendous significance of what was
crowd was evidently watching for the roof to fall in, and Alpatych
crowd, and Pierre saw Karataev whom he had not yet seen that morning.
crowd, they had got wedged in at the approach to the dam and, jammed in
crowd, went out of the drawing room and reappeared a minute later with
crowd.
crowd.
crowded closer and closer together. They advanced the few hundred paces
crowded round a pockmarked, broad-shouldered sergeant major who, tilting
crowded together close to his wheels and his horses. "What a fellow! You
crowded with peasant carts, some loaded high and already corded up,
crowding and hurrying across the bridge, ascending on the opposite side
crowding, a tall well-fed man lay on his back with his head thrown back.
crowds of people had rapturously greeted and followed him. From all
crown or to owners whose serfs paid quitrent and could work where they
crows flying from Moscow across the field, and when afterwards light
cruelly and painfully to the end of his life. He seemed still to hear
cruelty, as when tying the policeman to the bear and dropping them into
cruelty, debauchery, and drunkenness. And in spite of all this it is the
cruelty. Looking at his cold face, as he sat like a stern schoolmaster
cruelty..."
crumpled hussar cap stuck jauntily back on one side of his head. As he
crumpling her program. "Look, there's Alenina," said Sonya, "with her
crush the contemptible detachment that stood before him.
crushed him during the executions, but which he had not felt during his
crushed, but angry and working unnaturally, she saw that hanging over
cry and kissed again. Mademoiselle Bourienne also began to cry. Prince
cry as she spoke of her loss, did not leave her memory.
cry of ulyulyu, and above the others rose Daniel's voice, now a deep
cry of: "The general to the third company," the missing officer appeared
crying and were able to go to him with calm faces.
crying piteously and kissing me. One can do anything with him by
crying," continued the woman. "It's she. Here, this way!"
crystal decanters and fruit vases the count kept glancing at his wife
cudgel that comes to hand and strike with it till the feeling of
cultivated, and capable of the young men. Forgive my vanity as a
culture evade it and answer something quite different. And as counters
culture--following the path laid down by the universal historians who
cunning way, are ready to render any sort of service to their master,
cup before a table on which tea and a cold supper were laid in the small
cup left here?"
cup of tea?"
cupboards, and little tables. The quilt of a high, white feather bed was
curiosity at a Russian uniform, and came out at the other end of the
curiosity.
curiosity.
curiosity. Ferapontov's wife, who till then had not ceased wailing under
curiosity. In three carriages involved among the munition carts, closely
curious embarrassment among some of those present. Sonya, Dolokhov,
curling to his shoulders, in a majestically royal manner, and looked
curlpapers, ran in. The countess--her prayerful mood dispelled--looked
curly head to her knees and made the whole room ring with her laughter.
curly-headed like his mother and glowing with health, sat on his knee,
curly-headed, delicate boy sat with shining eyes unnoticed in a corner,
current beat softly against it below. Prince Andrew felt as if the sound
current in town she learned how the Rostovs were situated, and how "the
current of his thoughts, "that Anatole is costing me forty thousand
cursed the day before and will curse again a month later.
curtain flapping and blew out the candle with its chill, snowy draft.
curves, trailing its brush, when suddenly a strange white borzoi dashed
cushion at which Princess Mary was looking. The flow of her thoughts
custodian to enforce order and acted as the sovereign's bodyguard.
customary long-established relations on the matter.
customary remark: "It's not the gift that's precious, my dear, but that
customary routine. To such customary routine belonged his conversations
cut by the new French ambassador."
cut deep into his heart and drawn blood. Even now he felt clearly that
cut off, you see..." he went on with a smile, pointing to the empty
cut short. "She's ridden all day like a man, and is as fresh as ever!"
cutting off a leg or an arm for me."
cutting off and capturing Napoleon with his marshals and his army.
cutting off the enemy's retreat and the soundness of the only possible
d'ame--at that solemn moment felt himself enraptured by all that he had
d'honneur of which Napoleon was himself the head.
d'honneur), the monarch came out into the porch, putting on his gloves
dainty finger, was fixing on a last ribbon that squeaked as the pin went
damp and cold, especially in clothes that were still moist. As they left
damp earthen floor of the passage. The cold she felt refreshed her. With
dance) began to sound, all the doorways of the ballroom were suddenly
danced Daniel Cooper with his daughter.
danced that evening. He had never danced like that in Moscow and would
dancer, and one of the best matches in the city.
dancer, but smiling as only happy girls of fifteen can smile. When
dancers do, Natasha, rising energetically from her heels to her toes,
dancers, who--having decided once for all that being disguised, no one
dancing began in which Nicholas still further captivated the provincial
dancing master) gave for his pupils during the holidays.
dancing shoes did their work swiftly, lightly, and independently of
dancing with me."
dancing, but the governor's little wife placed her plump hand on his
dancing. An aide-de-camp, the Master of Ceremonies, went up to Countess
dandies, the lower part of his face hidden by his beaver collar and his
dandling him. A blissful bright smile was fixed on the baby's broad face
danger of being crushed, he rushed at the biscuits. He did not know why,
danger, and who was neither an educated man nor a courtier, was able to
danger--are surrounded by the French. It would be dangerous to move now.
danger. Formerly only bees laden with honey flew into the hive, and they
dangerous business, and if you think about it--a stupid business. Well,
dangerous crossing of the Straits of Dover and captured London--could
dangerous she became to men, and the more freely they could associate
dangerous.
dangers.
dangers. During these wanderings, Pierre noticed that he was spoken of
dangles.... See, she's got a little hunting horn!"
dans la barque, et n'en faites pas une barque de Charon." * There was
dare to, dared not in her present state of mind address herself to God.
dared complain, I who am deprived of all who are dear to me? Ah, if
dared to do yesterday, I will show you who is master in this house. Go!
dark and the glow of two conflagrations was the more conspicuous. The
dark with sweat. On its long back sat Daniel, hunched forward, capless,
dark-eyed niece of hers was so meek, so kind, so devotedly grateful to
dark-faced icon with an embossed metal cover. This was the icon that had
dark-haired general who was just ascending the knoll.
dark-haired, remarkably slim, pretty girl in a yellow chintz dress, with
dark. The officers were hurriedly drinking tea and breakfasting, the
darkened and he went up to the boy.
darkened of this man on whom the responsibility for what was happening
darkness by his white hat.
darkness of the night.
darkness that was occasionally rent by distant lightning.
darkness, and the drummer boy came to the door.
darkness, and though Pierre could not see his face he felt that the man
darkness, the man paused, then moved with cautious steps toward the
darkness, was suddenly lit up by a new brightness, full of significance.
darkness.
darkness...."
darling Sonya!" and she kissed her and laughed. "Vera's spiteful; never
darling, it's not the thing. Please forgive me, darling.... Mamma, what
darted forward at every word or gesture of the commander in chief,
dashboard with snow, Anatole and his constant companion Makarin dashed
dating from your childish days, and to see him so intimate with you may
daughter (long-faced like her father) and her governess. The other
daughter Helene.
daughter amid the general conversation. "Got herself up like a fool!"
daughter seemed to say: "There, you see? You plotted against me, you
daughter were having one not less important. Natasha came running to her
daughter whenever he chanced to see her:
daughter with an infant in arms. They were half clad, hungry, too weak
daughter's absence, knocked at the door.
daughter's and move away.
daughter's face which was wincing with pain and gazed long at it.
daughter's happiness.
daughter's head with all her strength. Then she turned toward her
daughter) to give the future sisters-in-law an opportunity to talk
daughter, Countess Vera, the attentions a young man pays when he intends
daughter, Countess Vera, with a smile.
daughter, I suppose?"
daughter, and he so prized his own cheerful tranquillity, that he
daughter, but for a minister! For me, there are no ministers!"
daughter, entered the drawing room, their dresses rustling.
daughter-in-law, "but she need not make a fool of herself, she's plain
daughter.
daughter.
daughter. "How beautiful she is!" Natasha without saying anything
daughter. She lowered her head and was ready to burst into tears.
dawn he had slept for a few hours, and refreshed, vigorous, and in good
day after that.
day and Natasha danced exquisitely. Her little feet in their white satin
day at dinner, informed Bolkonski that the sovereign wished to see him
day be mine forever, as familiar to me as I am to myself?... No, that's
day before and that they had sent for the doctor, but that she was
day before. A crowd of military men was assembled there, members of the
day before..."
day by day. All the physically or morally weak had long since been
day had evoked them. He had never, it seemed to him, been able to think
day he had learned that Prince Andrew, after surviving the battle of
day he had lost. He was happy as a lover when the longed-for moment of
day long. At the battle of Borodino, when Bagration was killed and nine
day of the battle. Kutuzov wrote that the Russians had not retreated a
day spent in inaction and solitude (he tried several times to fix his
day there, when preparing to go to Kiev, he fell ill and was laid up
day until then, but he could no longer do it. He could not, any more
day was mapped out, the prince rested and the princess played the
day which could be spent in such a variety of ways; there was not that
day's ration of bread remains, and in some regiments none at all, as
day, November 15, after dinner he again went to Olmutz and, entering the
day, and leave my lassies with you."
day, and yet he continued to spend whole days with the Rostovs.
day, but had heard about them from an infantry officer. "They broke up
day, but he did not come. On the second and third day it was the same.
day, especially by the mysterious fulfillment she had just seen of her
day, he returned to dinner, and without having time for a private talk
day, ordered the standards that had been captured to be lowered at the
day," said the visitor. "What a charming child," she added, addressing
day.
day.
day.
day.
day. And once more Kutuzov had to consent.
day. And the happiness of taking communion, or "communing" as Agrafena
day. The thought that her best days, which she would have employed
days a girl has so much freedom that the pleasure of being courted often
days after the delivery of his speech at the lodge he lay on a sofa at
days and nights with a Wallachian woman--Prince Andrew asked Kutuzov
days at the Karagins', and every day on thinking the matter over told
days before Princess Mary arrived. It was the last spiritual struggle
days before, and on the day that Sonya, after listening at Natasha's
days in advance, the order had certainly already been given for everyone
days of their retreat, of Karataev's illness and his death.
days previously had been that of the Emperor Alexander. Napoleon sat
days previously. That same evening a house serf who had come from
days they grew accustomed to him, and without restraint in his presence
days was still thin--moved. His gleaming eyes were fixed intently on one
days with her, asked her to sleep in her room, and often talked with her
days without eating. We've nothing, we've been ruined."
days' march and the enemy's outposts after a brief interchange of shots
days' march farther on and in quite another position.
days, while no duties were required of him, Prince Andrew rode round the
days.
de Bal-macheve." But royaute oblige! * and he felt it incumbent on
de Cologne should be sprinkled. Napoleon's short hair was wet and
de Stael, Talleyrand, Fichte Chateaubriand, and others. The historian
de Tolly was quartered nearly three miles from the Emperor. He received
de cochon (pig's lemonade), and Morel spoke well of the limonade de
de l'univers, nous allons lui faire eprouver le meme sort--(le sort de
de salut public--were taking shape and being realized.
de-tra-va-ga-la" he sang.
dead and so-and-so was married, which she would again be unable to
dead, I fancy. However, I'll look up our list. We had a list. Have you
dead-looking evergreen firs dotted about in the forest, and this oak,
dead. All that he saw and heard seemed to confirm this terror.
deafening roar, crackling, and whistling made his ears tingle.
dealer in the town and a landowner fourteen miles out of town who had
dealer's in Myasnitski Street. When returning by that street she had
dealers with voices of ingratiating affability inviting customers to
dealing with the matter have written the history of the beautiful words
dealt with public questions. If anyone gave or asked for personal
dear Count Vrbna, goes to him for orders."
dear Vyazmitinov...."
dear as one's own mother!" said he. "Well, and have you little ones?" he
dear boy, and have a look," he would say to one or another of those
dear child, consult only your own heart. That is all I have to say," and
dear fellow, I'll give you twenty thousand and a note of hand for eighty
dear fellow, no conditions better than our present ones could have been
dear fellow," said he, "into the fire with all such things! Let them cut
dear friend, listen! I know it all. I know I am not worthy of her, I
dear invalid?" said she, as though unaware of the cold offensive look
dear, good, gentle Marie, whom I have always loved as a daughter!"
dear, whether the will and letter were written, and whether they have
dearest to me--yet dreadful and unnatural as it seems, I would give them
dearest to us. He forgot that what he was saying about Natasha could
dearly and distinctly indicated.
death for his sake. Then Robespierre was beheaded for being a despot.
death of her brothers had become one of the richest heiresses in Moscow,
death that overhung them, they dared not look life in the face. They
death was so certain that soldiers suffering from fever, or the swelling
death's door. But you were enjoying yourself. Yes, enjoying..."
death's head. The stranger sat without stirring, either resting or, as
death, all at once rose before her with a new, previously unknown force
death, and Prince Andrew died.
death, love, the brotherhood of man," he kept saying to himself,
death, noticed an agitation among the peasants, and that contrary to
death, supposing that Pierre had heard of it long before. All this at
death--never entered his head. He wished for nothing and hoped
death? Not the men on the commission that had first examined him--not
debts and to rebuild his houses, Pierre still maintained that he had
debts and was obviously not guilty of contracting them.
debts the existence of which no one had suspected. The debts amounted to
debts," said the militia officer, speaking of Rostov.
debts. And Pierre decided that the steward's proposals which had so
decanter in her haste had not closed the door (everything in the house
decaying leaves and of dog. Milka, a black-spotted, broad-haunched bitch
deceased that they had immediately let the matter drop.
deceived. And I am off to the army. Why? I myself don't know. I want
deceiving himself, find reason for rejoicing in the calculation that
decent town. You and I will travel comfortably in my caleche."
decide the matter, but those who devised it," said Bilibin quoting one
decided not to sit down to cards or let his girls out of his sight and
decided now or never. On Thursdays Princess Mary remembered with a
decided now or never. She lowered her eyes so as not to see the gaze
decided that day, but that they also knew what she thought about it.
decided that the deed should be done. The gates of most of the houses
decided that the horses should be driven out into the woods and the
decided to send the letters and money by the Grand Duke's courier to
decidedly lost bearings, you know that a letter was received from him
deciding seriously to prove to this youth how foolish his words were,
decision would be to risk exposing one's stupidity and incapacity to
decisive words, though in imagination he had long regarded himself as
declaration to Princess Mary, he promised to go.
declaration, listened to him in silence and then told her son that he
declare his feelings to Princess Mary. And he knew that he would never
declared Natasha. "You want me to be miserable, you want us to be
declaring that only his courage and good luck made such a feat possible:
decline, but took the note quietly and thanked her.
declivity to his right. He looked in that direction, but though the
decorations. She ran up to him and, in the play of the sunlight that
decorous smile of self-satisfaction at being able clearly to understand
decorum through the service, meditating on a great variety of subjects.
decrease in the strength of the nation--even though it is unintelligible
decreases..."
deduced the essentials of his wishes quite correctly, and having once
deed to sign for the princess' benefit.
deed, we never get a conception of freedom in time. For if I examine
deed. They blamed Kutuzov and said that from the very beginning of the
deep breath after stooping, but refrained from doing so and breathed
deep chest notes. "For me it certainly was happiness." She paused. "And
deep furrow ran across his forehead, and standing by a window he stared
deep in his heart for him ever to decide to give her a successor and our
deep voice and with a slight cough--the voice and cough with which he
deep voice suddenly inquired from the other end of the table. "What are
deep within him his soul was occupied with something important and
deep wrinkles would crease his cheeks. His small, deep-set eyes always
deep-rooted legitimists, and patriotic views were expressed to the
deep. As soon as day dawned the march began. The artillery and baggage
deepest reflections to say a civil word to someone who comes in and can
deeply loved affianced wife--the same Natasha Rostova who used to be so
deeply. Only after emptying a bottle or two did he feel dimly that the
defeat, the glory of our Russian arms is secure. Except your Kutuzov,
defeat, there were many circumstances confirming the unfavorable rumors
defeated. A week after the gazette report of the battle of Austerlitz
defeated. An army has suffered defeat, and at once a people loses its
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
defend Moscow to the last drop of blood and is even ready to fight in
defend Vilna. You are cut in two and have been driven out of the Polish
defend it?" A prolonged and general silence followed. There was a frown
defend their country--the very incitement which was the chief cause of
defended and others still discussed it, the question was no longer
defended them. Young Count Toll objected to the Swedish general's views
defending her husband and attacking her brother. Her defense was weak
defending himself against superior forces of the enemy and abandoning
defense of the city; amazed also at the novel outlook revealed to him
defense of the fatherland, all Russians from the greatest to the least
defiant expression which said that she was not afraid of anybody. The
defined by the capture of pieces of material fastened to sticks, called
defines this freedom by the laws of reason, and so history is a science
definite and one is rid of the old tormenting doubt." Pierre held the
definite idea of her, he turned away and addressed Michael Ivanovich.
definite meaning, and which can therefore be readily introduced into any
definite meaning, especially if one considers that by tomorrow one may
definitely decided on, Denisov turned his horse and rode back.
definition of power needs explanation.
definition reason gives it. Freedom, apart from necessity, that is,
degree embarrassing for the Russians, as the most adroit diplomatists of
degree just the very qualities Pierre lacked, and which might be best
degree the faculty of divining the needs and instincts of those he dealt
deign to unite his fate. And I?... and he is still alive and gay!"
deigned to send your excellency a project submitted by me..."
dejected and frowning, sat on a bench by the bridge toying with his
delayed their return to the country.
delegate, the very men the serfs would themselves have chosen had they
delegated to them.
deliberate steps. This feeling of disdain was heightened when he saw the
deliberately down the carpeted gangway, his sword and spurs slightly
deliberately so that everyone could hear:
deliberately.
deliberating," continued Napoleon with the same derisive and
deliberation started smoothly, gliding first round the edge of the
delicate as a child's, revealed by the turn-down collar of his shirt,
delicate dark down was just perceptible, was too short for her teeth,
delicate white fingers raised from the green quilt the hand that was
delicious Russian tea," Lorrain was saying with an air of restrained
delight in, herself. "How charming that Natasha is!" she said again,
delight of frenzy. He flung down the slab, broke it, and swooping down
delight us continually by falling from the sky.
delight would find in his wife's ideas and actions the very thought
delight, now bask in the sun with a thoughtful air of importance, and
delight. So you still love me, my romantic Julie? Separation, of which
delighted at the unexpected rapidity of his pupil's progress, but could
delighted that from their point of view as plasterers, everything is now
delighted..." came the sounds of animated feminine voices, interrupting
delirious. Prince Andrew's bearers, stepping over the wounded who had
deliver.
deliver. "The Sovereign plainly said that the Council and Senate are
delivering his message, awaiting permission to withdraw. Napoleon,
deluding himself. Doesn't he know that he is a man, just a man, while
demand he made up his mind that he must have recourse to artifice when
demand the punishment for such an act; in the case of a virtuous act we
demanded a general engagement. Lubomirski, Bronnitski, Wlocki, and the
demanded a pillow and hot water, and unfastened and tore open her
demanded anything of him or sent him anywhere. He had all he wanted:
demanded--namely, simply to follow the enemy up. The French crowd fled
demanding bread, meat, biscuits, fodder, and whatnot! The stores are
demands were sent from Petersburg for Kutuzov to take his army that
demonstrated, and at last contemptuously ceased to demonstrate, like
demonstration of freedom.
demonstrations of love of Bourienne.
denied that he was a painstaking and brave officer, on excellent terms
denied--and to recognize it as the resultant of the forces, that is, he
denied?" he suddenly asked with exulting austerity and authority in
dense, which, swelling, growing, rolling, and blending, extended over
denser by the mist, prevented him from seeing anything for an instant,
department. Lanskoy informed the commander in chief that the army
departments of government.
departments.
departure by the twenty-eighth of August and the carts that were to
departure from day to day.
departure next morning, she went to her room and remained alone with her
departure of the inhabitants. If one accepts this twofold aim all
departure she formed a definite plan of action. Just as Boris' leave of
departure they were dissatisfied with one another.
depend on him, and from its lack of success this affair, for the first
depended on Rostov's winning or losing on that seven of hearts. On the
depended on arrangements made by the staff, I should be there making
depended on it.
depended on this.
depended on whether he was, or was not, in time to lock it. He went, and
dependence had taught her involuntarily to be secretive, having answered
dependence on brute force, Davout sent an adjutant to call the officer
dependence on cause.
dependent on her and living in her house. She felt sorry for her
dependent on these two elements.
depends on the way unexpected movements of the enemy--that cannot be
depends on your decision. Never mind me!"
deployed squadron, rode at full trot downhill toward the dragoons.
depraved. One is lured by women, another by honors, a third by ambition
deprecating expression of a dog when it rapidly but feebly wags its
depressed. Without greeting the officers, he scratched himself and asked
depressing and unsolved problem.
depressing than ever, and the countess fell ill from mental agitation.
deprived," he thought as he lay in the semidarkness of the quiet hut,
depth of his heart. In one place the peasants presented him with bread
depth of my soul I agreed with him. Talking of my family affairs he
depths of the country.
depths of their souls understand it as I do, and only try not to see
derision. "I ought to know the Emperor by now, after the times I've seen
derive from a course of treatment he would lose as a result of the
descend to the level of the original discussion.
descend upon the vanquished. I must be magnanimous and truly great. But
descendants were weak men and they too ruled France badly. And they had
descended the porch steps.
descending the valley. That moment of moral hesitation which decides
descending. In front in the fog a shot was heard and then another, at
descent of the high steep hill, down which a winding road led out of the
describe it," she had said, flushed and excited. Prince Andrew smiled
described as strength of will. Pierre was always astonished at Prince
described by Crosart, a newly arrived Frenchman in a Spanish uniform.
described it, she felt something like a fresh breeze wafted into her
described their last days in Moscow, their departure, the fire, and
described, where he is reported to have been prepared to accept battle
described: Prince Murat et tout le tremblement... You see that your
descried.
description of the last Petersburg fete she addressed her brother:
description. The old man began to sing, in the cracked voice of old age:
descriptive part of the letter. "And what a soul! Not a word about
desecrate our holy shrines. How long, O Lord, how long shall the wicked
deserter from the French army being brought to him. This was a Polish
deserved her reputation of being a very clever woman. Had she attempted
deserving of sympathy and less the result of free will. The founder of a
design but undertook an expedition into Russia, with which country he
design excited him still more.
design for embroidery. The countess was playing patience. Nastasya
designs the large detachments had on the transport, of the message Petya
designs, and instinctively fearing that he might give way to emotion
desire of everyone else.
desire spiritual improvement, I had no cause to doubt him, but he seemed
desire to do good to his neighbor.
desire to do so. A new sensation of comfort and relief came over him
desire to see Prince Auersperg, and so on. The officer sends for
desire to serve under so valiant and renowned a general, he had to forgo
desire to serve, not sparing their lives, and it is not any kind of
desire to show his friend as soon as possible that he was now a quite
desire war and as Your Majesty sees..." said Balashev, using the words
desire war, and had no relations with England.
desire, but there was pity for her feminine and childish weakness, fear
desire. The Emperor had written to Count Rostopchin as follows:
desire; that the enemy must be offered "a golden bridge"; that neither
desired results.
desired to be a military commander.
desires the ruin of us all. So I write you frankly: call out the
desires to arrest their course. Terrible examples have taught you how he
desirous of hiding her adoration for Helene and inclined rather to show
despair and repressed irritation. Sonya burst into sobs and ran from the
despair at failing in a Scripture examination, his borrowing money from
despair, grief, and the heroism of the Russians. But it was not really
despair, not knowing where to or why he was now riding.
despair, showing the possibility of consolation."
despairing gesture with his hand and passed through the room.
despairing, dejected expression of Natasha's face caught his eye.
desperate and agonized terror..."
desperate effort Dolokhov pushed the porter aside, and when Anatole ran
desperate effort...
desperate shrieks. He was told by his fellow officers that the screams
desperate weeping of a woman close to him. He stopped as if awakening
desperately and angrily and tried with her little hands to pull Pierre's
desperation as though he were at that moment facing some great danger.
despised them because of his old age and experience of life. The only
despised, but began to grow fond of, to respect, and to pity his
despite Napoleon's experience and so-called military genius, every
despite a quarrel between their masters.
despite all Anna Mikhaylovna's endeavors and entreaties. Soon after
despite her plainness seemed to him more attractive than Julie, he,
despite the fact that the doctors treated him, bled him, and gave him
despite the general's presence were talking loudly and gesticulating.
destination, halted, piled arms, and settled down on the cold ground,
destination.
destiny of man, and the laws which govern the world. But who are we?
destiny of our adored monarch. He will save Europe!"
destroy half my happiness. I am now writing to him about the same
destroy it. It is the very essence of the soul. Yet how many people have
destroy my men for your pleasure!"
destroy the structure, though it knocked against the very region of his
destroyed her."
destroyed in conflict with a raw army of half its numerical strength,
destroyed the French, and to him belongs the credit for taking the first
destroyed the mood of concentrated gloom in which he had spent the last
destroyed!" he said, and turning his horse rode back to Shevardino.
destroyed, then you will have nothing but the consolation of having been
destroying the bonds of citizenship, and beside which all other
destruction of Moscow and of his property, thrown out of his accustomed
destruction of Moscow, and said: "How was it you promised not to abandon
destruction of the Prussian army at Jena and Auerstadt and the surrender
destruction, for a great city with wooden buildings was certain when
destruction, was an absurdity, threatening the destruction of the
destruction. What would have happened had Moscow not burned down? If
destructions of power result from a nonobservance by the rulers of the
detached himself from earthly life. To love everything and everybody and
detachment and by evening found his master, Nicholas Rostov, quartered
detachment and the battle had not yet begun. In Bagration's detachment
detachment as to the condition in which they had found the citadel, le
detachment halted at the outskirts of a forest, on the path leading from
detachment of all) got to his appointed place at the right time. This
detachment operating to the left of Tarutino that troops of Broussier's
detachment, peasants from the adjacent villages, and residents who had
detailed account of his adventures.
detailed and exact orders as to measures to be taken immediately
details of his disaster he understood that half the campaign was lost,
detected sympathy and a desire to conceal that sympathy.
deter Denisov. All that he now wanted to know was what troops these were
determination he had to give in, and stop while carriages passed in,
determination of the troops would be quite different. Then all these
determination, looking at his watch. "It will be too late. It is quite
determine for whom and for what he felt such particular delight in
determine what is this power of one man over others.
determined, and absurdly self-confident as he was. Of all those present,
detested, rode up while Kutuzov was at dinner. Wolzogen had come from
detriment of their toilets. The men began to choose partners and take
development by Napoleon's caprice. The ideas of the Revolution and the
develops their greediness. Must tell Nicholas this.
devil, I'm busy!" he shouted to Lavrushka, who went up to him not in the
devise for him is a celebration of Jena and Auerstadt. Not only is he
devised. This combination of Austrian precision with Russian valor--what
devote some time to solitude and self-examination and do not resume your
devoted himself with such ardor--all the zest of such a life vanished
devoted to her by so many clever men and expressed in such pleasant,
devotion I look for in women. If I found such a one I'd give my life for
devotion and that she was ready to do anything for him and for the
devotion to God. When they prayed for the Imperial family and the Synod,
devotion, or of weariness and hope of resting before long. Prince Vasili
devotion, submission, and the poetry of Christian self-sacrifice, now
devoured him with his eyes, drawing himself up obsequiously, and from
dew was imperceptible on the sandy dust churned up more than six inches
dew-besprinkled dust of the road, on the walls of the houses, on the
diable a quatre..." *
diamond ring on his forefinger, who was fond of speaking French though
diamonds and pearls on their bare necks and arms.
diamonds, she passed between the men who made way for her, not looking
diary? There could be no doubt not only of his approval but also of his
dictatorship and Empire, or all the things that produced the French
dictionaries that were on the top.
did I bind myself to her? Why did I say 'Je vous aime' * to her, which
did Pierre cease to feel how sordid and humiliating were all mundane
did go down to see him, Princess Mary imagined the words he would say
did he say? Where to, now? Halt, is it? Did he thank us?" came eager
did he write in a letter to Paris that "the battle field was superb,"
did his utmost to gain his new master's favor.
did in December, namely a hundredth part of the original army.
did indicated his unusual position. But Dolokhov, who in Moscow had worn
did it purposely when she was there) the old prince kissed Mademoiselle
did it.
did kindle in her handsome, fully developed body she was even more
did no one see this, but on the Russian side every effort was made to
did not adapt himself mentally to this new position of affairs.
did not admit anyone. A maid came to the door to say that Alpatych was
did not calm her excitement. Suddenly her door opened softly and her old
did not cease chattering good-naturedly and gaily, continually praising
did not cry any more, but prayed continually, turning in soul to that
did not even dare to dream of that), but simply to die before his eyes.
did not even see the Emperor, and only noticed that he had gone because
did not hear his own cry nor feel that he was galloping, nor see the
did not intend her to be separated from Nicholas. She knew that Natasha
did not jar on the general beauty but, lending themselves to the mood
did not know, but he knew for certain that it was necessary. His income
did not know, or wish to know, of his existence and was contented and
did not leave his eager face. "Hoch Oestreicher! Hoch Russen! Kaiser
did not let him go. He sat down, sank into thought, closed his eyes, and
did not let it out of her hands. The tutors came, and the nurses, and
did not let me pass. They took me and shut me up. They hold me captive.
did not let the reading begin but wound up the springs of a general
did not make that effort. Some historians say that Napoleon need only
did not notice that look and moved hastily away.
did not now say those former terrible words to him, but looked simply,
did not order it to be sold."
did not please the sixteen-year-old officer. Though she concealed from
did not prevent a clear understanding but on the contrary was the surest
did not quite understand him. Moreover, Speranski, either because he
did not recognize him.
did not reflect that besides the couple of hours during which they saw
did not say what "it really" was. "For the present I am free and am
did not seek battle as eagerly as in former campaigns, but very lazily.
did not speak to Sonya who got up and went to her several times.
did not suit her faded features, always played round her lips expressed,
did not take her eyes off her husband. Nicholas and Denisov rose, asked
did not take her father away before the fifteenth, he could not answer
did not take place at all as (in an effort to conceal our commanders'
did not tell you the whole truth. I think there is no sufficient ground
did not understand and was not interested in any of these questions and
did not understand its significance. This expression suggested that she
did not understand them.
did not want or could not carry away with them. Austrian column guides
did not win. The profoundest and most excellent dispositions and orders
did not wish to believe it and insisted on having it confirmed by Pierre
did not wish to confess.
did not, and could not, understand the meaning of words apart from
did not, for instance, say to himself: "This man now has influence, I
did not, surrender.
did say something about going.... Speak to him; I can do nothing,
did she not show any trace of coquetry, but on the contrary she even
did so without saying what they wanted to say, the greater grew their
did still harder work on their own land. He did not know that the priest
did that genius, Napoleon, know it, for no one issued any orders to
did that subject grow and the weaker and more inadequate did her powers
did the honors to the prince.
did they not interest him, but he took no notice of them and at once
did this and that, all would be well; and he did what was demanded of
did this happen?" Princess Mary inquired.
did till they all stopped and he stopped too. The only thought in his
did when hunting, without reflecting or considering. He saw the dragoons
did yesterday, and the French will come and take me by head and heels
did you apply?"
did. "But best of all you have brought yourself back--for I never saw
did. "Home, I told you! And drive faster, blockhead!" "I must get away
didn't you capture him? So don't be surprised if not only the Minister
die and all will end. You'll die and know all, or cease asking." But
die in her daughter's arms during the journey--as, judging by what
die means that I, a particle of love, shall return to the general and
die. And what do you think, dear friend? Five years have passed since
died down of itself just as it had sprung up, without apparent reason.
died in this place.... When a new one comes he is done for in a week,"
difference in their ages, but she felt herself to blame toward him and
difference, that it was livelier in the towns in consequence of the
differences in the point of view from which we regard the event, but
different beings: then they were artificial, now natural and sincere. At
different circumstances, I cannot help recognizing that if that act had
different companies did not get mixed. But our left--which consisted
different directions like ants from a ruined ant-hill. Several of them
different ends of the army did not even resemble what Kutuzov had said,
different from Natasha's. She was putting away the things that had to
different from herself, who yet was able to understand all that was in
different from that of its elders which is often insincere, Nicholas
different kinds, all of which are incommensurate with the movement
different lodgings. As soon as the men of the various regiments began
different man. With a sudden expression of malevolence on his aged face,
different men surrounded Pierre. He looked at them without understanding
different one from that which he had ridden at the review, and bending
different parts of the deserted hive. From the alighting board, instead
different people and the people dashed in pursuit of the trap.
different people."
different roads available for the French, and one would have thought
different tones. Rostov reined in his horse, whose spirits had risen,
different, and better, Pierre than he had been in Petersburg.
different, but it was my duty to safeguard my life and dignity as
different--an unpleasant character and has not the same intelligence.
different.
differential of history, that is, the individual tendencies of men) and
differently defined by reason. Just so the force of man's free will
differently, but I'm sorry for your father, so I will conceal it."
differently. I would not be silly and afraid of things, I would simply
differently. People accustomed to misunderstand or to forget these
differently. Prince Andrew had thought and said that happiness could
difficult and assumed more definite forms.
difficult and destroys the desire and possibility of having an
difficult and important one, was entrusted to Dokhturov--that same
difficult for artillery and cavalry to retire. Prince Andrew took
difficult to execute. So fresh instructions were sent for the solution
difficult to explain what caused the Russians after the departure of the
difficult to imagine any aim more worthy or more consonant with the
difficult to imagine happier people, and that God only knew what would
difficult work of directing the storing and packing of their things and
difficulties only because they were apprehensive as to how the matter
difficulty but because of its incompatibility with their natures--by the
difficulty clambered out on the further bank. And as soon as they had
difficulty from the thoughts that preoccupied him.
difficulty out of the gully.
difficulty refrained from saying something harsh. She made no reply, but
difficulty refraining from tears of vexation and irritation rather than
difficulty repress the sobs that rose to her throat. He said something,
difficulty that had presented itself to the colonel). "Charmed to
difficulty, "the troops are burning with eagerness..."
difficulty, went to the small sitting room.
difficulty.
difficulty.
diffusion of printed matter--has the question of the freedom of will
digested his sufferings alone.
dignitary, when asked his opinion, replied that he thought so too.
dignity, and at the twitching cheeks of Prince Vasili.
dignity, and the deacon is the same. What holiness is there in giving
dignity--which tells me that each of us is, if not more at least not
dim, but definite and in the concise form in which he imagined himself
dim-eyed, toothless, bald, sallow, and bloated, or gaunt and wrinkled,
diminished income. The burning of Moscow had cost him, according to the
dimpled her cheeks, a smile he had never seen before.
din of shouting more incessant. Soldiers floundering knee-deep in mud
dining room where his daughter-in-law, Princess Mary, and Mademoiselle
dining room, according to their rank and importance: the more important
dinner and at other times, when as if tired of everyday life he had felt
dinner and looked about, blinking and scowling, or, with fixed eyes and
dinner and the potatoes are grand!"
dinner at the Rostovs'?"
dinner parties to the whole district on name days; there were still the
dinner parties," warmly replied Chichagov, who tried by every word he
dinner party at the Karagins', and Marya Dmitrievna took them there. At
dinner with it) and drew his attention to the verses.
dinner!... And there, look at this.... Well, my boy," the old prince
dinner, and we'll set to work. We will do, completely do, and undo these
dinner, but providing it and serving it all up, that's not their
dinner, the maid's inquiry what dress to prepare, or worse still any
dinner.
dinner. He called Natasha and asked her what was the matter.
dinner. I suppose he won't go?" she continued, turning to the prince.
dinner. Two officers of his own division joined him. The conversation
dinner? Hasn't she?"
dinnerless, had been whipped and sent to the village in quest of
dinners at once may perhaps get more enjoyment but will not attain his
dip. Prince Andrew, being always near the commander in chief, closely
diplomatic career in comparison with Pierre's happiness. The old general
diplomatic corps and the Emperor himself were to be present.
diplomatic difficulties and ends the military movement of that period of
diplomatic discretion tormented him, and he was happy to have in Prince
diplomatist?" asked Prince Andrew after a momentary silence.
diplomatists and monarchs nearly quarreled and were on the point of
diplomats who are esteemed because they have certain negative qualities,
diplomats, evidently had its own interests which had nothing to do with
direct a force of any size against Petersburg to threaten this capital
direct and relevant question which required a direct answer.
direct descent and ascent to the brook separating us from Schon Grabern.
direct hundreds of thousands of others struggling with death, and he
direct part in the events, and all the questions that seemed insoluble
direct result of greater or less success in war the political strength
direct retreat by the Nizhni road. In proof of this there is the fact
direct retreat on Nizhni-Novgorod. The army turned more to the south,
direct road from there to Moscow passed. Balashev, who was on the alert
directed during the whole campaign from Moscow to Vilna--not casually or
directed forces. In describing a war or the subjugation of a people, a
directed his will to the fulfillment of the divine ends, and that reply,
directed in 1812.
directed on the internal changes that were being undertaken in all the
directed the commander in chief's attention to some standards captured
directed toward arousing in the masses his own feeling of patriotic
directed toward her, and tried to appear the same as usual.
directing the march rode backward and forward between the carts. Their
direction at a slight rustle made by the latter. "Why have you, who do
direction have already been made.
direction he himself prefers, regards those as leaders who, owing to the
direction of the conflagration. As if urging each other on, the soldiers
direction of the drum as formerly, but made them, on the contrary, run
direction the old man indicated, he recognized Natasha, and following
direction toward the valley and disappearing one after another into
direction, I see that I raised it in the direction in which there was
direction--along the Kaluga road. Dokhturov was unwilling to undertake
direction. He tried to get away from them, but they would not for an
directions because in it there were fewest obstacles. For my action
directions from the Kremlin into which they had first marched. The
director, could not refrain from reminding Prince Vasili of his former
directs nor increases its movement foams ahead of it, and at a distance
dirty as in an old dressing gown.
disablement and death was caused by the balls and bullets that flew over
disagreeably and called up a whole crowd of memories, desires and
disappear and a single question, that of the closed door, superseded
disappear; and anyone looking at the rear of the French army would have
disappeared he noticed that the eyes of all in the room turned to him
disappeared into the skirt of the wood. At the same instant, with a cry
disappeared.
disappoint either Dunyasha or Natasha, but it was hard to sit still.
disapproval and dislike of Kutuzov.
disapprove of Andrew's choice; but in reply he said what he felt rather
disarmed his hearers.
disastrous was about to happen.
disbanding the Semenov regiment."
discerned.
discerning, Prince, and understand people's characters so well at a
discharged, and he had not had time to reload it. "No matter, dagger
discipline fails, not for a few hours only as in a battle, but for
discipline, if you allow a subordinate to address you like that!' It
discipline. Ostermann's flattering words and promise of a reward should
disclose neither his identity nor his knowledge of French, stood at the
disclosed the fresh gap between his teeth to which Prince Andrew could
disclosing a gap where he had lost a tooth (that was why he was called
discomfiture, came to town bringing rye, oats, and hay, and beat down
disconcert him. He did not lose sight either of the welfare of his
discontented and want to do something for mankind. But perhaps all these
discouragement?..."
discover personal attributes which he termed "good qualities" in people
discover what that something was, she felt that she could not be at
discovered.
discovery that he did so delighted them.
discretion to take measures or not for the defense of Bald Hills, where
discuss my actions, but to give you advice--or an order if you prefer
discuss so minutely and acutely all the recent European military and
discuss the bad news was difficult, and so it was best to be silent.
discuss, for that question had evidently been settled by people "wiser
discussed our interests like one family, and have rendered account to
discussed something trivial. They were preparing to go away somewhere.
discussed the direction the troops would now have to take. A sixth group
discussed there by a society of which Pierre was one of the principal
disdainfully, he entered the room of the Minister of War with peculiarly
disease, culture and ignorance, work and leisure, repletion and hunger,
disengaging himself, the prince spurred his horse and rode down the
disfavor. Now come here."
disfigured by fear of death now crowded together, crushing one another,
disgrace such as that of Ulm, or to utter destruction. But to forestall
disgrace the whole regiment? Disgrace the whole regiment because of one
disgrace with Kutuzov's whole army."
disgraceful to fight with a cudgel and they wanted to assume a pose en
disgust of that Natasha who had just passed him in the ballroom with
dish for her. "Well, my dear, and how are we getting on?" he asked,
dish.
disheveled head from the hot pillow.
dishonesty and various irregularities. Nicholas went out into the porch
dishonor will be all the same!" Pierre often indulged in reflections
disillusionment with life, offered him such consolation of friendship
disillusionment? Pierre was the only person to whom he made up his mind
disintegration and flight.
disinterestedly at the head of an alliance having for its object the
dislodge them for lack of troops, the men are running away and it is
dismal appearance with its broken roofs and fences, its foul streets,
dismal influence of cannon balls flying from the French batteries
dismay the executioner who was undressing the other man.
dismissal from headquarters Zherkov had not remained in the regiment,
dismissed from here; therefore, you can stay and go with us wherever our
dismount each moment that the wolf crouched back, and starting forward
dismounted slowly among the guns. He delivered the order and did not
dismounted. The game had begun.
dismounting he ordered a plan of Moscow to be spread out before him, and
disorder," he muttered. "Do as you like."
disorder. In and out of the hive long black robber bees smeared with
disordered battalion and at the enemy, "what's that?"
disordered. The French cannon did not reach there and the musketry fire
disorganized, I stopped in the road and thought: 'I'll let them come
dispatch and verbal instructions, galloped off to the General Staff
dispatch? You know everything."
dispatched that old man also to Petersburg to negotiate.
disperse them. During one of these attacks they carried off my empty
dispersed all about the town to the public houses and cookshops. Prices
dispersing among the shops while crowds of civilians blocked the bridge,
displayed during the Emperor's stay was the call for contributions of
displaying its white light amid countless other scintillating stars. It
displease the court besides. (You know there is some kind of
displeased at this excess of zeal.
displeased by the substance of his speech, which had even been forgotten
displeased her. She did not like Princess Mary, whom she thought very
displeased to see that the company consisted almost entirely of men and
displeasure at the poor success of our forces and the slowness of their
displeasure--said in Vilna that to carry the war beyond the frontier is
disposal."
disposed to treat the young heir in the most friendly and flattering
disposed toward him--would have used it to turn the count against him,
disposition it is said that, after the fight has commenced in this
disposition. They were called steppe peasants. The old prince used to
dispositions for the battle were written down from his dictation.
dispositions, it was written--though not in German this time:
dispositions..."
dispositions; nor that which Count Orlov-Denisov may have had in
dispute with the French grenadier. They were naturally talking about the
disputes about Buonaparte which would be inevitable. In any case it will
disrespectful manner of the exhausted clerk, the fact that the clerk and
dissatisfaction and reproach. "Old though he may be, he should not, he
dissatisfaction at the slowness of the pursuit and at the mistakes made
dissatisfaction found it had improved. He was dissatisfied because he
dissatisfaction on Boris' face, and as always happens to those in a bad
dissatisfaction the agitation and fear he had betrayed before his
dissatisfaction with the Russian government. Judging by the calmly
dissatisfaction, and perplexity? Who has not asked himself how it is
dissatisfied about something and that at headquarters they were
dissatisfied and inquiring expression at this stout man in a white hat,
dissatisfied expression. Berg hurriedly jumped up, kissed her hand,
dissatisfied with him, and also that at the Emperor's headquarters
dissatisfied with the government on account of his own disappointments
dissatisfied with your younger son? Between ourselves" (and her face
dissatisfied, interrupted by another, an unfamiliar voice. From the
dissatisfied. For a long time, oaths, angry shouts, and fighting could
dissemination of ideas, the printing press could have accomplished that
dissipated by the appearance of His Highness. "She is right, but how
dissipated their property--that being the chief fault of which he was
dissipation, associated with his old Petersburg comrade Kuragin and made
dissipations of town life, in wine, in heroic feats of self-sacrifice,
dissipations. He liked to dine and drink well, and though he considered
distance from him with his head thrown back, was a young soldier with
distance he heard as he rode the merry sounds of a soldier's dance song
distance he took off his cap and tried to speak respectfully, but he was
distance than they had already traversed, before they reached the
distance that allowed every softly spoken word to be heard, followed
distance that ought to separate them at that moment. Natasha understood
distance where no one had been before him. Bagration called to him from
distance with a big tree on it, near a village that lay in a hollow
distance, but down the hill before him. "It's the French!"
distance, though the collision had deprived it of all its force.
distance, while his eyes saw nothing but the astonished, frightened,
distance. In his mind, a painful process was going on which he could
distance. On the left the ground was more level; there were fields of
distances from the town as to protect the carts. (4) Similar measures
distant objects. Having reached the valley, Denisov looked back and
distant provinces, and one levy after another was being raised for the
distant roar of the yelling crowd was audible even there. He hastily
distant.
distinct from the main course of the battle.) So the battle of Borodino
distinct group, but who were now for the most part scattered about the
distinct in his dream) that he was talking of goodness and the
distinct worlds which merged into one harmonious whole, though each
distinct, precise, enticingly rhythmical strains of a waltz. The Emperor
distinction," said the diplomatist--"a gift, rather."
distinction?"
distinctions which may infringe equality. Fly to a brother's aid whoever
distinctly caught the music of the hunt with only two or three hounds
distinctly heard. "I thank you all for your hard and faithful service.
distinctly.
distinctly. In the valley he saw before him something like a river, but
distinguish a living body from a dead one, Napoleon from the Poklonny
distinguish a mounted man from one on foot. Napoleon, in the blue cloak
distinguish any of them and, feeling that she must speak to them all
distinguish something at a distance. At present he still forgot what was
distinguish them. The din of many voices was too great; all he could
distinguished air which inspired respect. Princess Anna Mikhaylovna
distinguished and intellectual men, who seemed to vie with one another
distinguished and wealthier match for Andrew. And they all struggled
distinguished from everyone else in the world. Napoleon merely laid
distinguished him from everyone else in that drawing room.
distinguished his form and her shortsighted eyes tried to make out his
distinguished men think so, it must be necessary and right," thought he.
distorted out of all likeness to his former self, and the flourishing of
distracted him from the military cares that had occupied him from the
distraction caused by the thought of Kuragin. During the first four
distraught yet angry expression on the faces of these two men, who
distress at the dead body with its long, thin, half-severed neck and its
distress, and pains in his feet and side. He remembered a general
distressed, and breathed painfully, but could not restrain the wild
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
distributed. Why has fate given you two such splendid children? I don't
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
district tribunals. Now those vague liberal dreams with which the
district where supplies were abundant.
district who ought to be arrested by a strong force--October 11."
district, not a soldier or officer was left. Men in military uniforms
disturbed Pierre. He had suffered so painfully three years before
disturbed him. "Well, what business is it of mine what goes on
disturbed that day, evidently by the fact that they had dared to inspect
disturbed.
disturbing himself or desiring anything.
diverse and familiar personalities, both old and young. The old men,
diverse chances which will be decided on the instant by the fact that
diverse thoughts and images occupied him simultaneously. At times his
diversity of lines of argument he used to support his opinions. He
diverting the Brothers from pride, to turn them toward the true path
divided into discontinuous elements, whereas the motion both of Achilles
divided into two alien and hostile camps, who changed their habits for
dividing into many. Each drop tried to spread out and occupy as much
divine love cannot change. No, neither death nor anything else can
division had been seen at Forminsk and that being separated from the
division of continuous motion into discontinuous elements. There is a
division would have been needed to convoy the corps of prisoners, and
division, smiled and beckoned to him.
division, the guerrillas' reports of distress in Napoleon's army, rumors
divisions regiments, and battalions by heart.
divisions to attack the convoy.
divisions, conquer--that is, kill or take captive--all the others, while
do all I can for your happiness."
do describe it, that is, as they would like it to have been, as they
do everything, not very well but not badly. He baked, cooked, sewed,
do it!" For more than ten seconds he stood not moving from the spot or
do it. He did not know why, but he felt a foreboding that he would not
do like this."
do not believe it. I have no right to, and can't, believe it." He
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
do not feel the movement of the earth, but by admitting its immobility
do not give a ruble each to the collections for the poor, and they
do not help matters, but hinder. They are only concerned with their own
do not write history), and (2) that spiritual activity, enlightenment,
do the right thing.
do this for my son--and I shall always regard you as a benefactor," she
do to get here."
do we, I mean the Austrian court, care for your victories? Bring us nice
do what he pleases,' she used to say of me. One day I asked her if she
do what was impossible.
do what you will! How can I go and apologize like a little boy asking
do with the justice or injustice of other people? She had to endure and
do you understand 'Uncle'?" her expression said to Rostov. How could one
do you want?"
do, and abandoning herself to him followed his lead hardly knowing how.
do--perished of cold and hunger despite their captors' desire to save
do--themselves turned to the right and came out onto the highroad at
do.
do. You don't understand that. What can I do? What can I do, Sonya?"
do. You will perhaps also see in your further initiation a like
do."
do?" he asked, evidently expecting an answer. "Well, what do you want
doctor and a valet--lay on the floor.
doctor and expecting another for whom they had sent to town, they had
doctor brought one of them, a young Italian, to see Pierre.
doctor came out with an agitated face and said she could not enter.
doctor smoking a cigar. The doctor was followed by a Russian assistant.
doctor!"
doctor's wife, who was calling him her deliverer, and recalling with
doctor's wife.
doctor. He was received in the best houses not merely as a doctor, but
doctor."
doctors did not keep me here at the spas I should be back in Russia, but
doctors say?" asked the princess after a pause, her worn face again
doctrines as causes of events, as soon as they have to describe an
does he feel? How does it hurt him?" thought Natasha. He noticed her
does it matter what we take away? Only look what is going on in the
does it mean?..." she asked, turning to Princess Mary. She got up
does not acknowledge, but of those rare and always solitary individuals
does not come from the quarter they expect. It rises again from the same
does not even attempt to hide its artificiality) of a man who is
does not even interest them, for it does not come within the range of
does not know Russian."
does not know what to decide on, and time passes bringing no result.
does not produce the slightest stir--a blind man has left it. There are
does one get satisfaction from acquaintances.
does she think about me? Yes, she is splendid!"
does that mean? Does it mean that it's the real thing? Yes? Mamma, are
does this mean? If it were an example taken from the history of China,
doesn't make a mess of things!"
doesn't the red-haired gunner run away as he is unarmed? Why doesn't the
dog could eat all it wanted.
dog was merrier and sleeker than it had been in Moscow. All around lay
dog with its felted hair hanging from its thigh was within five paces of
dog, coming heaven knows whence, which trotted in a preoccupied manner
dogs appeared out of the mist, approaching the Rostovs. In front rode a
dogs, but I went on undismayed. Suddenly a smallish dog seized my left
dogs."
doing and might have thrown up everything and run away anywhere.
doing just what every Russian desired. So what was the use of performing
doing justice to our feelings, we forget him."
doing so, groaned involuntarily.
doing some kind of man's work of his own, without help or guidance.
doing this or that action; but as soon as he has done it, that action
doing this? And Pierre felt that it was no one.
doing was done for the sake of his ally, and the small white hand
doings of a few dozen men in a building in the city of Paris, calling
domain of smoke that overlay the whole space in front, quick hissing
domestic reasons.
domestic serfs begged permission to go to have a look at him. That
domestic serfs were crowding in the hall, waiting to bid good-by to
domestic serfs--were seeing him off.
dominated everything else and soared above all their affected chatter.
don't deserve to have them."
don't feel that weakness in myself as yet, I know a little person who is
don't forget to put out my new coat," added Rostov, fingering his new
don't go. I will order supper. Go downstairs, we will come immediately."
don't grieve for myself,' he says, 'God, it seems, has chastened me.
don't in the least understand why men can't live without wars. How is
don't interfere with you and Berg."
don't know how important you are to me, how much you've done for me...."
don't let her slip!"
don't let's talk about me; tell me how you managed everything. I often
don't move. Shouldn't we put a cordon round to prevent the rest from
don't need all that at all. By being ruined I have become much richer."
don't now."
don't philosophize, don't doubt, marry, marry, marry.... And I am sure
don't speak so, master! There was a general who did not believe, and
don't talk to me, don't, don't."
don't understand at all," said he to himself, and after that he did not
don't understand it."
don't want a reward... But I want..."
don't want anything, Prince."
don't want to do this..."
don't want to. I am speaking of the staff in general."
don't! It is too painful for her!"
done after Austerlitz, he related this occurrence at such length and
done and what was left had still to be packed, she found it dull.
done as one of them said. He ordered it. There we have command and power
done at Anna Pavlovna's, that it would be difficult to get rid of Anna
done at Mozhaysk after the battle of Borodino.
done at all, but this untiring, continual spiritual effort of which the
done before) that I'm in the dumps."
done by a concourse of people, allowing those who do not take a direct
done for a long time. Tears were in his eyes and in his throat when the
done for us."
done in the realm of history did not concern him at all.
done it myself, I should not have had the courage, but it's splendid. I
done that though badly and to a small extent; but I have done something
done to attain an end worthy of the nation, and they are not to blame
done up.
done with two hundred and thirty rubles! I even manage to put a little
done your best to increase his mental sufferings."
done!" he thought, aimlessly going toward a crowd of stretcher bearers
done, I have done; but, if you like, I won't speak to him again."
done, as from the spots selected by Napoleon the projectiles did not
done, for during the whole battle Napoleon was so far away that, as
done, the Rhetor said:
done--to push a cart out of the mud with one's shoulders, pull a horse
done. Have you chosen a post in which you might be of service to your
donned a jacket he wore only in town and went out on business. It was a
door and his expression of sleepy indifference suddenly changed to one
door and took the boy back to the nursery. Five minutes later little
door into the huntsmen's room, from which came the clear sounds of a
door of the Governor's room opened and they all rose and moved forward.
door of the adjoining hut as if expecting something unpleasant to emerge
door on the left led into the princesses' apartments. The maid with the
door open, giving orders that every messenger should be allowed to wake
door opened and Lavrushka came in with some papers.
door opened quickly and the stern figure of the old man in the white
door opened, and Anatole entered, stooping and trying not to brush
door rows of brightly lit boxes in which ladies sat with bare arms and
door she stopped as if her conscience reproached her for having in
door, afraid of being seen by the prince, not for fear of ill-usage by
door, made her immediately forget herself and her own grief.
door, making a final effort to hold it back--to lock it was no longer
door, resolved to safeguard her, it was to have been put into execution.
door.
door. "Papa wants to sleep."
door. The princess looked round and saw Natasha coming in, almost
doorway, stopping now one pair and now another with gracious words which
doorway. The general with the bandaged head bent forward as though
doppelkummel. The officers gladly gathered round him, some on their
double sat down on the ground like a bird shot on the wing. Everything
double the value of the property.
doubled, moved on.
doubled. To this Prince Andrew answered with a smile that he could
doubly mined and that there are menacing fortifications at its head and
doubt filled her soul. Could the joy of love, of earthly love for a
doubt it now. Rostov rode in the direction pointed out to him, in which
doubt, "Is not all I think and believe nonsense?" And it was just this
doubt, and self-derision, which appeared on his face against his will,
doubted but felt almost certain that without the help of troops the
doubted the necessity of taking an active share in life, just as a month
doubtful does the free will of those concerned in the event become and
doubts and excite their imagination, giving them a bent for exaggeration
doubts concerning the real value of such histories arise either because
down again and her lips puckered.
down and began:
down and up, rose higher and higher to the village of Valuevo visible
down as a stone and raise me up as a loaf!" and every morning on getting
down before the altar to which she was led. The enchanting, middle-aged
down below and that one of the soldiers he had noticed before was
down below. That was the only part of the fourth act that Natasha saw.
down her dress with an inquiring look at her mother, when suddenly from
down his back.
down his chisel. (The wheel continued to revolve by its own impetus,
down in a corner, and folding his hands placed himself before the icon.
down in an armchair and burst into tears.
down in her easy chair, now taking her prayer book, now kneeling before
down in his carriage.
down in it, and listened to Pierre, coughing discontentedly and frowning
down in my room and have a rest."
down on a sofa in the next room.
down on a sofa near the silver samovar, as if all she was doing was a
down on one of the tubs, picked it up.
down on the sofa in an attitude of despair, then rose, went to the door
down over the uneven ground. One could already see the soldiers' shaggy
down over the wound, felt it, and sighed deeply. Then he made a sign to
down the Nikitski Boulevard.
down the hillsides, and clouds of cannon smoke rolling, spreading,
down the room twice. His eyes shone and his mustache twitched as if he
down the room.
down the wax, the seal, and the paper, with his accustomed rapidity.
down their arms at the first demand.
down to us from the remotest ages, even from the first man--a mystery on
down with a book in the drawing room near the door through which she
down with her foot under her on the bed that had been made up on the
down! Sit down, Michael Ianovich!"
down! What?..." said Rostov, waking up. At the moment he opened his eyes
down, and smiled affectionately.
down, and there's an end of it.... What are you pushing for? Isn't the
down, he was surprised by the beauty of those ruins. The picturesqueness
down, raising her knees to her chin, kicking out and laughing almost
down, toying with his Sevres coffee cup, and motioned Balashev to a
down.
down.
down. One bullet and then another whistled past him. He mustered his
downcast head; and he began to pace the room, glancing occasionally at
downhill and uphill, across a ryefield trodden and beaten down as if by
downhill in full cry after the hare, and from all sides the borzois that
downstairs to his own room. A quarter of an hour later the old count
downstairs.
downward slope, lay a field of spring rye. To the right, beyond a steep
downwards as was his habit.
downwards like a little bird; a flame flashed in the middle of the
downwards, a man indubitably believes this and always expects the law
downwards.
downy lip was open and she was smiling joyfully. Prince Andrew entered
dozed off. Alpatych made a slight movement.
dozen leashes of smart borzois, agriculture, neighbors, service by
dozen of the serf mummers and drive to "Uncle's."
dozens of soldiers, continually replaced by others, who ran from the
dozing. His head sank forward and then he roused himself.
dragged myself up, so that my leg hung down on one side and my body on
dragging away boards, dry wood, and thatch from the roofs, for the
dragging away the last logs from the huts and barns. Then they rode
dragging him to the window. "That money is Denisov's; you took it..." he
dragging it by the staff, ran on with the battalion. In front he saw our
dragon, a lady distinguished not for wealth or rank, but for common
dragoons' disordered lines. One Uhlan stopped, another who was on foot
dragoons. In the center, where Tushin's battery stood and from which
drank a great deal. He was only quite at ease when having poured several
drank much, and eagerly. But those who knew him intimately noticed that
draped from side to side of the streets, with huge monograms A and N. In
draped over one shoulder, came into the space left vacant for her, and
draw toward the table, but not near enough for the candles that had been
drawing Boris away, she did not think of that now, and in her own way
drawing Natasha (whose cheeks were glowing from the cold) to her by the
drawing her hand from beneath her old mantle and laying it timidly and
drawing him down put her arm round his thin, scraggy neck.
drawing in her breath.
drawing near had not terrified her, just as the mere thought of it made
drawing nearer to Dolokhov.
drawing room (and he was almost always there) had a physical effect upon
drawing room so wet."
drawing room with its old furniture resembled the solemn gathering of
drawing room with some maps which he spread on a table, and put
drawing room, and also to Anna Pavlovna herself who had received the
drawing room, approaching now a silent, now a too-noisy group, and by a
drawing room, drew a chair toward him or her, and jauntily spreading out
drawing room, he served, by the contrast he presented to her, as an
drawing room, helped to receive and entertain the visitors. The young
drawing room, where he embraced the count, kissed the hands of Natasha
drawing room--that of love--boundless love for him, for her, and for all
drawing room.
drawing room. And, in fact, Bilibin's witticisms were hawked about
drawing room. Pierre dressed hurriedly and, instead of going to see
drawing room. The guests began to disperse, some without taking leave
drawn and, as it seemed to her, piteous face in her glass. It seemed to
drawn from history. It is merely necessary to select some larger or
drawn into the campaign by lot or by conscription. This could not be
drawn with Kutuzov; and how they would make suggestions, quarrel, issue
drawn. He sought a quiet refuge, and in Joseph Alexeevich's study he
dread of death seized him. Filled with fright he opened his eyes and
dread was in the air. It was evident that the affair so lightly begun
dreadfully afraid for him. It would be good for him to have companions."
dream of Princess Mary was always difficult and a little frightening.
dream.
dreamed that she saw her sons lying dead. After many consultations and
dreaming of his triumphs. The dispositions for the next battle are
dreary, persistent activity. Davout allowed himself that pleasure when
drenched, whose trousers had worked up to above his knees. Behind him,
dress and even her breathing could be heard. Everything was stone-still,
dress and weepers. She softly approached Princess Mary, sighed, kissed
dress with her little hand, now arranging the scarf and looking at her
dress, have it fetched. Really! You know the fate of your whole life may
dress, transparent over her shoulders and bosom. The abbe, a well-fed
dress. "But no! Why did this thought never occur to me before?" and
dressed alike, in new pale-blue frocks, and were both fresh, rosy, and
dressed and undressed, drying their shirts and leg bands or mending
dressed for his attendance at court in full parade uniform, which he had
dressed gay young men on splendid, well-groomed, fresh, only slightly
dressed in a Russian coat so that he might be kept with their band and
dressed up in feathers and gold.
dressed. Princess Mary's self-esteem was wounded by the fact that
dressers ran out to fetch water, or to point out those who were to be
dressers.
dresses would not be ready, or that something would not be arranged as
dresses, condemned the bearing of a lady standing close by who was not
dressing for his ride, and wore a blue uniform, opening in front over
dressing gown every day, he invariably became confused and begged her to
dressing gown looked out.
dressing gown, this lunatic was running impetuously, his gaze fixed on
dressing gowns and uniforms, which they had put on.
dressing stations the grass and earth were soaked with blood for a space
dressing, Petya had prepared many fine things he meant to say to the
dressing, she received petitioners of various classes, of whom there
drew back from the bed, making way for her. He was still lying on the
drew himself up very straight and tall and rode to the Pavlograd
drew his saber, and with a happy and resolute countenance, opening
drew nearer to him. Her face flushed.
drew nearer to our Uhlans and the French dragoons who galloped after
dried and warmed themselves, cooked their porridge for the first time
drink some water, and send for the doctor.
drinking and, as he unbuttoned his waistcoat, of abusing the government
drinking when he wanted to drink, sleeping when he wanted to sleep, of
drive her, sat perched up high on the box and did not so much as glance
drive up, went to meet him.
driven their two-horse carts loaded with wheat and had returned dusty
driver in his bast shoes ran panting up to it, placed a stone under one
driver who had known Dolokhov and Anatole some six years and had given
driver's leg. Their spirits once roused were, however, not diminished,
driving through the town, he saw the Iberian shrine with innumerable
driving toward Pierre in a covered gig, sitting beside a young surgeon,
drone population of the army began blowing hard that way, so that it
drones, without having finished their buzzing on a previous theme, flew
drooped his eyes sadly and again took to twirling his snuffbox.
drooped.
drooping as he broke into a gallop.
drooping head and breathing heavily, pacing silently up and down. When
drooping tail.
drop. Well then, on Friday after the review I shall expect you,
dropped it into a leather pouch attached to the lathe, and, approaching
dropped them again. All the blood which had seemed congested somewhere
dropping his head he sat down on the cold ground by the wheel of the
dropping into his usual after-dinner nap, and laughed at everything.
drops closely pressed together, and all these drops moved and changed
drops.
drops...."
drought had continued for more than three weeks. Each day fleecy clouds
drove away with their swords the crowd of prisoners who were gazing at
drove past was an acquaintance of the Rostovs', and Petya thought of
drove right over two of them. Eh?"
drove through the streets and footsteps were rarely heard. The
drove to her daughter's early one morning so as to find her alone.
drove up to the porch.
drowned as usual by the buzzing of the court drones. But the calm,
drowning Uhlans who distracted his attention.
drowning, that the mother was hungry, that the soldier was in the ranks,
drowsiness overpowered him, red rings danced before his eyes, and the
drowsiness. "But what was I thinking? I mustn't forget. How shall
drowsing off I clearly heard a voice saying in my left ear, "Thy day!"
drug, and had died in agony before assistance could be rendered her.
drummer boy. "It's capital for us here, but what of him? Where have they
drummer, their leader, turned round facing the singers, and flourishing
drums, he recognized that mysterious, callous force which compelled
drunken camp, a name the whole army gave to their encampment there,
drunken imbecile to account. The Frenchman listened in silence with the
drunkenness to be expected on the morrow because it was a great saint's
dry clothes without offending Mary Hendrikhovna's modesty. They were
dry hands clenched with vexation at her not understanding a sum in
dry there, and Mary Hendrikhovna's there."
dry-eyed, occupied with most trivial matters as if not understanding
dry."
drying it at the fire and how they had laughed at him.
dubiously. And this silence about Dokhturov is the clearest testimony to
duc even the most partial ceased to regard him as a hero. If to some
ducked it.
due time. It was what the French called "le hourra de l'Empereur."
duel he did not go to his bedroom but, as he often did, remained in his
duel with Dolokhov.
dug in the ground, and near the post and the pit a large crowd stood
dug out for them by the soldiers and roofed with branches and turf. The
dug.
duke asked for more troops.
dull expression.
dull weather was repulsively ugly--seemed quietly beautiful now, in the
dull-witted people have for any conclusion they have reached by their
dumfound people and impel them to insane self-oblivion. He called for
dun-colored, with light mane and tail, and when he rode it no one could
duration of a dream.
during his courtship of Helene.
during its first eleven days after leaving Moscow: a stampede which made
during that half-hour Rostov cast eager and restless glances over the
during that movement.
during that time learned, from the talk of the French soldiers, that all
during the battle, and feeling reassured he dozed off.... The dark
during the five years he had known her, and how her head had cracked
during the holidays to amuse himself. Nicholas guessed what his mother's
during the journey.
during the night and attack the French right flank the following day.
during the night, but nothing was stolen; and as to the value of their
during the retreat passed many positions better than Borodino. They did
during the whole campaign, and left the broken ranks of the soldiers
during their retreat it was their native land. But that native land
during these weeks and this recollection was pleasant to him.
during this campaign, and who had formerly commanded the division in
during those awful moments--the father who so remembered everything
dusk. All day it had been calm and frosty with occasional lightly
dust from the sleeve of his uniform, and going up to a mirror examined
duties indicated to us by God Himself, and that though we might expose
duties on you, and you must be a man."
duties, (c) relations with my friends, and the management of my affairs.
duties."
dutiful et tout ce qui s'ensuit! * That's certain."
dutifully asked his father's forgiveness for what he had allowed himself
duty every day, or may place me under arrest, but no one can make me
duty said in a whisper, "To the right, at the window."
duty to assure Pierre that he was greatly afflicted by the death of the
duty, he would have found one of the conditions of man's primitive
dwarfs and one peasant woman will toss three of them with a hayfork."
dwell arose in his soul.
dying and was already half dead. He was conscious of an aloofness from
dying man wished to see, her own admission was assured. Casting a rapid
dying man, an unborn babe, or an idiot--complete absence of freedom, by
dying of wounds and the sovereign had thanked him for heroic deeds, and
dying was also dreadful.
dying, stepping over the dying and killing one another, only to move on
dying," replied the maid with a sigh.
each alternate step; and in time to this, with stern but varied faces,
each ascent or descent of the road the crowds were yet denser and the
each event presents itself as partly free and partly compulsory.
each face, appraising the possibilities of establishing intimacy with
each individual which used to excite and irritate Pierre now became a
each of them again training two others and all being closely united,
each of those present, and the advantages that might accrue. He took the
each other, the men disperse, attack singly, run away when attacked by
each side of the open door and the carriage steps waiting to help the
each side of the trench, the earth was cut out to a breadth of about two
each time he touched his forehead. His face wore a calm look of piety
each time is saved in an unexpected manner. Owing to various diplomatic
each time with fresh pleasure and each time discovered in it fresh
eager curiosity to the stage. Natasha too began to look at it.
eagerly addressed him. This was one of the head army doctors. He was
eagerly and rather disdainfully, not resting on anything although his
eagerly forward to help him off with his cloak and take his hat and
eagerly from the balcony toward the porch. Rostopchin, coming out there
eagerly the more those past interests were closed to him. It was as if
eagerly to work at the new task of placing the wounded in the carts. The
eagerness and briskness presented a marked contrast to the dissatisfied
eagle, began to address the assembled people," were read and discussed,
earlier or later, or whether he secured accommodation at this station,
earlier still?... When, when was this terrible affair decided? Moscow
early hour when she met no one but bricklayers going to work or men
early in the morning of the first of September, orderlies and servants
early to dinner," cried several voices. "We'll take you in hand."
ears just as carefully, and when she entered her drawing room in her
ears washed, perfumed, and powdered, as befits a ball; the openwork
ears. It was evident to the dogs, the hunters, and to the wolf herself
earth and which Princess Mary taught me and I did not understand--that
earth was stationary and that the planets moved round it and those who
earth.
earthly things, that had incessantly tormented him, no longer presented
ease.
ease. It was the state of the soldiers' boots. More than half the men's
easier to see people coming along it. "Follow me!" said he, crossed the
easily and simply receive an immediate and certain solution.
east to west.
eastward and collides with a countermovement from the east westward.
easy to be an interesting man (I am an interesting man now); people
easy," said he in abrupt sentences while sealing his letter.
eat before going away. He went to a hotel he had noticed that morning.
eat?"
eat?... Perhaps..."
eating and talking among themselves, taking no notice of him.
eating their rye porridge and carrying fuel. He sent for an officer. The
eating! I think that punishment by depriving children of sweets only
eccentric father.
echelons." So he reasoned.... All the time he had been beside the gun,
echo of all that she herself imagined she was feeling.
eclipses his ultimate goal and attracts all his hopes and desires. And
ecstasies over "Uncle's" singing. She resolved to give up learning the
ecstasy such as he had never before known. Every trait and every
ecstatic cries.
edge of the clearing. The seconds, measuring the paces, left tracks in
edge of the forest.
edge of the wood, with the two scraggy oaks rising above the aspen
edge, but never losing sight of the moving French. That morning,
edge. Everything grew bright and glittered. And with that light, and as
edge. The Cossack was sharpening the saber under the wagon.
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
educated and clever. This is all that his foreign education has done for
education of the young, unite ourselves in indissoluble bonds with the
effect of which he had witnessed during the executions. To fear or to
effect that one ought not to go to the French theater and that to
effective and pleasant though now feeble voice a story Pierre knew. It
effective--the peasant laborer. When Nicholas first began farming
effects of Prince Andrew's were in very good order: new, clean, and in
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
effort was directed to pushing on to Moscow at the end of the summer,
effort, and stress, like the opening of a door grown rusty on its
effort, raised it with difficulty onto the saddle, leaned on his knee,
efforts beyond their strength laboriously drag away a dead bee or
efforts had been expended. He knew that it was a lost battle and that
efforts of the old count, and instead of being degraded to the ranks
efforts to seem calm.
efforts with which he moved his tongue made her drop her eyes and with
effrayee, as he called it, shoes, and silk stockings.
eh? Yes, a nice stepmother little Nicholas will have! Write and tell
eight muskets; but try as he would Pierre could not afterwards remember
eight, please. We shall make up a rubber. Our general is coming. He
eight, returning after a sleepless night, he sent for embers, changed
either in front of them or to the right or left, but there were soldiers
either of them. I would give my life for the happiness of them both."
either perish or put an end to the misery of all Europe--which it seemed
either sat alone or came timidly to Princess Mary, or to Natasha of whom
either that Napoleon was a great genius, or that Louis XIV was very
either," he thought. "Yes, I did not know anything, anything at all till
either."
elapsed after which a visitor may rise, Nicholas got up to say good-by.
elasticity of movement, faith in his good fortune, and generally in that
elated. He had noticed a solitary tree ahead of him. This tree had been
elbow and looking at him with eyes that shone through her tears. "I
elbow in a broken-down shed in the village of Knyazkovo at the further
elbows and, smiling, talked to her for a long time. While conversing
elbows on the table, thinking always of the same terrible question:
elbows on the window ledge and his eyes rested on that sky.
elbows turned outwards, his hands on his knees, and his shoulders
elbows, as if to say: "You can tell me your views later, but now be so
elderly hosts and by the more important of the visitors (the old count's
elders and Nicholas, who had also come to the table. "My God, my God!
elders did, that he had neither seen nor heard anything of them. But
elders.
eldest princess at the door asking whether she might come in.
eldest princess were sitting close together talking. Seeing them pass,
eldest princess, and moved with her to the side of the room where stood
eldest princess, who were sitting under the portrait of Catherine the
election as chief of the militia would not please the Emperor. They did
election..." thought he. But now the campaign was beginning, and he had
electricity. Atoms attract each other and atoms repel one another.
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
electronic works
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
elegantly witty. In society he always awaited an opportunity to say
element of necessity and are less insistent on punishment for the crime,
elite.
elopement, with additions.
elopements are like," continued Dolokhov with a wink. "Why, she'll rush
else could tell her anything so comforting or so reasonable as this
else gives me that sense of soft tranquillity that you do... that light.
else how could that have happened which had happened? And how could she
else, and was at all the balls and parties of the best society. There
else, but it took too long to dissolve, so it was decided that Mary
else, runs upstairs and does up her hair and wags her tail and is unlike
else--formed by the men in the battery. His first unconscious feeling
else--indefinite but firm as the bond between her own body and soul.
else--something the living did not and could not understand--and which
else.
else. But receiving no orders, he remained for some time in that rigid
elsewhere, he was surrounded by an atmosphere of subservience to his
elsewhere--in the relation to the people of the man who wields the
elsewhere. Order after order and plan after plan were issued by him
emaciated sallow man on crutches, barefoot and in underclothing, limped
embarrassed faces of Sonya and Marya Dmitrievna, the count saw clearly
embarrassed him. He was like a man entirely absorbed in some occupation.
embarrassed voice, though it sounded severe to Denisov--"but my daughter
embarrassed, "is the Emperor...?"
embarrassing attentions. On the face of the wag Zherkov there suddenly
embarrassing. So he was silent. But before he had decided what to do,
embarrassment looked Pierre straight in the face.
embarrassment, her own face expressed confusion and suspicion.
embassage.
embers from the soldiers' campfire were placed on a bent sheet of iron
embittered the relations between the commanders in chief, and even
embrace him, cling to him, and make him look at me with those searching
embraced Natasha and kissed her.
embraced him and lifting his spectacles kissed his friend on the cheek
embraced him, and tears of joy choked him so that he could not speak.
embraced his sister.
embraced the one true faith, and asking him to carry out all the
embracing Denisov. "Nicholas wrote us... Natasha, Vera, look! Here is
embroidered court uniform, knee breeches, and shoes, and had stars on
embroidering: both were rosy and pretty and they differed only in that
embroidery came into the room offering their services. Without changing
embroidery frames while a third read aloud. It was the eldest who was
emerging from the gates of the yards and moving along the streets.
emigrant.
emotion of a man re-experiencing in recollection strong impressions he
emotion. But well as he knew it, Pierre now listened to that tale as to
emotions associated with that feeling.
emotions, that for a long time past those memories had not entered his
emperor, kings, and princes who had deserved it, reprimanded the kings
emphasizing certain words and opening his eyes significantly.
employ dangerous remedies.
employ, but those folk sayings which taken without a context seem so
emptied them, rolling the vodka in their mouths, and walked away from
empty and deserted village again ascended. The horses began to lather
empty witticisms. Gradually, unnoticed, all these persons began to
empty, he looked angrily at his informant, turned away, and silently
empty, the roads impassable. The Orthodox begin looting, and in a way
emulation in pursuit of commendation and rewards, which recognize it.
encampment, and not within sight of the enemy before an action in
enchanting party," said he, turning to Anna Pavlovna.
enchanting... from the moment I saw you I have never ceased..."
enchanting?... It's our turn to begin."
encounter an enemy invisible ten paces off. But the columns advanced
encounter and to preserve his troops, the massacre of the broken mob
encounter one another at the clean, smart hussars who moved past them in
encountering the old prince, of whom he was afraid. He did not mention
end of his regiment's encampment. Through a gap in the broken wall he
end of the meal. He winked at the butler, whispered directions to the
end of the shed was saying, with a strong emphasis on the word who.
end of the shed. "So you've come, you rascal? She remembers... Now, now,
end of those thousand miles. One must have the prospect of a promised
end to the power of the beast, that is, of Napoleon, and tried by the
end, and they were already admiring her.
end. Amen."
end..." thought he.
ended and felt that his mission was accomplished; and at the same time
ended with a thud into something soft... f-f-flop! and a Cossack, riding
ending. "If only they would let me end my days as I want to," thought
endless chain of causation inevitably demanded by reason, in which each
ends that were predestined.
endure this man who is a menace to everything."
enemies the creditors and all who had business dealings with her
enemies! Hurrah!" he exclaimed in his dashing, old, hussar's baritone.
enemies, he tried to continue reading. But feeling this to be senseless
enemy and of the war were contradicted and all Napoleon's attempts at
enemy drew near the wealthy classes went away abandoning their property,
enemy guns was directed between one and two o'clock.
enemy in full strength at Borodino--defeated at Krasnoe and the Berezina
enemy rises before us--namely the Orthodox Russian soldiers, loudly
enemy soldiers occupying houses they did not own. Even if there was any
enemy under the Emperor's command. Commanded by the Emperor himself
enemy was everywhere in flight and that there could and would be no
enemy was the same as at Austerlitz and Friedland--yet the terrible
enemy's advance, and by this effort to unite them while avoiding battle
enemy's flight, these orderly masses returned thence as disorganized
enemy's horse patrols could be discerned.
enemy's intention to kill him seemed impossible. "But perhaps they may
enemy's lines of communication between Smolensk and Vyazma. Denisov came
enemy, do not avenge thyself except by doing him good. Thus fulfilling
enemy, had taken prisoners, and once had even captured Marshal Oudinot's
enemy," said Prince Andrew with venomous irony. "It is very sound:
enemy.
enemy.
energetic a character. He is so accustomed to unlimited power that he is
energetic gesture of inquiry with his small white plump hand.
energetic gesture. "Here he ought to burst out--that's it, come
energetic readiness for action and resistance. His feet were bare.
energetically do we pursue this aim that after crossing an unfordable
energetically with his white hands, almost shouted:
energy and again play with her cousin as soon as they too could, like
energy of young men often shows the way better than all the experience
enfeebled. Bennigsen, the Tsarevich, and a swarm of adjutants general
engaged; he was shouting "Hurrah!"
engagement and his reception by the Minister of War.
engagement broken off, and that he would do all he could to meet their
engagement with Nicholas.
engagement would be renewed, no one--least of all Natasha and Prince
engagement) he would say something about men, honor, and the
engaging the cogwheels.
engraved with the count's monogram that stood before his plate,
engrossed by it, yet his strut seemed to indicate that, besides military
enjoyed narrating all this, and did not seem to suspect that others,
enjoyed the beauty of his companion, was absorbed in his mastery of the
enjoyed the famous actress' favors, and that in his presence Napoleon
enjoyed the favors of a very important personage, acquaintance with all
enjoyed their Rhine wine, saute, and ices, and however they avoided
enjoying ourselves! Vasili Dmitrich is staying a day longer for my sake!
enjoyment from that reading.
enjoys life and knows how to live, he swayed to and fro with dignity,
enormous map of the environs of Brunn was spread out.
enormous monster. Perhaps he was really sitting on a wagon, but it might
enormous whole.
enough as it is."
enough for her to love and know she was beloved, she wanted now, at
enough in Moscow to supply the whole army for six months. Yet Napoleon,
enough to be sure that this will not turn your head, but it imposes
enough to be tied to a bad woman. But still he pitied Prince Andrew to
enough."
enrolled among the Cossacks.
entailing heavy expenditure, he had noticed to his surprise that he
entangled and it grew difficult to move. And Uncle Nicholas stood before
entangled. It seemed to her mother and Sonya that Natasha was in love
entangled; the count too sighed and, noticing the snuffbox in his hand,
entanglements of life, he was living so calmly and quietly. He felt that
enter or not, clicked his tongue.
enter that room.
enter; there were no hawkers, nor the usual motley crowd of female
entered Moscow till it was destroyed is like studying the dying leaps
entered Moscow, finding it plundered, plundered it in their turn. They
entered Moscow.
entered his father's dressing room (not with the contemptuous look and
entered in the diplomatic corps and made a Gentleman of the Bedchamber.
entered she got up quickly, changed her position and expression, and
entered the anteroom I heard Andrusha's peals of laughter and that meant
entered the drawing room elegantly dressed in the uniform of an
entered the room.
entered took no notice of her. The princess nodded to her daughter and
entered whom Anna Pavlovna had been waiting for and wished to convert,
entered, and at the big stout figure of Pierre who, hanging his head,
entered, as if to say: "Yes, that's how I want you to look."
entered, the bronze handle of one of the doors turned and Prince Vasili
entered.
entered.
entering on such an explanation. From day to day he became more and more
entering the French service. The captain was happy, the enchanting
entering the battery ran back.
entering the field of analysis the universal historians stop halfway.
entering the misty region with a sound of hoofs and wheels and now and
entertaining or amusing in what was going on. His face was sad and
entertaining supposition.
enthusiasm of that month of captivity, of those irrecoverable, strong,
enthusiasm with which he spoke of women. Though all Ramballe's love
enthusiasm--was only the loss of the battle of Austerlitz, the so-called
enthusiasms, dreams, and hopes of happiness or goodness, in Prince
enthusiastically, quite forgetting all the humiliation she had endured
entirely to her and to the home, and the children whom she had to bear,
entirely--that is, with her whole soul, leaving no corner of it hidden
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.
entrance of the house at Bald Hills. As they approached the house,
entrance to the dam raised his hand and opened his mouth to address
entrance, after scrutinizing the mother and son (who without asking to
entrance. But Napoleon had dressed and come out with such unexpected
entrance. The prince was working at the lathe and after glancing round
entreated. "Remember no one ought to interfere in such matters! I have
entreaty, a threat, and above all conviction that she would herself
entrenched under the enemy's fire, if they have nothing to do, try hard
entrenchment. They had to hold their noses and put their horses to a
entrenchments being thrown up, the freshly dug clay of which showed up
entrenchments looked out just as menacingly, and the unlimbered cannon
entrenchments there by the twenty fifth and that those begun on the
entrenchments, and the places where, in line with them, the field
entrenchments.
entrenchments. There, you see? There's our center, at Borodino, just
entrusted her to Belova. Agrafena Ivanovna used to come to wake Natasha
entrusted to him his enchanting wife (parisienne de coeur) while himself
entrusted to him, addressed Pierre sternly.
entrusted to him, was pedantic in the fulfillment of his duties, severe
entrusted to him. It was already past eight o'clock. He dismounted
entrusted to him. Natasha was in bed, the count at the Club, and Pierre,
entrusted to his care and whom he intended to benefit.
entrusted. The more he realized the absence of all personal motive in
entry of the French into Moscow, during the whole of that agitating,
enveloped everything.
enveloped him completely. When she smiled doubt was no longer possible,
enveloped in those beams, he heard his voice, that kindly, calm, and
envious and Natasha could not help joining in.
envious eyes that were fixed upon him, and went out of the room.
envious glance at the grass, the wormwood, and the streamlet of smoke
envoy. He dismounted, took Balashev's arm, and moving a few steps away
epaulettes had been packing with his valet in the rooms assigned to him.
episode as of some childish, long-forgotten matter that was not worth
equal halves on the palm of his hand, sprinkled some salt on it from the
equal of this strange, dear, clever man whom even my father looks up to?
equal zero, we assumed in some given case--as for instance in that of a
equally amiable to all, especially after supper. "Il est charmant; il
erect on his handsome black horse, looking about him in a leisurely and
errand and brought back the guitar.
error or evil can there be in my wishing to do good, and even doing a
esaul drew back. They were so near that they thought they were the cause
esaul one saw that he was as comfortable and as much at ease as always
esaul. "Why didn't you bwing that one?"
escapade made everybody feel confused. Denisov blushed too, but smiled
escape as quickly as possible from this position, of the hopelessness of
escape discipline. In general they regard Smolensk as the place where
escape from these dreadful thoughts she went to Sonya and began sorting
escape from this muddle, indecision, intricacy, and weakness.
escape it anyhow."
escape runs straight into his opponent's arms.
escape, and Bagration's four thousand men merrily lighted campfires,
escape?"
escaped. The girl was shouting something but, seeing that he was a
escort, as if afraid, in the grievous condition they themselves were in,
escorted him to the door, repeating something to him several times in
escorting him and the other criminals; he felt it in the looks of an
especially Bennigsen, who ever since Tarutino had been at daggers
especially Kutuzov for having failed to do so.
especially after having dined, Bolkonski felt that he could not take in
especially appealed to Pierre. The important mystery mentioned by the
especially as the smoke mingling with the mist hid the whole locality.
especially at the one running toward them.
especially attracted his attention. The peasant seemed to him not merely
especially by the French, which says that a girl should not let herself
especially in Petersburg as a pleasant surprise, were such that Prince
especially on returning to the old conditions of life amid which he had
especially requests for money to which, as an extremely wealthy man,
especially so the general, who admired the apartment, patted Berg on the
especially that Natasha would now be herself again.
especially the rich heiresses who were most of them plain. There was a
especially the women. Yes, dear boy," he continued, "I have met loving,
especially the youngest, the pretty one with the mole, who often made
especially to the left, near Semenovsk, something seemed to be seething
especially toward evening when he had emptied his second bottle; he was
especially when he wanted to do something to please her, or feared that
essence of life, and the laws defining that essence.
essence of the matter aside, shut out the possibility of that essence's
essence of the soul and does not require an object. Now again I feel
essential attitude of the masses. Only in the highest spheres did
essential condition.
essential connection of historical persons with the masses.
essential--would not have taken place. If I reflect on an action still
essentially as before.
established by his order.
established himself with Count Bennigsen, who, like all on whom Boris
established over this ruined nest. He felt this in the looks of
established that she could say the emptiest and stupidest things and
establishment which Nicholas had even enlarged, the same fifty horses
establishments for young ladies. Prince Vasili entered the room with the
estate near Moscow had inevitably to be sold, and for this they had
estate near Moscow, and to receive many people who formerly did not
estates and quite recovered the philanthropic mood in which he had left
estates and which many people envied proved to be extremely valuable and
estates he at once unerringly appointed as bailiff, village elder, and
estates in the south and there attending to the welfare of his serfs. He
estates of the realm, he said that the government must rest not on
estates. His new brethren gave him letters to the Kiev and Odessa Masons
esteem his lofty qualities. I will detain you no longer, General; you
esteem personally. Armfeldt virulently hated Napoleon and was a general
estimation.
estrangement, and ridicule with which troops of different arms usually
et energique, he himself was still the same: he knew that and knew that
etc. And as usual nothing happened in accord with the disposition.
etc.,
eternal joy and bliss.
eternal personification of the spirit of simplicity and truth.
eternal souls, for the attainment of benefits which endure but for an
eternal source." These thoughts seemed to him comforting. But they were
eternal, distant, and unknown the presence of which he had felt
ethnographic, or economic conditions, then the free will of those
even Napoleon, could say anything against that truth which they all
even a thousandth part of what she expressed by voice, smile, and
even at home did nothing but play cards with his mother, pace silently
even by a ball dress.
even conceive that Napoleon together with other influences was the cause
even did that, but they were exceptions.
even felt the heat of the fire. Occasionally curly tongues of flame rose
even got to their right place, but too late to be of any use and only
even have considered such a very free and easy manner improper and in
even if Moscow were taken, for him to remain there and do what he was
even in his way; but all at once he felt that this would not do, and
even in my way. You know I always was a savage, and now am even more
even in this room there now stood an empty bath, and water had been
even increased to desperation like a man who, straining himself, shrieks
even interest her, for it seemed to her that was all extremely simple
even know if it would be a good thing (he even felt, he knew not why,
even little Nicholas exchanged looks in silence. The old prince returned
even make any attempt to get leave of absence or to retire from the
even more beautiful than it had been three days before at the review. It
even more bewildered than he, and do not say the words they should have
even more careful of her appearance than when she was unmarried, and
even more. Trying to stimulate his emotions he looked around. "God,
even my maid has taken to being rude. At this rate they will soon begin
even now never says a word against him. Those pranks in Petersburg when
even possible to express that hatred by fighting a battle, when
even pushed aside, he began wrapping it round the princess. Either from
even remember how formerly, on the strength of similar wretched logical
even the manifesto itself should no better pretext present itself.
even their faces, more and more distinctly. They were our Horse Guards,
even try to do so. All were watching the count and Marya Dmitrievna.
even weady to dance the pas de chale."
even wish to know of his existence but would now have been offended
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
even-tempered and calm and quite as cheerful as of old. This amazed
evening and under the influence of wine--followed all that was told him,
evening at Speranski's, "with only a few friends," as the host had said
evening at the Melyukovs', the girls went to their bedroom. When they
evening before, had greatly increased during the night. Moscow was on
evening he listened to Pierre in a sort of trance, and fancy--as we were
evening on the fourth of August.
evening parties. Berg and Vera could not repress their smiles of
evening the sky cleared again and the sun set in reddish-brown mist.
evening they had talked over everything and the conversation passed from
evening was this:
evening when the rewards bestowed by the Emperor were mentioned.
evening without even stopping to eat. Ermolov was nowhere to be found
evening, brought him to Moscow by daybreak, and driven him back again
evening, he went into the large division of the tent at three o'clock in
evening, however, as the wife's face grew more flushed and animated, the
evening, the adjutants had spread it to all ends and parts of the army,
evening--without even asking himself what they were wanted for--he
evening.
evening. (This was the battle of Shevardino.) He was told that there in
evenings for years, she regretted Julie's presence and having no one to
evenly, and then raised his head. He had an intellectual and distinctive
event have been executed, we forget about the others that were not
event not occurred these hints would have been forgotten, as we have
event seems to have taken place. Napoleon III issues a decree and the
event was produced by Napoleon's power, another that it was produced by
event!"
event, acted in an altogether different manner from Kutuzov.
event, as for instance in a war or a revolution, and so without assuming
event, joyful or sad, that took place in that house was important to all
event--from an endless number of most diverse circumstances and was only
event--the abandonment and burning of Moscow--and tried with his puny
event.
event. In the English Club, where all who were distinguished, important,
event. To us, the wish or objection of this or that French corporal to
events (that is to say, events the reasonableness of which we do
events about to happen--despite their former horror and detestation of
events have no common sense and are all contradictory, as in the case of
events in the will of one man; he is as right as the Russian historians
events is purely external and fictitious.
events may be explained by the fact that certain persons treated one
events occur solely by the will of a Napoleon, and Alexander, or in
events remain unexecuted. Only the possible ones get linked up with a
events that led the French army into Russia; just as in stencil work
events the so-called great men are labels giving names to events, and
events then occuring lay in the national feeling which he possessed in
events were inevitable.
events, and bowed his old head in a spiritual sense as if expecting and
events, remembrance of remote ones, and the childish vanity with which
events--the loss of almost the whole of the Rostovs' Moscow
events. His actions--without the smallest deviation--were all directed
events. The incontestable proof of this deduction is that, however many
events? Then listen:
eventuality could alter the efficiency of the Drissa camp, that
ever because Anatole's presence had vividly recalled to her the time
ever been in her life. She was at that height of bliss when one becomes
ever been to any man. Natasha kept turning to Helene and to her father,
ever heard him utter a groan or a word of complaint. From morning till
ever since he had overtaken the regiment in Poland, had lived with the
ever since the battle of Borodino, for all the generals who came to
ever stronger and fuller and merging into a deafening roar.
ever was Boris resolved to serve in future not according to the written
ever, only showing still more irritability and skepticism as to what was
ever-increasing amiability at the other guests. Natasha, who sat
ever-increasing crowds moving toward the Kremlin, the less he remembered
ever-increasing restlessness, which he could not explain, took
ever-lucky gambler who, after recklessly flinging money about and always
every Russian. But why are you so anxious? You have still time to get
every bit of it is occasioned by the forward movement of the ship,
every corner of the Empire, receiving complaints, redressing wrongs,
every day more and more connected with her, that it was impossible for
every decision would be approved by them all with very few exceptions.
every eventuality, every possibility even to the smallest detail! No, my
every eye she met now was immediately dropped.
every footstep in that house since the terrible news had come, so now
every honest man's duty to go against the government, and that the oath
every human action appears to us as a certain combination of freedom and
every letter.
every loss, the liveliness increased more and more.
every moment of the life of kings as a tool for its own purposes.
every moment, not explaining or consoling, but recalling her to life.
every moment. They are my enemies. In my opinion they are all criminals.
every shade in the play of expression on the face of the man who had
every step, but the universal historians' accounts are all made up of
every step.
every time that, pointer in hand, she sat down to show him the French
every time there has been a revolution in any state there have been
every turn.
every way..."
every word and gesture he saw allusions to his happiness. He often
every word and movement was described with ecstasy.
every word he added: "But don't hurt my little horse!" and stroked the
every word that he or Natasha had spoken and pictured every detail of
everybody advised making the attempt. After much disputing and arguing,
everybody got up he went along, limping, and, when he had warmed up,
everybody is suffering, tortured, and being corrupted, and that it
everybody was asking what should be done, and all were trying to calm
everybody with wide-open eyes, as if wishing to intercept every glance
everybody would go into raptures over every word of hers and look for a
everybody! Not forgetting anyone. I always said when he was only so
everybody, equally pleased to see everyone, and equally indifferent to
everyday dress. Now please, do it for my sake. Katie," she said to the
everyone about Anatole. One man told him he had not come yet, and
everyone adopted toward him the tone of men who know something others do
everyone all right?" he thought, stopping for a moment with a sinking
everyone began to run.
everyone believed in the merit and usefulness of his deed, and he had
everyone came to take leave of him and they all wept.
everyone ducked. It flopped into something moist, and the general fell
everyone else who opposed his theory. But besides this feeling of
everyone else, his flight from home, the peasant coat, the pistol, and
everyone has," he said after a pause.
everyone in society, leaned over and spoke to her.
everyone in such cases--that it was merely some silly whim that seized
everyone in the drawing room.
everyone in the house, and never forgot anything. If he now incurred
everyone is afraid of him, and that must please him. He must think that
everyone knelt down and sang a prayer. All these things were repeatedly
everyone knew of the imperial dissatisfaction with him. The proprieties
everyone met with the words:
everyone questioned him about what he had seen. Pierre felt particularly
everyone tried to get a glimpse of the projectiles as they flew over
everyone without exception and without the slightest variation in his
everyone's situation. Tout comprendre, c'est tout pardonner. * Think
everyone, for myself, and for everyone. And I was innocent--that was the
everyone, including Anna Pavlovna, felt this.
everyone, the tutors and governesses made their bows, and they went out.
everyone--especially to one so closely bound to me--and that I must bear
everyone.
everyone.
everyone. Almost all day long the house resounded with their running
everyone. But in spite of every desire to regard it as known, anyone
everyone. Pierre was so used to that smile, and it had so little meaning
everything Pierre had said. Pierre's past life and his unhappiness prior
everything better than I do."
everything conventional, artificial, and human--for everything the
everything depend on her daughter's inclination. She invited Nicholas to
everything done by necessity, by accident, or by the will of subordinate
everything earthly and a strange and joyous lightness of existence.
everything from society and giving nothing in return. You have become
everything had been foreseen, and that if the enemy were really going to
everything has been taken away. Sometimes I am dreadfully sorry for her.
everything he could say had long been known to him, that he was weary of
everything here is rotten and that an overthrow is coming: I don't
everything in his own way.
everything in perfect order, only one little thing is lacking, namely,
everything in the children's lives that seemed noteworthy to their
everything just as it happened, but imperceptibly, involuntarily, and
everything may be over for me! All these memories will be no more, none
everything possible to take his son to him, and so she prepared to set
everything seemed simple and natural.
everything she did in his presence and, looking up at him gratefully,
everything she said and everything the others said was very amusing and
everything so simply and with such assurance!) Mademoiselle Bourienne
everything that had once been must now be different.) "He told me once
everything that is only seen in huntsmen. He doffed his Circassian cap
everything that was good and worthy of being loved.
everything to comprehend it, and kill everything to examine it. In the
everything was as it should be: only one thing disconcerted Prince
everything was becoming more and more happy and animated. "Oh, how I
everything was bubbling with life in the ruined but reviving city.
everything was done to stop them. And not only was Napoleon not afraid
everything was going from bad to worse, but whether telling a story or
everything was going well on the farm. Her unnatural tone made him wince
everything was splendid. "Just fancy: wants to be an hussar. What's one
everything went well and easily.
everything will be possible for our order, which has already in secret
everything you're told. You were told..." Helene laughed, "that Dolokhov
everything, also thought that discussion of the government was a very
everything, and ecstatic pity and love for that man overflowed his happy
everything, and put everything in its place. He will not hinder
everything, annihilating him.
everything, my friends, and I beg you to take everything, all our grain,
everything, no one can love you more than does
everything, repel force by force?... No! We are very far from that.
everything, to have mercy upon her. The prayers to which she surrendered
everything, to love God in all His manifestations. It is possible to
everything, was constantly in pursuit of Petya who was always running
everything.
everything.
everything. Of late he had exhibited a new trait that tormented Princess
everything. One must think of the future, of all of you... I love you
everywhere at the head of the troops, I can assure you. Our corps was
everywhere obtainable, very difficult, and near Ryazan where the French
everywhere, all with the same preoccupied expression and busy with
everywhere.
evident are the laws of that movement. To discover and define those laws
evident duty." She paused. All were silent, expectant of what was to
evident he had reflected on this subject more than once, and he spoke
evident that a drowning man is less free and more subject to necessity
evident that any answer would lead to conviction. When asked what he
evident that he never considered what he had said or was going to say,
evident that he not only knew everyone in the drawing room, but had
evident that only along that path does the possibility of discovering
evident that the cadet was liberal with his tips and that it paid
evident that where they had expected to meet a single division there
evident.
evident. Prince Andrew talked incessantly, arguing now with his father,
evidently considering him too young.
evidently decomposes Alexander's power into the components: Talleyrand,
evidently did not expect.
evidently did not realize what they were doing.
evidently displeased both reader and audience. The people's minds
evidently experiencing a new and powerful emotion as he turned his curly
evidently forced. Not only the guests but even the footmen waiting at
evidently giving vent to the sounds in the same way that one stretches
evidently glad of a chance to say quicker in words what he wanted to
evidently had no evil intent though he might have refrained from coming
evidently he alone was not seeking anything for himself, nursed no
evidently impossible.
evidently in a fit of rage, his coal-black eyes with their bloodshot
evidently in despair that the sole remaining chance of verifying his
evidently in the village itself and behind the hill. To the left from
evidently intending to express her sympathy with his sorrow, but Pierre
evidently likes me so much. And why not enjoy myself?" thought Natasha,
evidently mistaking him for one of the hospital authorities.
evidently much excited. Rostov moved to the window to see whom he was
evidently not because he was shaven but because they had never grown.
evidently not slept that night. He looked about distractedly and screwed
evidently only to justify himself before the stranger. "Sister must have
evidently pleased with his military designation and rank. He received
evidently reflected and decided how to act, he very quietly took
evidently rigged up by soldiers out of any available materials and
evidently should not have been.
evidently solitary laughter could mean.
evidently suffered a defeat at the old prince's. She was still too
evidently taking a bad turn. Every day, letters of inquiry and notices
evidently unable to repress his vexation, after the princess' carriage
evidently unconscious of what she was doing began shouting in angry
evidently understood Balashev's importance. He led him past his soldiers
evidently wished to draw him on.
evidently wishing to end the conversation, but the flushed and excited
evidently wishing to give her words a very definite meaning. "I remember
evidently wishing to speak pleasantly to them. "He wrote here that he
evidently would not repay.
evidently wrong and that he ought not to do. But at the very time he was
evil while men remain what they are, and also because wisdom needs no
evil, unhappiness, or sorrow.
evoked by the memory of the time when the paper he was now reading had
evoked the compassion of those who knew and liked him.
evoking the best side of his nature and taking a pleasure in so doing.
ex-captain of police, was saying angrily:
exacting, so that without being a hardhearted man he inspired such fear
exactitude. He always came to table under precisely the same conditions,
exactly hear his words but understood them from the movement of his
exactly?" said Pierre.
exaggerated politeness.
exaggerated reports became current about them and about the position of
exalted personages passing in the streets in their elegant carriages
examination, yet to disclose his rank and position was dangerous and
examinations to qualify for the grades of Collegiate Assessor and State
examined it the day after it was committed. And in the same way every
examines arbitrarily selected elements of that motion; but at the
examining and the judgment upon it, that period will be finite, while
examining continuous motion.
examining the familiar Rostov features of the young man's face, his
examining, for as soon as there is no freedom there is also no man. And
example of Krasnoe and of the Berezina. It is only possible to capture
example, yet here you are without your boots! The alarm will be sounded
exasperated with one another and, long after the action had begun on
exasperating to Rostov, he ran his eyes over the Russian ranks drawn
exasperation. "Don't you hear it's His Majesty the Emperor's health?"
exceeded twenty thousand rubles. Dolokhov was no longer listening to
exceedingly lofty, the members of the household and the footmen--one
excellency Prince Andrew himself gave me orders to move all the people
excellency cannot get away."
excellency!' says I, and I just tumbled on the bottom of the sleigh and
excellency's participation in the common action is highly valued by
excellency," said Timokhin timidly, and continually turning to glance at
excellency."
excellency... I had no men... your excellency."
excellency?... nobody knows."
excellent French.
excellent dinners for the officers at every halting place. The regiments
excellent fellow, Prince Dolgorukov; and though you may not know it, the
excellent mother. Oh, my friend! Religion, and religion alone, can--I
excellent. Moreover, the Rostovs' affairs were seriously embarrassed, as
except Monsieur de Castres.
except Natasha, and then called her pet to her armchair.
except a few scattered skirmishers. An empty space of some seven hundred
except by a great effort, to realize the danger and the difficult
except me. I see... I see that I am repulsive to him, especially when I
except passionate love for her father, love such as she thought she had
except the cavalry, the artillery, and the transport--there was no
except the one he knew of--that Prince Andrew's marriage threatened to
except the young princesses.... They are still young...." She bent
except what impedes the great aim of our order, which is to obtain for
exception to the rule of not receiving bachelors in his house.
excessive contempt for others that he observed in Speranski, and by the
exchanged looks and smiled contemptuously at this general's senseless
exchanging a few words. From a campfire a hundred paces off came a sound
excited condition of a commander on a battlefield to whom thousands
excited horse he galloped forward along the village street.
excitedly animated and healthy men." So thinks, or at any rate feels,
excitement and to being unaccustomed to speak of abstract matters in
excitement at being grown-up and in a perpetual ecstatic hurry not to
excitement in these conflicting salon circles and some demonstrations
excitement might have on her son. She went several times to his door on
excitement of the conflict could not and would not give way.
excitement was going on there.
excitement, rushed toward the drawing-room door, probably in order to
excitement.
excitement.
excitement. "Don't you understand that either we are officers serving
excitement. At the same moment Natasha, without drawing breath, screamed
exciting, especially to the young.
exclaimed a sorrowful voice.
exclaimed at Otradnoe not so much in fun as in earnest--and her mother
exclaimed different voices; and the heavy breathing of the bearers and
exclaiming and oh-ing and ah-ing.
exclamations, and dimly made out something leaning against the palings
excursions, he spent most of his time at home making himself one with
excuse his costume.
excusing herself, she went to the door of the old prince's room. The
execrable, yet to him is entrusted the fate of our whole country.... I
executed because they could not be. Apart from that, the chief source
executed is impossible, not only in the case of Napoleon's invasion of
executed or not. But this was only the external condition; the essential
executing of the plan.
execution. Every order executed is always one of an immense number
executions resulting from the preaching of love.
exercise book containing geometrical figures.
exercises in the music room. He knew that she had not sung since her
exhales from a flower. He could not understand the value or significance
exhausted and hungry, went forward led by their officers. Others held
exhausted and six thousand men sacrificed to defend it till late at
exhausted by feeding her baby, who steals some food; or a man trained
exhausted faces of the spectators.
exhausted troops some rest, and letting the transport and heavy convoys
exist), nor did he see an advanced post of the Russian army, but while
exist, for then man's will is subject to that law.
existed any longer, that nothing existed but happiness. "Is it possible?
existed in this case. Prince Vasili readily adopted her tone and the
existed only in the heads of a dozen individuals--for the events and
existed within him. His meeting with Pierre formed an epoch in Prince
existed, and when little Nicholas perceived him he grew faint with love:
existence and full of joyous hopes for the future. She had merely become
existence he learned every day, he felt that now, in 1809, here in
existence of Prussia.
existence. Another, observing the migration of plants, notices that the
exists between the expression of someone's will and the execution of
expand his chest, raise his head, and rejoice at his good fortune.
expanded his chest and rode, frowning, beside him to the front line, as
expect it will go hard with him."
expect it's snow... that spot... a spot--une tache," he thought. "There
expect to interest him, she turned to his father. The conversation was
expect you feel it so yourself. Let us write her a letter at once, and
expect you today," he added. "I only sent you the note yesterday by
expect. He was so used to submitting to Prince Vasili's tone of careless
expectancy.
expectation of an important order for an expensive funeral. The Military
expectation--the feeling that "everything is just the same, so why did I
expectations of those who knew her. The subdued smile which, though it
expected anything from Speranski and from any of his own activities
expected back every minute.
expected it) to the charm of the notes reverberating, filling the
expected such a sight. Just before him, almost across the middle of the
expected this.
expected to be at once presented to the Emperor. At the chief entrance
expected was approaching. Hardly anyone he knew was left in town. Julie
expected--neither Napoleon, nor Alexander, nor still less any of those
expecting Marya Dmitrievna Akhrosimova, known in society as le terrible
expecting anything from yourself in the future, you will feel at every
expecting every moment to see his dead face, and she felt that the
expecting him to bow or to step out of his way. Prince Andrew did
expecting him."
expecting it, they are so sure that it will happen that I cannot, I
expecting the summons to zakuska, * avoid engaging in any long
expedition against England (which would inevitably have ruined him) he
expedition and vividly picturing to himself what would happen next day.
expeditiously, unnecessary things were left, and the most valuable
expenditure on those preparations and the need of obtaining advantages
experience of life had reached the conviction that thoughts and the
experience of life must be senselessly wasted unless he applied it to
experience that feeling during those memorable days preceding the battle
experience, he was afraid of losing it. But he was not destined to bring
experienced a feeling of joy, freedom, and life; but when during his
experienced and capable in state affairs, who, without sharing any of
experienced before. All that was distressing, and especially all that
experienced driver knew it was better to hold the whip raised as a
experienced for a long time--that of hundreds of eyes looking at
experienced for a long while. She did not realize who and where she
experienced for the last fortnight, and the joy that had lit up her
experienced my readiness to reward you. That readiness will not weaken
experienced the same feeling he had had on the eve of a battle, when
experiencing the joyful feeling of a boy escaping from school, began to
experiment or argument, recognized by all thinkers and felt by everyone
experimental science stands to abstract science.
explain such a question.
explain to us what without its help man cannot comprehend: why, for what
explain.... Yesterday our left flank was there at Shevardino, you see,
explained by the activity of Louis XIV, XV, and XVI, their mistresses
explained her wishes to him, she let him go to the drawing room.
explained how to rivet the hoof and went away to his own quarters.
explained their teaching by hieroglyphics. A hieroglyph," said the
explaining something to some Russians who did not understand them,
explaining that Dolokhov was betting with Stevens, an English naval
explanation of the causal nexus of this new force with the event.
explanation with him about Natasha.
explanation, but meeting the latter's impressive but meaningless gaze
explanation.
explanation. It really seemed that Sonya did not feel her position
explanation..."
explanations, however clear they might be. Whether it was the teacher's
exploit?"
exposed rear, or why not this Italian gentleman's attack--very fine, or
exposed--and she seemed to bring the glamour of a ballroom with her as
express a wish and Natasha would jump up and run to fulfill it.
express his devotion to his monarch except by cruelty.
express his opinion as he had hoped to, left on him a vague and uneasy
express sympathy, remained standing beside her.
express the thoughts that filled his mind. He began to explain that he
expressed by details of the morbid character of Ivan the Terrible and by
expressed his feelings, and has since become famous. On returning home
expressed hostility, which Pierre noticed at once. He had approached
expressed impetuosity and enthusiasm. Nicholas blushed when he entered
expressed in the highest degree by the behavior of Chichagov, who knew
expressed it, were sharpening their teeth for it. Two of the commanders
expressed perplexity as to what Julie's smile might mean. In spite of
expressed the concentrated and happy resolution you see on the face of
expressed the same wish--could no longer check the inevitable movement,
expressed this most eloquently.
expressed)--this came about because his commands did not correspond to
expressed. He wished to help her and say something pleasant, but could
expressed. The ridicule and contempt were of course expressed in a
expressing deep sorrow.
expressing himself so artificially because he was talking French.
expressing known historic facts by equations and comparing the relative
expressing the thoughts that had suddenly occurred to him.
expressing this conviction to himself, in another part of his mind her
expressing... as in its last note... you understand... Besides, unless
expression and she sat silent. She sat a long time looking at the
expression and the same prevalent appearance of goodhearted innocent
expression and went out again without saying a word. She looked at
expression evidently pleased him.
expression for the unknown remainder of what we know about the laws of
expression he could see there was one of boredom, curiosity as to the
expression he saw on other faces--an expression that spoke not of
expression his joke had brought to his sister's face, he repented and
expression in his treatment of his daughter. To his former pretexts
expression of Prince Andrew's face was angry or tender.
expression of agitated surprise and guilt she went about the house,
expression of face.
expression of her father's. His face wore that expression when his
expression of his fixed eyes, watched the regimental commander's back
expression of irritable impotence. "What for? If I were a wobber I would
expression of joy at the commencement of the long-expected campaign and
expression of perplexity, turned round to Miloradovich as if seeking an
expression of profound and sincere devotion and respect mingled with
expression of quiet solemnity.
expression of that wish, but find a series of orders, or expressions of
expression of the whole historical movement is hard to understand.
expression of will in any action, our own or another's, the first demand
expression on her kind little face, "that really would be the match for
expression on his face changed in a way evidently deliberate and
expression on his face pleased Natasha.
expression on his full, cheerful, clean-shaven face, the same firm
expression on the faces of the crowd of soldiers and militiamen who were
expression only in her more and more beaming face and quivering nose.
expression seized Princess Mary's hand.
expression she did not understand, and lay down again. He was suffering
expression the sculptor had happened to give the angel's face, Prince
expression which seemed to say that he alone knew where and how much Eau
expression with which, after a glance at Kutuzov, the soldier with the
expression, evidently habitual to him when conversing with women.
expression, looked observantly and sympathetically at the father and
expression, though his eyes were fixed on her, referred not to her but
expression, which with characteristic tact she had acquired though she
expression--the same man who had rushed out of the wattle shed. At that
expression. "C'est... c'est du Mack. Nous sommes mackes (It is... it
expression. But the author himself took the verses and began reading
expression. It was the heavy tread of Princess Mary that he heard.
expression. She did not even get up to greet him. "What is the matter
expression. This quivering of his left leg was a thing Napoleon was
expression. Vera was good-looking, not at all stupid, quick at learning,
expression.) "Take the covert at once, for my Girchik says the Ilagins
expressions of gratitude for her deliverance, as she termed what had
expressions with the choicest French phrases--which was a peculiarity of
expulsion of the French proved that the winning of a battle does not
extend farther than the western, the Polish, provinces.
extend the hand of reconciliation.
extending its neck, galloped on yet faster. Hardly had the Horse Guards
extending over his cheeks, bent low over the face of his hearer, as was
extermination of the French. Dorokhov's report about Broussier's
external shock was needed to overcome that shame, and this shock came in
external world is well known, where the time between the action and
external world, the greater or lesser remoteness of time, and the
externally as before, all his former amusements lost their charm for him
extraordinarily becoming. Everyone told her she looked very handsome,
extraordinarily disdainful composure with which Speranski answered
extraordinary and mysterious part of the prediction.
extraordinary intelligence, the more so as in the depth of his heart it
extraordinary movement of millions of people. Men leave their customary
extraordinary, superhuman capacities, or simply men of very various
extraordinary," and at the very moment she thought this, the face and
extraordinary. It had been a speech such as only constitutional monarchs
extremely kind to him and told him to visit them again.
extremely pleasant to him. He thanked the soldier and began to eat.
extremely--whether he was promoted to a captaincy or would receive the
extricated himself from an awkward situation and placed another in it,
eye at the sun, which showed like a huge crimson ball in the unclouded
eye he had lost, Kutuzov walked with plunging, swaying gait into
eye. A fifth, to achieve his long-cherished aim of dining with the
eyebrows and looking uneasily and timidly at her.
eyebrows and mustaches were smeared over the perspiring, flushed, and
eyebrows which, when he frowned, sometimes hid the gleam of his shrewd,
eyebrows.
eyebrows. Prince Andrew went up and kissed his father on the
eyes and asked the count which was his daughter.
eyes and restlessness in his movements, Prince Andrew approached
eyes and swayed his head. "A matchless people!" he repeated with a sigh.
eyes at those who were passing. Glancing in at the door, Rostov saw that
eyes attracted him irresistibly.
eyes caused the little girl to smile.
eyes expressed entreaty, shame at having to ask, fear of a refusal, and
eyes fixed on the cavalry below them.
eyes fixed on the dark face of a large icon of the Saviour lit by a
eyes from him, but braced himself up more and more and held his head
eyes full of tears and of thoughts, gazing shiningly and imploringly at
eyes gazed from under his brows at his master, who was silent. "Can you
eyes grew dim, she could not see and could not hear anything, but was
eyes inquiringly on him.
eyes lit up so that her face was entirely transformed. Then she suddenly
eyes more than ever he drew himself up still straighter, but did not
eyes occasionally sought out his fine well-set-up young son, resting
eyes off him. His brother and sisters struggled for the places nearest
eyes off the French.
eyes opened wide with fear and joy.
eyes still shifted from side to side but with a downward look not rising
eyes that seemed more prominent than ever, lay on the armchair beside
eyes that seemed to say: "Ah, there he is! Let's see what will come of
eyes to complete the show of prisoners, could not fail to attract his
eyes upon it, told her to read the letter aloud. When she had done so
eyes were brighter than usual.
eyes were gazing calmly and fixedly at her, Natasha, to break the
eyes while his arms and legs twitched. He spoke without himself knowing
eyes with the same veiled look. Each time this happened Rostov felt
eyes, and black tousled mustache and hair. He wore an unfastened cloak,
eyes, and he was going out, but became aware of an intense look fixed
eyes, and then quickly went to his place and sat down. "Sit down, sit
eyes, glittering feverishly, met Pierre with a questioning look the
eyes, in her delicate smile, and in every trait of her gentle face.
eyes, pensively swaying her head and feeling an unexpected flow of
eyes, she locked her in; and having given orders to the yard porter to
eyes.
eyes.
eyes. "Call Andrew!" he said suddenly, and a childish, timid expression
eyes. "What has happened to her? How she is singing today!" And suddenly
eyes. Evidently possessed by some idea, he stood over those who were
eyes. His shriveled old hands were folded and on the finger of one of
eyes. Princess Mary noticed this and glanced gratefully at him with that
eyes. The aide-de-camp replied that probably the Emperor would not be
eyes."
eyes; then she suddenly asked herself to whom she was saying this.
face all lit up by the moonlight. He slipped his arms under the cloak
face an explanation of what she was reading, but did not find it. Her
face and glittering eyes.
face and just nodded to him with his long head. But after it was
face and narrow little eyes beamed with self-satisfied merriment. He
face and shining eyes, galloped up to them. She was followed by Petya
face and whole figure, the Russians stared at Pierre because they could
face and, taking him by the ear, pulled it gently, smiling with his lips
face as if driving off a troublesome fly. "And why are you stopping
face assumed the coarse, unpleasant expression peculiar to him. Shaking
face at all suited to a battlefield, but a most ordinary, homelike face.
face at such times was very serious.
face at the princess without speaking and evidently not thinking about
face became suddenly transformed. It was as if a light had been kindled
face changed into a winning and piteous look of fear. Her beautiful eyes
face close to her mother's, "I am sorry, forgive me, I'll never do it
face had already sealed the order. The count looked around him. In the
face in his hands.
face in the mirror.
face instantly changed and assumed an offensively affected, sugary
face it gave him a burning sensation and yet to his surprise it did not
face linked itself up with Kutuzov's remembrance of his personality.
face of each soldier and each officer seemed to say.
face of the man addressing him. Rostopchin grew confused and became
face of the old man and seeking any indication of his being a traitor.
face on the catafalque, and the encounter he had with Zubov over her
face probably looked very terrible, for the officer said something in
face ready for rapture, and love and tenderness for her, stronger
face that it was only mischief, she shook a finger at her sternly with a
face to Prince Andrew, smiled, and waved his hand.
face to make it bleed, shouted in a tearful voice: "Police! Murder!...
face today. She cried as she said good-by to Uncle," Sonya remembered.
face vanished; she frowned and overwhelmed Pierre with a torrent of
face was animated, which, however, did not conceal its sunken and faded
face was calm, gentle, and happy. Clutching her breast to keep herself
face was not visible. The cavalry singers were passing close by:
face was of a pale-greenish tint, shouting to his men. "Go round! Wait
face where it was rising. But besides this there was something else of
face which had already gone white.
face with Prince Andrew, who came out frowning and looking old. Pierre
face with his hand so as to look into her eyes.
face with its fine straight nose would have been handsome had it not
face wore that special look of confident, self-complacent happiness that
face, Pierre pushed his way in through the crowd.
face, already growing old, though he was dressed like a most fashionable
face, and by his walk and the first words he uttered recognized him as a
face, disfigured by the half-shaven head, hung down hopelessly. At
face, evidently wishing to soften the rudeness of his words, he added,
face, screwed up his eyes, and pensively swayed his head. At another
face, she blushed and came rapidly up to him.
face, shook his head, and going up to him silently kissed him on the
face.
face.
face.
face.
face.
face. A gentle, mild light poured from them. Then all at once he
face. He cut Bolkonski short.
face. They all three of them now experienced that feeling of awkwardness
face; his eyes continually wandered from one object to another.
face?" Prince Andrew asked himself as he looked. Prince Bagration bent
faces for the most part only expressed the fact that they found it very
faces of these young people, especially those who were military men,
faces out of the door of a room where a bright samovar was boiling and
faces struggled for the mop: how differently do those clouds glide
faces was a quiet and solemn look.
faces, that feeling was intensified. Throughout his journey he felt like
faces, uniforms, and decorations of the generals, who one after another
faces, whom the officers keeping order tried in vain to drive from the
faces--that of fear. Prince Andrew for the second time asked the
faces. (He distinctly saw an old French officer who, with gaitered legs
facing Bagration and, as the very personification of Moscow hospitality,
facing it a black knoll that seemed as steep as a wall. On this knoll
facing the ditch. One with a white plume in his hat seemed familiar to
facing the quartermaster who was reporting to him. On seeing Rostov,
fact is he has come to see Count Cyril Vladimirovich, hearing how ill he
fact is that now Kutuzov with his staff and all of us count for
fact, it seemed as if matters were quite hopeless, for at every mention
fact.
factors mitigates his fault in our eyes. The self-sacrifice of a father
factory hand, a thin, sallow-faced lad of eighteen in a loose coat.
facts and the historical accounts only arises because the historians
facts he felt to be of historic importance. As the Emperor's suite was
facts.
faculty to understand the essential points of the impending battle, but
fading princesses still lived, with its enormous retinue; as soon as,
failed him. He was seized by panic and could not go where it was
failed to meet Kuragin in Turkey, for soon after Prince Andrew arrived,
failed to recognize her.
failed. Boris on the contrary at once found his footing, and related
failure and supposing that someone must be responsible for it, Toll
failure, the enemy placed ten guns to the right of the village and began
faint light of the burning spirit, Pierre, as in a dream, saw several
faint morning light.
faint smile forgot to fade though his features now expressed horror
faint with fear lest the baby should be drowned in the font, and awaited
fair at Vyazma every year and smilingly offer it to her, "Dronushka, now
fair-haired lad in a clean blue coat, was standing over the others. His
fair."
fairy kingdom where everything was possible.
fairyland.
faith in the religious significance of marriage, committed an act of
faith with him--which he felt the more acutely the more he tried to
faithful to me for the whole year of my absence! Like the gentle dove
faithful, unalterable love of this girl had a gladdening effect on him.
faithfully as I can, without disquieting myself by examining my feelings
fall asleep, as he leaned against the wall.
fall asleep, called Dunyasha the maid to put out the candle, and before
fall in the spirit of the troops occurs, as in all national wars.
fall into a trap Moreau set him, and from which he did not know how to
fall of the first man, resulting in the production of the human race,
fall off your horse," he added, "because--that's it, come on!--you've
fallen behind, his face showing alarm at his defection, ran at a trot,
fallen had not a soldier standing by held him up.
fallen leaves that dropped of themselves from that withered tree--the
falling asleep, but suddenly, almost with the distinctness of reality,
falling from the trees. Near the watchman's hut the black shapes of the
falling from the window, she listened to the words of the service which
falling snow and toward evening it began to clear. Through the falling
falls on the things about him--we see that each of these circumstances
false note in them. "Allow me to tell you, your excellency, that that
false paper money, and worst of all they kill my children and my
false path historical science has followed are due solely to the lack of
false) had been received during the night of a movement by the French to
false. Thus an adjutant galloped up from Murat with tidings that
faltered. "You are on good terms with Michael Ilarionovich Kutuzov...
fame, with the girl at the window, the oak, and woman's beauty and love.
familiar gallop of coquetry, without any ulterior motive or any
familiar to Prince Andrew. Several dressers were pressing on his chest
familiar voice called him and a hand detained him.
familiar voice, "what I say is that if it were possible to know what is
familiar weariness of his expression were still the same. He was wearing
familiar, to get excited and to have arguments about extraneous matters
familiarity that grows up between a nurse and her mistress.
families of the Rostovs' and Bolkonskis' relations sometimes came to
family and that's all I want."
family and to the crown serfs--those fields and meadows where for
family be disgraced," thought she.
family consultation; is it not so, Prince?"
family fortune, and so he could not be angry with him for refusing to
family group broke up.
family life continually rose in her imagination. She drove them away and
family, Count Ilya Rostov, continually drove about the city collecting
family, but was kept all summer in Moscow by his new duties. Dolokhov
family, she thought it her duty to go to see them. But remembering her
family, the whole question resolves itself into not eating more than one
family, was the most gifted with a capacity to feel any shades of
family. Military, administrative, political, and Masonic interests
family. That same day, Rostov, profiting by the darkness to avoid being
famous joke of Ermolov's was being circulated, that as a great favor he
famous order of the day to General Bennigsen:
fancied he really had said it. "But they insisted on their own view:
fancies.
fancy he did not clearly picture to himself either the striking of the
fanned by the breeze, was rapidly spreading. The French columns that had
far as the pond, along the avenues of young lime trees Prince Andrew had
far as was in his power held the troops back. He did not advance.
far away in the broken ground--"That's where the Moskva River is, and
far behindhand in many things that had they begun to converse in her
far from Mikulino where the forest ran close to the road. Since then,
far from being strong, was no more a position than any other spot one
far less tranquil and happy than before.
farewell, lads! To our health! Hurrah!..." he cried, and emptying his
farms at which Nicholas might procure horses, recommended to him a horse
farther and farther off, the black horses driven by Zakhar could be
farther away. Among the soldiers in the shops and passages some men were
farther back in history the object of our observation lies, the more
farther he left Moscow behind and the deeper he plunged into that sea
farther into the region where the army was already in action.
farther still.
farther, probably along the line of the French camp. Rostov no longer
farther. Serpukhov is already occupied by an enemy detachment and Tula
farthest links of that chain. The tales passing from mouth to mouth at
fascinating and consequently so alarming that he was ready to run away,
fascinating marquise of thirty-five and at the same time for a charming,
fast as her nimble little feet would carry her. Boris did not laugh.
fast as the horses could draw it, but for a long time Count Rostopchin
fast asleep with his head on his arm.
fastened it to the uniform. Lazarev glanced morosely at the little man
fastened to the cording of his uniform and, indicating a bandaged arm,
fastening his coat. When he had finished, he turned to Bezukhov, and
faster.
faster. He liked giving a painful lash on the neck to some peasant
fat chest uncovered, stepping unevenly and timidly in one slippered and
fat finger.
fate and in spite of the pleasures and distractions around me I cannot
fate of men of action, and the higher they stand in the social hierarchy
fate of the capital and of your empire! Russia will shudder to learn of
fate, her father-in-law, and her husband. After crying she had fallen
fate. The firing died down and soldiers, talking eagerly, streamed out
father Natasha's note to Princess Mary breaking off her engagement
father and Anna Mikhaylovna, that it had something to do with her
father and instantly dropped again. Natasha was happier than she had
father and of Nicholas."
father and of Prince Andrew. Involuntarily she thought their thoughts
father could for their education, and they have both turned out fools.
father had forgotten his son's letter on the drawing-room table; but she
father has a German valet, and he is a splendid valet and satisfies your
father has been with me and caressed me. He approved of me and of Uncle
father has come to intercede for him. But he's a good-for-nothing lad!
father he had hardly known), and her melancholy was just like the august
father is rich, I don't regard myself as a relation of his, and neither
father or at Natasha.
father said, looking ironically at his son, "I beg you to put it off for
father to be a connection of Prince Vasili's. The elderly lady who had
father to give his consent, irritating him and having to bear the brunt
father who had brought it from the siege of Ochakov. All these traveling
father!" thought she, trying to restrain her wrath. "Hard as it may
father's affairs in order, and would even--he felt it--ensure Princess
father's consent, and he could do the same, but that she would never
father's death reached him. He at once resigned his commission, and
father's door. "Why are these people with frightened faces stopping me?
father's friendship for you; but now I entreat you for God's sake to
father's funeral, her voiced trembled. She turned away, and then, as if
father's illness, since his death, and especially since her meeting with
father's letter, he returned to the nursery.
father's nature showed itself in Pierre. He felt the fascination and
father's pardon for herself and for Philip the footman, who had begged
father's requirements better than you could, then it's all right to let
father's ridicule of the new men, and drew him on and listened to him
father's room with the good-humored and victorious air natural to him.
father's room, that huge room in which Count Bezukhov had died.
father's study as the latter wished to say good-by to him alone. All
father's will that I should like to know..."
father's wish--to propose, and postpone the wedding for a year.
father's. I had to talk over a very important matter with him. I only
father, and always at the thought of enemies and those who hated her she
father, and even his comfortable bed in the house on the Povarskaya rose
father, and then talk of rules of war and magnanimity to foes! Take no
father, coldly, maliciously, and unpleasantly.
father, muttered in a whisper:
father, pensively watching the lights of the street lamps flickering on
father, sighing and evidently disconcerted, very soon became silent and
father, the terribly wild cries of her mother that she heard through the
father--Prince Andrew--and his father had neither shape nor form, but he
father-in-law and now at Princess Mary. When they left the table she
father.
father.
father."
father... and she will make you a good wife... God bless you!..."
fatherland--something senseless, masculine, and obstinate which there
fathers have to put up with.... Is this princess of yours rich?"
fathers of the Society of Jesus?"
fault or the pupil's, this same thing happened every day: the princess'
faultfinding, understood nothing of what she heard; she only wondered
faut, that's a different matter; but the Kuragins' set of women, 'women
favor are among the count's papers, then, my dear girl, you and your
favor, and directly they noticed it turning in any direction, this whole
favor."
favoring Golitsyn and mysticism, and afterwards Shishkov and Photius.
favorite barcarolle. Natasha was preparing to sing. Denisov was looking
favorite expression when he was in a rage) and called for the company
favorite occupation when not playing boston, a card game he was very
favorite song: native and birch tree and my heart is sick occurred in
favorite, "how is it you have so little tact? Don't you see you are not
fear and concealing it from the doctor, she agreed to Natasha's wish and
fear appeared on her flushed face.
fear it possesses all. If there were no suffering, man would not know
fear of refusal, like a boy asking for permission to get on a horse, he
fear of weakening at the decisive moment and so losing his self-esteem.
fear when her face is like that?" thought he, and placing himself before
fear would prevent her understanding any of her father's further
fear, and the thought that he might be killed or badly wounded never
fear.
fear.
feared for her brother who was in it, was horrified by and amazed at
feared him.
feared lest the confusion she felt might overwhelm her and betray her as
fearing he might take her words as meant to move him to pity, looked at
fearing to be captured by the French on the way to Krems.
fearless and gay to kiss her hand. "I know she's a scamp of a girl, but
fears nothing so much as a general battle is impossible."
feat; and like a child he made sport of the momentous, and unavoidable
feather bed and hugging her friend. With an effort Sonya sat up and
feather bed. Natasha began consoling her, but her face showed that she
features, and then she saw his face and met his gaze.
features, gave him a rather comical expression. Bekleshev and Theodore
features, which had been gloomy, suddenly lighted up, and while still
features. Nicholas was short with curly hair and an open expression.
feeble actions in comparison with what took place in the center of the
feeble voice.
feedeth them," he said to himself and wished to say to Princess Mary;
feeding horses--we may die of hunger ourselves! As it is, some go three
feel I am not the same and it troubles me. A wonderful boy, but I am
feel afraid in his presence. I am always afraid when I'm with him. What
feel afraid."
feel awkward. Involuntarily feeling this at dinner on the first day, he
feel like it, she became enthusiastic in order not to disappoint the
feel most painfully, I know him." (It seemed to Napoleon that the chief
feel that in that place and on that day, it was improper to speak so of
feel that there was no longer a place for him in life.
feel) we arrive at laws," so also in history the new view says: "It is
feel, was in danger. They could not think of anything but how to help
feeling a joyous sense of her love for him. Remembering her friendly
feeling agitated her.
feeling amazed themselves at what they had done.
feeling at that moment. "Is there anything at all behind that impassive
feeling her heart beating quickly and violently. "Dronushka tells me
feeling herself bound to Princess Mary by affection, learned to love her
feeling his eyes gazing at her.
feeling implanted in each of us and in our fathers.
feeling it necessary to make a sacrifice before abandoning the capital
feeling of devotion returned to him even more strongly than before. When
feeling of doubt and conflict with which he had trodden the Enns bridge,
feeling of life being possible only in each other's presence.
feeling of pity for this man frightened him and he wished to go away,
feeling of sickening agitation.
feeling of unpleasant awakening from the hurry and eagerness to push on
feeling offended at having to wait so long, sat crossing and uncrossing
feeling stronger than friendship sprang up between them; an exclusive
feeling that arose in her toward the girl, she kissed her. But she felt
feeling that in the main it was going badly.
feeling that she was in no mood for their conversation. Count Rostopchin
feeling the hand of God upon him, suddenly recognizes the insignificance
feeling too feeble to break the meshes or to set to work carefully and
feeling which absorbed her altogether and hindered her from following
feeling with which he had galloped across the path of a wolf, Rostov
feeling--her mental tranquillity was destroyed, and desires, doubts,
feeling. To the family Natasha seemed livelier than usual, but she was
feelings and reason, had to go from west to east to slay their fellows,
feelings in others, and if never having felt them I cannot approve of
feelings of others, and had he at all understood what Pierre's feelings
feelings of which he had not thought lately, but which still found
feelings, all those ideas that seem so important to us, are unnecessary.
feelings, but if that were so, he would say for the last time.... But he
feelings, he frowned and nodded slightly as a sign that Balashev might
feelings, her sufferings, shame, and remorse. He now understood for the
feels for you."
feels it is perishing and does not know what it is doing. To study the
feels, and remembers innumerable things simultaneously, but has the
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
feet and be laid low by our hosts! Lord, Thou art able to save both
feet and beseech him. He will lift me up, will listen, and will even
feet and hammered him with his fists. Shouts of approval were heard
feet in their overboots on the table, and began to reflect.
feet of the galloping side horses. Nicholas began to draw ahead. Zakhar,
feet off the sofa.
feet scampered merrily and quickly across the meadow grass.
feet that moved through the sticky mud that covered the planks of the
feet were the only sounds that could be heard. Anna Mikhaylovna, with an
feet, their cries, and their spontaneous laughter. They laughed and were
feet.
feet.
feet. Where is Alexander now, and of what is he thinking? A strange,
feigned severity. "You spoil her, Ilya," she added, turning to her
fell heavily on to the wet ground. The Cossacks saw that his arms and
fell in love with Nicholas and does not wish to know anything more. Even
fell in small round spots through the shade of the lime-tree avenue,
fell on his back. He opened his eyes, hoping to see how the struggle of
fell with stupid simplicity, but consistently, and belabored the French
fellow like that Schwa'tz!" he cried.
fellow repeated one after the other, and they moved up the street
fellow you are for dancing!"
fellow!" and for some unknown reason tears suddenly filled his eyes.
fellow's crotchety! Of course Prince Andrew is not a child and can shift
fellow," he said abruptly and eagerly, "I must confess to having been
fellow--your friend--I like him! He stirs me up. Another says clever
fellow. Oh, by the by!" he shouted through the doorway after Pierre,
fellows? The last one was hardly twenty."
felt a responsibility for all that was happening in Europe; and not
felt a wish to contradict. Though he usually spoke easily and well,
felt a wish to speak to the stranger, but by the time he had made up his
felt abashed and asked whether what he had been saying did not concern
felt an estrangement from everything belonging to this world, terrible
felt any symptoms of pregnancy. She laughed contemptuously and said she
felt ashamed of his speech with its constitutional tendency and sought
felt astonished that he could have spent so much time on such useless
felt at every step of history.
felt boots approached the unseen bend of the staircase more rapidly.
felt boots, he went to the little princess' apartment.
felt by every man, is understood by us only to the extent to which we
felt for both of them.
felt guilty and grew timid on catching the expression of his face and
felt happy). "We had our hands full last night. However, I think the
felt herself a being accidentally forgotten in this world and left
felt himself revived and rejuvenated when after leaving her he stood
felt himself to be. At the right beat of the music he looked sideways at
felt his friend's absence very much, having no news of him since he
felt in her heart a devout and tremulous awe at the thought of the
felt it indecorous to speak of her pregnancy before Pierre, though the
felt joyful that the moment had come when he would at last start on that
felt nothing but amazement at what they were saying. A thought that had
felt so glad to be free from his own lawlessness and to submit his will
felt stifled by the smoke which seemed to hang over the whole
felt sure his commander was sending for him to punish him for breach of
felt that he had still much to do and to do quickly. Glowing with the
felt that his mother was displeased with him and that, despite her love
felt that she would be left with her mother and Sonya among a minority
felt that something gave way in his soul and that he was guilty of a sin
felt that the battle of which he had brought tidings was far, far away
felt that the being before him was quite different from, and better
felt that the way advised by Tushin and the other officers was the
felt that there was no more to be said.
felt the same excitement.
felt the tension of the amorous air in the house, and also noticed a
felt this delicacy and so found great pleasure in his society. But
felt this, and as if wishing to show him that she did not even dare
felt, sunk deeper than was desirable for his peace of mind. That pale,
felt, the worst was the state of his bare, raw, and scab-covered feet.
felt, through her happiness, that there is another sort of happiness
felty winter hair.
femme la plus seduisante de Petersbourg, * was also there. She had been
fence they all spread out evenly and quietly, without noise or talk,
fence was broken and branches of the plum trees had been torn off with
fence which I could scarcely reach with my hands. After much effort I
ferociously, pushed forward, elbowing his way and shouting "hurrah!" as
ferocity and for Russians to blame the scoundrel Bonaparte, or later
ferry, that girl thrilled by the beauty of the night, and that night
fertile woman. The old fire very rarely kindled in her face now. That
fertilizes the latter, and sees in this the purpose of the bee's
festive around him. Nearer and nearer to Rostov came that sun shedding
festive in his air, which, in conjunction with his firm and virile
festivities and fireworks are becoming wearisome."
fetch the deputation had returned with the news that Moscow was empty,
fever he had suffered from in the hospital in Moscow, and as he grew
feverish delirium or drunkenness.
feverish eyes at the door in front of him as if trying to understand and
few days and which was essential for the execution of his design. The
few of them at the balls. But he did not run after the unmarried girls,
few phrases, marshals and adjutants had come galloping up with
few times in silence, but his eyes glittered feverishly and his lips
fewer, and of still-higher officers of whom there are still fewer,
fez, his face distorted with fury and the pupils of his eyes rolled
fichu for which he had paid a good price, kissing her straight on the
fidelity to a man who on his part, by entering the married state without
field beyond the village came now sounds of regimental music and now the
field of Austerlitz and had later enlarged upon with Pierre, and which
field of Austerlitz, enduring the heedless blows of his left foot and
field of Austerlitz. Not only does a good army commander not need any
field under fire, as he had done at the head of the Kursk regiment at
field, where there were some sheds built of charred planks, beams,
fields of winter rye, downhill where snow still lodged near the bridge,
fields or on the threshing floor, he returned from the sowing or mowing
fields seeking it and dug it out with their sabers and ate it, though
fields), "there is no truth, all is false and evil; but in the universe,
fierce blow jerked his head to one side.
fifteen were lost. Consequently the four were equal to the fifteen, and
fifteen years, with the assurance of Napoleon's invincibility, with the
fifth group, displaying the profundity of their strategic perceptions,
fiftieth part of its former inhabitants had remained, but it was empty.
fifty members of the English Club and fifty guests were awaiting the
fifty-three minutes. He noted this down that same evening, among other
fifty."
fight a battle 'on his own hand' as the Germans say. He does so. This
fight another battle, and since then the government property had been
fight now.
fight the Austrians?
fighting under the command of a genius, in two--or three-line formation,
fighting would probably go on for a long time yet, and that things being
figure of Prince Andrew, in a fur cloak the deep collar of which covered
figure of Tushin who was sitting cross-legged like a Turk beside him.
figure. "Number Two!" he squeaked. "Fire, Medvedev!"
figures in his clear, bold hand.
figures would throw on the wall, when they heard the steps and voices of
file--of whom there are always the greatest number; of the next higher
fill his own pockets!' 'Will you please be silent?' 'Vewy good!' Then he
fill whole volumes to demonstrate their merits, when they relate to a
filled all the passages and alleys of the Bazaar. But there were no
filled by the domestic serfs--the men on one side and the women on the
filled his glass he changed his mind and altered it to his usual stake
filled his soul with joy.
filled with blood and the color rapidly came and went in his face.
filled with her firm, bold writing.
filling their bags. On seeing Alpatych, Ferapontov turned to him:
finally and decisively. "It is not enough for me to know what I have in
finally there were six thousand rubles for his outfit and various other
finances.
find a state in which he felt that though idle he was fulfilling his
find an answer to these terrible questions.
find another as smart."
find him alone. When he came in and saw an hussar of the line recounting
find out at what distance there were other French troops. They reckoned
find out where Dolokhov was and whether he would come that evening.
find place in her? But she was very happy. As they were nearing home she
find some way of taking on herself the excess of grief that crushed her
find the true path out of the labyrinth of lies!
find their wars and battles carried out in accordance with previously
find what it should do at that most difficult moment. And as soon as the
find you another place."
finding any confirmation of the ideas that occupied him.
finding everything upside down everywhere. Thus he stumbled on Bagovut's
finding pleasure in drawing out the human qualities of the embittered,
finding there stabling more than sufficient for their horses, went on,
finds a justification.
fine ancestral Rostov house and estate near Moscow. It was not necessary
fine gray eyes, and on his delicate lips the same capacity for varying
fine place! Why are you not eating anything, gentlemen?" Nesvitski was
fine weather. A short, swarthy lieutenant colonel of hussars with thick
fine young daredevil of an hussar married and settled down. Among these
fine!"
finger at his master. "They are on the scent of the cubs..." he
finger before his nose and smiling. "You shall tell me all about that
finger, "then I have nothing to answer for; but if it is valid, no
finger? I don't love it, but just try to cut it off!"
fingered his papers, closed the bureau again, and sat down at the table
fingers spread out before his eyes said:
fingers to his lips he hastened away.
fingers together and the badge was between them. Then he approached
fingers twitched nervously.
fingers, drew out a gold imperial, and lifting his eyebrows gave it to
fingers.
finish because their eyes meeting said the rest.
finish dealing, and then Ilyushka will come with his chorus."
finish, and laughed at everything.
finished dressing and with her old nurse's big shawl wrapped round her.
finished her tea and evidently needed a pretext for being angry
finished learning, and then I will do something. I only pray God that
finished phrases of general interest. These sayings were prepared in the
finished quickly.
finished speaking to him, and now he continued to speak to another who
finished the melody merged with another instrument that began almost the
finished with the Tartar, whom they covered with an overcoat, the
finished. She jumped up and hugged and kissed him. "Nicholas, Nicholas!"
fire and pressed it there!"
fire and where cavalry should gallop and infantry should run. But even
fire for the first time.
fire glowed--the first of those that were beginning in Moscow. To the
fire in several places. The buildings in Carriage Row, across the river,
fire more discipline (obtainable only by movement in masses) is needed
fire was worth seeing. It was a tough job you set us there, my word!
fire!"
fire, "a plump man gets thin, but for a thin one it's death. Take
fire, and overwhelm with shellfire the enemy's battery, against which
fire, and the frosts--and instead of genius, stupidity and immeasurable
fire, for Moscow had to burn as every village, factory, or house must
fire.
fire. From pain, cold, and damp, a feverish shivering shook his whole
fire. One glow had long been visible and everybody knew that it was
fire. Toward two o'clock the regiment, having already lost more than
fired it suddenly became as bright as noon. He galloped to the bridge.
fireworks at Zakret, Count Bennigsen's country seat.
firing at the Augesd Dam and was looking at the killed and wounded left
firing in the valley. Not a single muscle of his face--which in those
firing them at Tushin's battery.
firing was, he began to look for the general and his staff where they
firm and resolute--they were those of Napoleon. He had just finished
firm faces surrounded his benefactor on all sides. But though they were
firm voice:
firmly in hand. And this is what they have let it come to! Villains!
firmly resolved not to call on the Rostovs again and to forget the whole
firmly.
firmness, and expedition. I consider myself fortunate to have such a
firmness, and success which your intellect, military talent, and the
firmness, looking with a changed and inspired expression at the spot
first Kutuzov stood still while the regiment moved; then he and the
first appearance in society. Anna Pavlovna greeted him with the nod she
first approximation to a cause that seems to him intelligible and says:
first child who was delicate, when they had to change the wet nurse
first division of the Second Army.
first experienced this strange and fascinating feeling at the Sloboda
first fortification but was driven back, for on emerging from the wood
first glance at Natasha's face, and wept on her shoulder with sorrowful
first he had ever written. Boris and Natasha were at the other window
first irregularly at varying intervals--trata... tat--and then more and
first learned to say "pear" and then "granny," that this son should now
first letter which came soon after he had left home, Prince Andrew had
first loved her. He thought of her pregnancy and felt sorry for her and
first meeting with Potemkin. And he saw before him a plump, rather
first not only what had been said but also what Kutuzov would have liked
first of all to know in what the nation's life consists.
first of one and then of another priest.
first pair of gloves, a man's, he said that Pierre could not know their
first period of his service, hard as he tried and much as he reproached
first person in this house; she's my best friend," cried the prince.
first regiment roared "Hurrah!" so deafeningly, continuously, and
first second. "A baby? What baby...? Why is there a baby there? Or is
first sign that occurs to him and in his turn has offered that as an
first sleigh over a cradle hole in the snow of the road, and each of
first the family felt some constraint in intercourse with Prince Andrew;
first thing he saw was the pale face and trembling jaw of a Frenchman,
first thought of this filled her heart with gladness.
first time all the cruelty of his rejection of her, the cruelty of his
first time since their encounter concerning Telyanin. Rostov, feeling
first to Pierre, then to some drink, then named Prince Vasili in an
first to catch his eye. He sent him.
first understand him. At length when he had understood and looked in the
first'; that's what the old folks used to tell us," he added rapidly.
first, and I said something disagreeable to him. He replied. I flared
first-born more than all her other children and even reproached herself
first.
fist for fear of losing what it holds, and therefore perishes, the
fist, and tapped it on the floor, making the sparks fly, while he
fit to be my sister's companion."
five hundred thousand men, and the downfall of Napoleonic France, on
five men between him and Dolokhov with his bluish-gray uniform.
five o'clock. There were no ladies present except Speranski's little
five times. He entered the room softly. The little princess, plump and
fix his whole attention. A healthy man can tear himself away from the
fixed above his head. Then he took out a knife, cut something, closed
fixed and frightened eyes, crossing themselves, bowed and kissed the old
fixed in a chosen spot, vigorously holding its tail erect, shining and
fixed on her.
fixed on two saddles and covered with a horsecloth, a small samovar was
fixed on.
fixed straight on his son's. Something twitched in the lower part of the
fixed, and then a shiver passed down her broad neck and the corners of
fixedly at whatever her eyes chanced to fall on. This solitude exhausted
fixing on one of those four men, whom he could not clearly see for the
flag let it fall from his hands. It swayed and fell, but caught on the
flagging spirit of the troops would not permit it.
flames. Why had he fought the marauder? Pierre answered that he "was
flank and drive it into the Bohemian mountains according to plan, were
flank and the shifting of the whole field of the forthcoming battle from
flank now that it is nearly four o'clock and the battle is lost?
flank with but half as many men. (Poniatowski's action against Utitsa,
flank, a noncommissioned officer who had stopped beside the dead men,
flank--still more obstinately. We should have attacked Napoleon in the
flank. If you have seen amiss, sir, do not allow yourself to say what
flank. In the center Tushin's forgotten battery, which had managed to
flank. The officer of the suite ventured to remark to the prince that
flank..." here the officer paused. "Well, you see, that's difficult to
flanks of his sweating chestnut gelding with all the anger the count
flanks of the battery that is to bombard the entrenchment on the left,
flanks was more than six miles, even if the messenger were not killed
flapping against its staff.
flashed with a cruel light.
flashes and thunderclaps, but "we will not be that child."
flattered by his rapidly established intimacy with the French marshals,
flattered him, and he submitted to them.
flattering to him. At first it seemed strange that the son of an obscure
flattering--quite simply and naturally.
flayed, some not, and broken-down carts beside which solitary soldiers
flaying dead horses, and so on, soon showed a great liking and aptitude
fleches were, but where Pierre was the smoke of the firing made it
fleches) to lead his division through the woods, Napoleon agreed, though
fleches. The smoke spread out before them, and at times it looked as if
fled from Moscow and had been hiding in its vicinity. The Russians who
flee as to an inviolable bulwark and protection," there again kindled in
flee, considering himself lost. He pretends to fall into a swoon and
fleeing crowd. A mounted general separated himself from the infantry and
flesh with their hands. There was something horrible and bestial in
flew out empty; now they fly out laden. The beekeeper opens the lower
flew over the heads of Bagration and his suite, and fell into the
flexibility of her small limbs, and by a certain coyness and reserve of
flight and took it straight into her open heart, divining the secret
flight has been arranged to get all the old maids married off. Catiche
flight was so rapid that the Russian army pursuing the French could
flight, and on that the whole strength of the French was concentrated.
flight. Here and there among the cells containing dead brood and honey
flings the bags of incendiary material into the water, and approaches
flirt with, but dared not even speak smilingly to, any other woman; did
flitted about before the fire, and through the incessant crackling of
float on the surface of that milky sea of mist. The whole French army,
floated across the sky and occasionally veiled the sun, but toward
floating on its side in the middle of the pond. He rode to the keeper's
flogged or sent to Siberia--and still less for your serfs. If they are
flogging bench a stout man with red whiskers, in blue stockings and
flogging was only just over, and the executioner was releasing from the
floor and asked for some more water. The maid brought it.
floor, jerked her thin and rather short plait of hair to the front,
flopped against his pillow and his face. Each time the fly touched his
floundered about in that dirty pool like carp stuffed into a watering
floundering silvery fish in the watering can, on that dam over which for
flourished his castanets as if threatening someone. The soldiers,
flourishing his arm and saying something with a stern look. The blood
flourishing his arm, called him to enter.
flourishing his arms.
flourishing it.
flow from the same sources--the circumstances of his birth, education,
flow of these sounds.
flowed from him as evenly, inevitably, and spontaneously as fragrance
flowed, the soul-stirring rolling and crackling of musketry was heard,
flower tubs and hid there.
flower, you know--like some strawberry blossoms. Sometimes I am sorry
flowers and carry it to the hive, says that it exists to gather honey.
flows uninterruptedly from another.
flung himself to the ground to avoid being knocked over, and a riderless
flung it away. Tikhon caught it and handed it to a footman. The little
flung it on the ground.
flung out violently.
flung the exercise book away.
flushed and his eyes gleamed with resolution and anger.
flushed face in the lace of her mother's mantilla--not paying the least
flushed she turned round. He was looking at her with glittering eyes,
flushed with pleasure at the aptitude of this reply, but hardly had
flushed, and drawing her kerchief over her face went laughing out of
flushed, and gave the princess a frightened look.
flushing and addressing an adjutant who had ridden up, "so let him do
flushing.
flustered and heated, raised her voice, and sometimes pulled him by the
flustered voices here and there were heard calling and caps began to
fluttered, grew into harmonies, separated, blended, and again all
fluttering above the fire and remembered a Russian winter at his warm,
fluttering in that light. Tushin had not returned, the doctor had not
fly away into the sky, everyone must know me, so that my life may not be
fly upwards. The angel's upper lip was slightly raised as though
flying beneath him and at the sparkling sky, felt himself again in
flying. Lord have mercy on us sinners!"
fo'ward!"
foam-flecked horses, shouted "Coming!" and Konovnitsyn rushed into the
foe, Buxhowden, is vanquished; we can now turn our thoughts to the
folded shirt.
folded," she concluded, convincing herself that the details she had just
folding table and red chairs, then into the drawing room with a round
folk used to say: 'A sweating hand's an open hand, a dry hand's close.'
folk--the half-witted and other pilgrims who visited her without the
folk.' It will serve her right, she will be confused, but you will see
follow Pierre. Pierre, taking him by the arm, pulled him toward himself
follow them, and let us be persuaded that the less we let our feeble
follow with the things, and--now slipping in the mud, now splashing
follow, for this was clearly only a prelude.
followed behind, talking and shouting.
followed by Tikhon, who ran after him, handing him different articles of
followed by a Cossack.
followed by a ball flying past and striking the earth, a man, a gun, a
followed by a suite galloped up to him.
followed by their suites. Kutuzov, affecting the manners of an old
followed her on tiptoe. She did not notice him.
followed her. The men went into the study and little Nicholas Bolkonski
followed him in some excitement. Seeing the enemies exchanging friendly
followed him in, as if there were now no further need for permission to
followed proved that the commander in chief at that moment was absorbed
followed singly. The footmen began moving about, chairs scraped, the
followed the sovereign from Petersburg to Vilna and eclipsed the refined
followed them unnoticed by his uncle and sat down at the writing table
followed them. In front of him walked Kutuzov's groom leading horses
followed to check the soldiers and were involuntarily drawn into doing
followed, Balashev, who more than once lowered his eyes, involuntarily
following an unconscious sequence of ideas.
following budget:
following day. On that day, June 27, the preliminaries of peace were
following her example, would sob, and without permission would leave his
following him.
following the mass movements and general orders, and constantly studying
following the princess, whom a footman was helping into the carriage.
follows from the fact that it is cold; and not that a child who needs
follows the current of his own thoughts, "things will have gone too far.
follows:
folly, and cruelty. He thought of his wife. "They are all alike!" he
folly, and form of those devoted to us a body linked together by unity
fond of the French, and almost every day of the stay at Tilsit, French
fond of, was that of listener, especially when he succeeded in setting
fond), and ordinary conversation could again be heard. A tradesman's
food, cleanliness, and freedom--now that he was deprived of all this,
food, using his brain, or anything else) he cannot recognize this
fool!" cried Denisov, not pronouncing his r's. "Such ill luck! Such ill
fool!" said Denisov severely.
foolish. And running over the events of the day he remembered the French
foot began convulsively tapping the horse's side with the spur, and how
foot in the stirrup. His horse by habit made as if to nip his leg, but
foot through the town.
foot to the other she ran like a kitten the few steps to the door and
foot when but a few minutes before she had been wishing she had more
foot, and smilingly examined the princess' hair. It was evident that he
foot, bounded from the floor like a ball, and flew round the room taking
foot, flooding the dam, because it was full of the naked white bodies
foot--which everyone appreciated in view of her size and habitual
foot. Behind him a cavalry regiment was coming down the hill preceded by
footman dressed in knee breeches, shoes, and a swallow-tail coat, who
footman, two tradesmen, and a discharged soldier. After standing some
footmen and footmen in plumed hats. From the carriages emerged men
footmen, and awaited each expected dish with some anxiety. Everything
footpace to the place where the whips were getting the hounds together.
footpace. Petya rode beside him, longing to look round to see whether or
footsteps beyond the door, both halves of it were opened rapidly; all
footsteps running along the path. She rose and saw Dunyasha her maid,
footsteps. Pierre rose and said it was getting late. Prince Vasili gave
for Buonaparte's hatred of him.
for Christ's sake!"
for His help and for the victory.
for Mademoiselle Bourienne and went with her to the drawing room.
for Napoleon had passed the Arbat more than four hours previously on his
for Napoleon to come out, were standing at the porch, round his saddle
for Natasha was unpleasant to him and he had not once been to see the
for Natasha, with a pale and set face, entered the room from the door at
for Nicholas to marry a rich heiress. She felt this to be their last
for Petersburg alone.
for Petersburg two days later. Everybody was celebrating the victory,
for Prince Andrew.
for Princess Mary, she signed it, and it was given to Alpatych with
for Sonya and of his firm resolve to marry her. The countess, who had
for a battle had not yet expressed itself strongly enough, and because
for a long time hiding her flushed face in her hands trying to realize
for a long time, always in the same fog, descending and ascending hills,
for a long time. When the voices subsided, the footmen cleared away the
for a mere fancy?" said Nicholas taking her hand.
for a single moment during the whole service. He judged by the cautious
for a year; but Natasha attacked her brother with exasperation, proving
for aid to God and His saint.
for an instant at the sight of her, but immediately smiling again, and
for an official post, so he had come to Petersburg to look for one and
for another traveler, and for himself it's unavoidable, because he needs
for any enjoyment would not return again. Yet it was necessary to live
for anyone else, but gave him some of the best joys of his life; and the
for anything to get just what he liked done always. He had only to
for cavalry to act among the bushes and broken ground, as well as that
for certain, that the enjoyment of doing this good is the only sure
for common activity--in agriculture, trade, and every administration.
for dear Vera's sake."
for doing. He imagined all sorts of possible contingencies, just like
for eighty thousand rubles. Berg smiled meekly, kissed the count on the
for everything, the colonel moved forward and ordered the second
for five weeks, and then suddenly, with no fresh reason, fled back:
for fuel and kindled fires there.
for gaiety and laughter to them. Petya was in high spirits because
for girls and boys."
for half an hour repeating the same words to the various arrivals,
for he could not help being what he was--that (though he tried to
for her (she knew that) but it concealed something, and until she could
for her in particular. He had promised to be at the ball and introduce
for her intervention.
for her own sake.
for her passionate desire to get married, for her artificiality, and
for her son, kept demanding now a carriage (which they did not keep) to
for her, and sometimes I think she doesn't feel it as you or I would."
for her. When the little princess had grown accustomed to life at Bald
for her."
for herself should she glance round. Anna Mikhaylovna, with a meek,
for him always. He not only did not renounce them subsequently, but when
for him by a new light. He understood that latent heat (as they say in
for him the most difficult thing in life--to say an unpleasant thing
for him to arrange his new life without receiving thirty thousand in
for him to go on, but as he seemed quite decided to say no more she
for him to inspire the people in the capitals and arouse the nation in
for him to meet ladies at dinners and balls in Petersburg.
for him to think that anything disgraceful had happened to his beloved
for him to vent his wrath on. Trembling and panting the old man fell
for him undecided. Already from his military experience and what he had
for him, Prince Bagration sat at dinner, talking with some commanding
for him, because, after his loss to Dolokhov (for which, in spite of all
for him, but again pressed on him so that they jammed his leg, and those
for him, she would not give way. Coldly, without looking at her son,
for him, that he paid no attention to it. The aunt was just speaking of
for him.
for him.
for him. That's the sort of fellow he is. His father keeps a cookshop
for him?" he thought, and opening the door he let the boy pass in first.
for himself, and in a nervously emotional and softened mood he went out
for himself. As is often the case with those gifted with an ardent
for his horses, and when he had had his tea he went to bed.
for his last reconnoitering expedition, and was awaiting Denisov, who
for his part tried to pretend to the count that he considered these
for his removal from town, and that you have even accepted papers from
for his reply, surrounded him, and led him to the drawing room. It was
for his ride.
for how can we, miserable sinners that we are, know the terrible and
for however man's free will may be restricted, as soon as we recognize
for in either case millions of obstacles may arise to prevent its
for instance as all those which led the French armies to Russia, is
for instructions... From the Consistory, from the Senate, from the
for irony a fresh one was now added--allusions to stepmothers and
for it and feared to send him to the front, and like Dokhturov he
for it--the kind of good-natured, fussy shallowness necessary for the
for it. Moscow was burned because it found itself in a position in which
for it. The one thing that recalled the patriotic fervor everyone had
for it; but when her youngest: the scapegrace who had been bad at
for its storms.
for itself the best position for a general engagement and found such a
for letting a private traveler have the courier horses. But the officer
for life, but I don't understand that, I forget quickly."
for me to bear.... Excuse me, good-by!" and suddenly she began to cry
for me."
for more than anything else in the world, did not know how to approach
for mutilation and death, the words of posterity about their having been
for my civilian clothes? Surely not! He would understand on whose side
for no one believed it to be possible; it resulted from a most complex
for not strictly obeying the doctor's orders?
for nothing, and deep in his heart experienced a gloomy and stern
for our defeat by the memory of former victories; and the words of
for partisan warfare. At night he would go out for booty and always
for permission to serve in the army.
for philosophical meditation (to which he himself was particularly
for proprietors who perish morally, bring remorse upon themselves,
for refusing the command of the army, yet blamed him for such excessive
for reinforcements and all said that the Russians were holding their
for saving his life.
for shame! It would be better if you went to the war."
for some days in Moscow and was staying as usual at his father's house.
for some reason and shaking himself free.
for something, for some quality, for some purpose, or for some reason,
for that sort of thing and a young man fears to bind himself and prizes
for that very evening. But despite all these measures the men, who had
for that was the affair of the sovereign, but as far as she personally
for the French vanguard; Rostov, as a careful squadron commander, wished
for the Queen, or for Madame Elizabeth? Nothing!" and he became more
for the Russians was, and was bound to be, that we were brought nearer
for the accomplishment of his role, so much as all those round him who
for the actors and then amused at them. She looked at the faces of the
for the aged? And is it not a palpable, unquestionable good if a
for the approaching chief.
for the attainment of that purpose.
for the blood to drip off, and anxiously glancing round with restless
for the children. I am nursing and my milk was spoiled.... Petya was at
for the consequences.
for the courage he needed and which he knew would not stand the sight of
for the cup was an hussar who wanted a drink; but he neither knew nor
for the deliverance of Russia from hostile invasion.
for the fight. Take up the spear and shield and arise to help us;
for the first fortnight. She received letters from her relations to
for the first time quite closely, with all its wrinkles and details,
for the first time vividly imagined what was in store for her there at
for the first time.
for the future, Pierre's journeys and occupations, the war, and so
for the future?... Yes and no. The chief reason was a sudden, vivid
for the hare to run on the balk and the borzois did not overtake him so
for the hive life--that is to say, for history--whatever had to be
for the hundredth time. He took a pack of cards that lay on the table
for the infantry!" he exclaimed as Petya rode up to him.
for the life of man is expressed by muscular movements and muscular
for the mistake, but because he was an object of sufficient importance
for the money."
for the most part savage and brutal. One motive only they all had in
for the other columns to arrive, advanced no further.
for the pleasure of telling you the truth. For Gallicisms I won't be
for the princess' things. And don't go to any meeting yourself, do you
for the salvation and glory of Russia.
for the society of ladies, began to come often to the house, and the
for the sovereigns.
for the strengthening of the heart by faith and hope, and its animation
for the talkative doctor to go.
for the twenty-thousandth time and lay down. But hardly had he done so
for the unknown x itself the conditions under which that force becomes
for the welfare of Russia. In Prince Andrew's eyes Speranski was the man
for their guests' arrival.
for their pipes, smoked, went to fetch more tea from Sonya--who
for their sake I should like to liberate the serfs. You may not have
for them with my ax, this way: 'What are you up to?' says I. 'Christ
for them--did not go up to the dying man, but passed by him, joined the
for themselves, so that the army might have its future provided for.
for theology, ethics, and philosophy. History surveys a presentation of
for these simple, kindly people.
for they could not be carried out, and though they entitled one
for this affair, or for blood to be shed over it.... You were not right,
for this dinner. The count had been a member and on the committee of
for three days, and not one of them knew or imagined what was in store
for three months. He had what the doctors termed "bilious fever." But
for trees and gullies for men and continually discovering his mistakes.
for us.
for us. The field marshal looks on and waits for letters addressed
for value received. And to avoid being imprisoned for the remainder, as
for war cannot be conducted successfully without unity of command, and
for we know that he could not restrain the troops from attacking at
for what he would say.
for which I am ready to die."
for which he had paid seven hundred rubbles was not worth half that sum.
for which he was long unable to forgive himself, "I have lost a little,
for which her partner came to seek her, put an end to her discourse with
for whom he longed appear before him and, having pressed her hand to his
for whom they were waiting. Some walked thoughtfully up and down,
for wine.
for you to talk or think of such matters. It is no easier for me; but,
for you," said Natasha, with a responsive smile. "You should have
for you. Well, thank God!" and received her presents with another
for your neighbor? Have you ever thought of your tens of thousands
for your wife is ready. Princess Mary will take her there and show her
for your work. And lastly you too, peasants, come from the forests where
for!"
for. Am I not right, good Christians?" said the tall youth, with a
for. On the contrary, it seemed to her certain that had he not been
for?" He rose and went up to Boris.
forage for the horses or the cattle. That was a misfortune no one could
forbade Father Augustin to remove icons or the relics of saints; now
forbidden them to fight the Russians, they would have killed him and
forbidding the men to disperse about the town, sternly forbidding any
forbidding us to eat of the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge is specially
force nothing had seemed to him strange or dreadful: neither the corpse
force of free will, incomprehensible in itself but of which everyone is
force of the wind is beyond the influence of the buds. I see only a
force of this or that detachment. Sometimes--when there is not a coward
force that feeling of agitation and expectation in Pierre which he had
force their way through them with bayonets.
force upon Kutuzov's line of communication with the troops that were
force, and so on, but we are conscious of the force of life in man and
force, as in their simplicity some historians think who say that the
force, so variously understood by the historians themselves, is really
forced on me. Even now" (he emphasized the word) "I am ready to receive
forces equal to one A gave a resultant equal to a thousand times A--the
forces now are, and then..."
forces ready to manifest themselves just as strangely, unexpectedly, and
forces they are obliged to admit, in addition to the insufficient
forces, but will always be a mean--what in mechanics is represented by
forces, did people begin to assure themselves that they had desired this
forces, so as to know his bearings should he be sent to execute an
forefather Adam to our own times, is that temple reared which is to be a
forehead and a long face of unusual and peculiar whiteness, who was
forehead as he stooped to kiss her hand. She wished to love him as a
forehead was moist. Prince Andrew touched the head with his hand; even
forehead, wetting him with her tears. Then after a pause she said:
forehead.
foreign policy, the attention of Russian society was at that time keenly
foreigner who sees her, even if ignorant of her significance as the
foremost began to turn, while those behind began to halt. With the same
foresee everything and avert the general course of events, and it is
foreseen everything. But the contingencies are endless."
foreseen--are met, and on how and by whom the whole matter is handled.
forest and the road, smoking campfires could be seen and indefinite
forest the horses began to snort and sweated visibly.
forest. Among the trees a man with long legs and long, swinging arms,
forestall him, threw off his fur coat and ran on tiptoe through the
forestalled, my dear! It was thought of long ago. It is done in all the
forever and there came into being something nondescript, neither
forever by not asking to remain attached to the sovereign's person, but
forever remained a cruel memory to them both. He had not time to say it,
forever, forever!" she pleaded.
forever."
forewarned, takes measures accordingly."
forget all that.... She says: 'I shall love him always, but let him be
forget that I do not regard either myself or you as having been at all
forget the past, to forgive me whatever wrong I may have done her, and
forget to pause after this mot to give time for its due appreciation.
forget us. Is he here?"
forget. But, my dear, will you not give us a little hope of touching
forgetfulness of all the rules of decorum, pushed forward to the
forgets either an insult or a service. I offer you my friendship. That
forgetting that it was unbecoming for the girls to see men undressed,
forgetting that she was dancing with a grown-up partner she bent her
forgetting the geographical position of the Niemen, thought that what
forgetting. We must have another entree. Ah, goodness gracious!" he
forgive me." Pierre involuntarily glanced at the loose button. "And if
forgive you!" And she crossed herself. "Lord forgive him! My dear, what
forgiveness. "All will be forgiven her, for she loved much; and all will
forgiveness?"
forgiving the penitent.
forgo the charity of this house.
forgot everything. But in time he grew used to this demand. Knowing that
forgot it.
forgot them. His head was burning, he felt himself bleeding to death,
forgotten all that had happened to her. She no longer complained of her
forgotten for which servants were sent back, that they had decided to
forgotten me. He paid me attentions in those days," said the countess,
forgotten the thousands and millions of hints and expectations to the
forgotten. Our duty, my dear, is to rectify his mistake, to ease his
form a clear conception of the man. Pfuel was one of those hopelessly
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
formal "you" instead of the intimate "thou" in speaking to her. The
formalities necessary for a divorce, which would be explained to him by
formality, but they winked behind his back and tried to mislead him at
formally.) "Though I don't agree with the gentleman..." (he hesitated:
formation, now in the equipment employed, now, and most usually, in the
formed a definite idea of what an attack was and were expecting to hear
formed a group and some soldiers crowded round them. Their faces all
formed a star-shaped figure, scarcely swaying their bodies and with
formed in which float the diplomatists, who imagine that they have
formed into detachments and began firing. Orlov-Denisov, still waiting
formed of him soon after his arrival at the shed. With his knowledge
formed plans, the only conclusion to be drawn is that those descriptions
formed the picket line on either side, there were many curious onlookers
formed up at intervals, and wheeled round other similar masses of
formed.
former acts of self-sacrifice she had been happily conscious that they
former agility and boldness, and under the influence of the fright
former days. Her features were more defined and had a calm, soft,
former divinely appointed aims of the Jewish, Greek, or Roman nations,
former gloomy frame of mind, concerning vengeance, killing, and
former lively tone.
former position. A huge, broad-shouldered gunner, Number One, holding
former pupil of his.
former purity of her love for Prince Andrew had perished. And again in
former strength. For Denisov, too, the memories awakened by the name of
former war. "The Emperor will teach your Suvara as he has taught the
former way of life. And now I wish you a good journey, my dear sir," he
formerly destroyed all his mental edifices, no longer existed for him.
formerly to be with Pierre, and came to see him every day. To Pierre as
formerly when he did not grasp what lay before him or was said to
forming up. "One word from me, one movement of my hand, and that ancient
forms of pleasure--balls, promenades, concerts, and theaters--but she
forms of town life perished, until finally all was merged into one
forth clouds of smoke. It was no longer a battle: it was a continuous
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
forth is equally right with the child who stands under the tree and says
fortification of the Kremlin, and drew up a brilliant plan for a future
fortification.
fortnight twenty-five thousand, and so on. By the autumn of 1813 the
fortnight's retreat, the Russian troops had halted and after a fight had
fortunate!" he thought.
fortunately for her, she felt her eyes growing misty, she saw nothing
forty miles all the peasants were moving away and leaving their villages
forty miles? I couldn't hold them in, my hands grew numb in the sharp
forty to whom Denisov had introduced him.
forty with a long waist, a long closely cropped head, deep wrinkles,
forward and back to save himself from falling. An old, noncommissioned
forward and everybody shouted "hurrah!"
forward beside Schmidt with the bullets merrily whistling all around,
forward shading his eyes with his small hand to look at the French.
forward toward the old man with a forced and timid smile.
forward with his breast toward the swords, meaning them to pierce it.
forward, and experienced great happiness.
forward, halted, and again moved on, and from all sides vehicles and men
forward.
forward.
forward. "Company commanders!" he shouted in a voice accustomed to
forward. "It's in my ears. But perhaps it's music of my own. Well, go
forward. Alpatych, mastering his offended feelings, kept pace with
forward.) "Such a question cannot be put; it is senseless! The question
forwarded by courier to the commander in chief.
fought and where the obvious disintegration of the French army began;
fought on a chosen and entrenched position with forces only slightly
fought out in physical philosophy. Theology stood on guard for the
fought there. This was shown first by the fact that there were no
fought, on the twenty-fifth not a shot was fired by either side, and on
fought.
foul-mouthed devils, you brutes, I'll give it to you!" shouted he,
found a kind of tantalizing satisfaction.
found an expression of his love of her. Occasionally amid these memories
found expression in calling her maid "my dear" and speaking to her with
found her nephew there with his tutor, and a letter from Prince Andrew
found him, but Marshal Davout was one of those men who purposely put
found himself in a corner of the shed among men who were laughing and
found in it a new enjoyment.
found in my mind the text from the Gospel: "The life was the light of
found it preferable and more advantageous to live in the count's house
found it very strange here on Russian soil to encounter this hostile,
found it, I've found it!" he added.
found ourselves in my bedroom where there is a double bed. He lay down
found the Cossacks, inquired for the regiment operating with Platov's
found the Prussian army. Boris, speaking with deliberation, told them in
found the count with it in his hand, sobbing and laughing at the same
found the priest and got the passport? Who raised the money? I did it
found them in Pierre's hat, where he had carefully tucked them under the
found them to be so tiresome that it wearied him to look at or listen to
found to be false. And that morning Colonel Michaud had ridden round the
found words he had long been seeking.
found, Napoleon also gave instructions that the Polish colonel who
found, and the whole pack, joining together, rushed along the ravine
foundation.
foundation. Prince Bagration turned to the old colonel:
founded a society and in consequence has great influence, they say."
founders.
four dead. Two men in peasant coats ran away at the foot of the wall,
four different provinces. He had arranged this for himself so as to
four thousand, not more, and not even that; but even were they ten
four till six o'clock and did not begin their deliberations all that
four weeks.
four years before; and so he was taken aback when quite a different
four. Everything pleased it. Now it would roll on its back, yelping with
fourteen, I am only one eighth weaker than he, but when I have exchanged
fragmentary sentences tried to explain about a doll which she produced
fragrance of flowers. A beekeeper, seeing the bee collect pollen from
frame, and as usual began to tell her what he had been doing that
francais," said Dolgorukov, with grave satisfaction. "Good, wasn't it?"
frantically, had such an effect that they managed to squeeze through
freak of fate made the impossible possible. The success of the trick
free agricultural laborers--this being one of the first examples of
free and more inevitable to one who knows the mental condition of him
free but on the contrary at that meeting to bind him to her forever.
free to pass himself off as a bachelor.
free to take his goods back to his village and no one may hinder him
free use of his fists. At first he saw nothing reprehensible in
free will do not exist because at an unknown period of time we sprang
free will we arrive at absurdity, while by admitting our dependence on
free, and turning sideways felt the pulse and reflected a moment. The
free. But if I examine an act performed a month ago, then being in
free.' Isn't that lovely and noble! Yes, very noble? Isn't it?" asked
freedom I could understand it and should be the first to enter the army;
freedom and a certain measure of inevitability. And always the more
freedom and entirely subject to the law of inevitability.
freedom in man, for a being uninfluenced by the external world, standing
freedom of Poland or the greatness of Russia, or the balance of power in
freedom of his movements.
freedom we see in any action the less inevitability do we perceive, and
freedom which he experienced only during those weeks.
freedom, equality, and progress (these, I think, cover the ground). Let
freedom, equality, enlightenment, or civilization, and as the connection
freedom, she begged Princess Mary to forget everything and forgive her
freedom.
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
freely--and Petya adored her. Above all, they were gay because there was
frequently addressing one to whom the title was still a novelty.
frequently at home.
frequently on the battery and spent bullets buzzed and whistled around.
frequently than the soldiers, but they already give commands. An
frequently. A general does nothing but command the troops, indicates the
frequently. But wherever it may turn there always will be the wave
fresh air should remain at home," he would add with extreme logic, as
fresh and attractive. The music became more and more audible. The melody
fresh and dewy. A herd of cattle was being driven along the road from
fresh and elegant as the other. Prince Andrew rose and politely placed a
fresh and pretty face yet more attractive.
fresh conflict to finish the enemy and did this not to deceive anyone,
fresh decorations was particularly proud at this time, seemed to him a
fresh from the army, an acquaintance of his own, who often danced at
fresh troops, spoke of the hardships already endured by the people, of
fresh, dewy, and cheerful. The sun, just bursting forth from behind a
fresh-looking, handsome old man with a large gray mustache.
freshly formed to defeat him wherever he may appear. May the ruin he
freshness even at night or when the road passed through the forest; the
freshness of atmosphere of the French army, which was so alien to us.
freshness, an unconsciousness of her own powers, and an as yet untrained
fretted to utter that word, and letting the borzois slip he galloped
friend Bolkonski, whom he had not seen for two years.
friend as if she did not consider her worthy to hear what she meant to
friend's hand.
friend's influence.
friend's look was now still more clearly expressed in the smile with
friend, Mademoiselle Bourienne, sends you kisses.
friend, but Nicholas avoided him. With that peculiar feeling of youth,
friend, it has of late become hard for me to live. I see that I have
friend, stay here at the staff and tomorrow we'll have a talk."
friend, that I look on marriage as a divine institution to which we must
friend, the princess' eyes--large, deep and luminous (it seemed as if at
friend--is your friend," she corrected herself. (It seemed to her that
friend.
friend.
friendly looks and heard friendly words. Yesterday's adjutant reproached
friendly manner, "We are on the eve of a public disaster and I haven't
friendly with Vera--that dear Vera."
friendly words to officers he had known in the Turkish war, sometimes
friends and associations, besides the comforts of life of which he had
friends went together to Prince Andrew's door. Natasha opened it
friends--you among them--and as for the rest I only care about them
friends." (He smiled still more pleasantly.) "I wished to ask the
friendship for you," he repeated. "He's joining the hussars."
friendship for you. She was not expecting us?"
friendship with the father whom Nicholas could not remember--all this
friendship's sake he is leaving the university and me, his old father,
friendship, of his various meetings with him, and especially of the last
friendship. And that hurts me." There were tears in her eyes and in her
friendship?" remarked the count in an inquiring tone.
friendships? He is a man who has been more than a father to me!" The
fright if they did not leave that very night. Without any pretense she
fright were amused by Pierre's lisp and the new words they had not heard
frighten me... You've seen the princess? Is it true she's in love with
frightened and ashamed to have accepted charity in a house where such
frightened and bewildered Mitenka. The conversation and the examination
frightened by what he had done.
frightened eyes and seemed merrier than usual. She understood hardly
frightened eyes gazed straight before her, evidently prepared for the
frightened face and bent down.
frightened faces. The youngest child, a boy of about seven, who wore an
frightened gesture of Anatole's. "First, the letters," said he, as if
frightened glance as if not understanding why this was done to him. A
frightened the beast, and it rushed forward onto the hunter's gun,
frightened!"
frightened, just got frightened and hid her face in her hands. Then he
frightened, realizing that there was not that barrier of modesty she had
frightened, sickly little face.
frightened. "I believe the whole of Moscow will burn, there's an awful
frigid politeness.
frill that surrounded her face. Her face had shriveled, her upper lip
frock and hair.
from Austerlitz, where he alone had withdrawn his column unbroken and
from Berlin with the very latest details of the Emperor Alexander's
from Captain Timokhin again flitted over his face. He turned away with
from Davout's corps. From the talk of the Germans Pierre learned that
from Davout, who was now called Prince d'Eckmuhl, to turn the Russian
from Denisov, rode past too, at the rear of his squadron--that is, alone
from Dron, Alpatych contented himself with that, though he not only
from Erfurt. Helene spoke of him as "mon page" and treated him like a
from French to Russian.
from His Highness the Archduke Ferdinand and here are these," he said,
from Kutuzov, he felt the more irritated the more he felt himself
from Moscow back to the Niemen were like those in a game of Russian
from Moscow, and that there had been some spies and agents of Napoleon
from Napoleon proposing peace and falsely dated from Moscow, though
from Napoleon, and from the awkward wording of Memorandum No. 178. It
from Petersburg, the very vortex of life, these people lagged behind
from Petersburg. There was no general plan of action. The vacillation
from Pierre. "Call the interpreter."
from Prince Andrew in Switzerland in which he gave her strange and
from Prince Andrew, availing themselves of Kutuzov's absence and of the
from Raevski's battery a second time, made his way through a gully to
from Russia, he risked being forestalled on that road by the French
from Smolensk and two miles from the main road to Moscow.
from Smolensk to Borodino. The French army pushed on to Moscow, its
from Sonya freed him from the knot that fettered him and from which
from Vienna to Znaim was shorter and better than the road for the
from a courtier's point of view (and in an Emperor's vicinity all became
from a dream and lifted his head.
from a habit acquired during his sufferings.
from a medicine bottle into a wineglass half full of water.
from a young girl either such firmness or such skill in nursing a
from actions which would torment him afterwards."
from all sides of the inactivity and disorder of the French; the flow of
from an ensign and became Emperor. Well, well, God grant it," he added,
from army commanders for green oats mown down by the soldiers, when
from behind his company and, though he was a middle-aged man and not in
from behind still came the shouts: "Onto the ice, why do you stop? Go
from behind, alluding to his shabby cart horse, "only I didn't wish to
from bondage glorify the name of Russia!"
from both sides and was fought in the simplest and most artless way.
from bursting into a peal of ringing laughter even before they had a
from carousals back to gossip, reading, and wine. Drinking became more
from childhood as quite an everyday event was wrong. "Is it just
from choking, Sonya, pale and trembling with fear and agitation, sat
from corporal punishment, and could not avoid expressing it by cries of
from correspondence with those abroad that Bezukhov had obtained the
from every side, and invoked his terrible name to shatter each other's
from everybody else.
from excitement, asked the aide-de-camp whether he would be permitted
from finishing, she bent her head with a movement as graceful as
from having experienced the change of feeling toward Napoleon and the
from her neck the necklace the young Armenian was wearing, and the young
from her old world--a world in which it was impossible to know what
from her regrets, desires, remorse, hopes, and sins.
from her. "Destroying the army, destroying the men! And why? Go, go and
from her. Karagina had replied that for her part she was agreeable, and
from him and glanced sadly at one another with a sigh at his naivete.
from him as from a common enemy. This happened not because they were
from him than another; there were none of those uncertain and undefined
from him! However, God grant that everything turns out well!" (She
from him. He was glad, and at the same instant began to pity the
from him. She felt that her unity with her husband was not maintained
from him. The alliance with Prussia, Austria's treachery, Bonaparte's
from his bit, tramping the planks of the bridge with his hoofs, and
from his commanders. During his absence he had been promoted captain,
from his horse in a pool of blood. Nobody gave him a look or thought of
from his parents, in which they told him of Natasha's engagement to
from his pocket began asking the officer in how far the road before them
from his promise and set him completely free.
from his shoulder and pressed her to his heart. His capers reminded
from his suite, which waited respectfully, began to pace up and down
from home, at dinners, parties, and balls.
from it, the death of Prince Andrew, Natasha's despair, Petya's death,
from it. And from that hut, while Denisov was speaking, a general with a
from it. Through these forests Denisov and his party rode all day,
from its aim. Kutuzov's wish was to attack next day, and the whole
from its original principles. And so toward the end of the year he went
from laughing.
from me, I wish to know absolutely how things are."
from me," said he. "I have served twenty-three years and have done no
from memoirs, reports, projects, and so forth, have attributed to this
from men above him; he himself never gives an order. The noncommissioned
from my father's remarks and his talks with Michael Ivanovich I know all
from one paragraph to another with his hard nail.
from one strip to another to walk a mile, then he stripped the flowers
from one to another, grew stronger and reached its climax when they all
from our scouts. Here are two letters from Count Nostitz and here is one
from outside, and had paper rubles distributed to them."
from page to page," he thought. "I used to understand what a 'corner'
from passing, "won't this be too much for poor Uncle at a moment when he
from present affairs, but then he suddenly started and his face assumed
from seeing his face, moved away.
from several other forces, like the movement of the wheels; others again
from side to side, gave a couple of leaps and with a swish of its tail
from sitting on the outer sill was being forced out by two footmen, who
from soldiers, wagons, and the filthy traces of a camp--he saw villages
from that room and taking Natasha by the arm said something to her.
from the Emperor Alexander and am very glad to see you." He glanced with
from the French and standing in front of the Preobrazhensk regiment.
from the French, and when his eyes met those of the prisoners they
from the Guards just before this campaign. He behaved very well in
from the Revolution leaving the people to anarchy, and Napoleon alone
from the Tula to the Kaluga road and go to Tarutino, which was between
from the affairs of the Petersburg lodges, and lived almost entirely in
from the apes. They say this, not at all suspecting that thousands of
from the army and would certainly write to his father, but that the
from the bank under the horse's hind hoofs. Turning the horse sharply,
from the barn, flushed, sunburned, and perspiring, with a smell of
from the bench, and he rode to Fili where his carriages were waiting.
from the bonds of State and Church, a teaching of equality, brotherhood,
from the boy.
from the bridges and slipped stealthily and silently past the church of
from the commune.
from the cooperation of all the other coincident causes--to occasion the
from the council, tired and exhausted but eager and proud of the victory
from the court arrived, and on the first of May, Denisov was ordered to
from the crowd around, and at the same moment a mounted patrol of French
from the crumpled heap under the table would save him, now counted the
from the doctor to Pierre. To him, in a particularly respectful and
from the doctrine of the equality of man, or the very cruel wars and
from the fact that he had asked me several times whether N. and S. were
from the folds of her frock.
from the forest that skirted the highroad a large French convoy of
from the greater or lesser fulfillment by the rulers of these unknown
from the height of this perception all that had previously tormented and
from the highest quarters a confirmation of what they wanted to believe,
from the hill. There was no one now between the squadron and the enemy
from the hints contained in his letter and given by the little princess,
from the hot house carrying in their skirts plums they had plucked from
from the infinitely large to the infinitely small. The same is done by
from the low ground by the pond, a puff of white smoke appeared, then
from the man who gave it or from the Emperor and whether it had to be
from the marshal. What marshal this was, Pierre could not learn from the
from the mechanism, swung about in an arbitrary and aimless way without
from the mortification to which his wife had subjected him that he now
from the old count, the countess, Petya, Vera, Natasha, and Sonya, and
from the old countess. Nicholas felt himself irredeemably indebted
from the one army and back to Valuevo from the other. Other crowds,
from the orderly and began to mount.
from the other end of the corridor, Strauch, an Austrian general who on
from the other side of the door, and the officer--with pale face and
from the others. All was blended into one brilliant procession.
from the post and began pushing it into the pit.
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
from the right flank, beside which the carriage passed the company,
from the room with a moan either of pain or sorrow.
from the seat of war and Natasha's health began to improve and she
from the shed, and looking in that direction Prince Andrew recognized
from the shelf the first book that came to his hand (it was Caesar's
from the terrible sensations amid which he had lived that day and return
from the theater, had had supper and were grouped round the clavichord.
from the time Prince Kuragin asked for his passports. The reasons on
from the time he entered Moscow till the time he left it. The absence
from the truth in describing the condition of an army) and this is what
from the west to the east killing their fellow men, and the event
from the wood, mustered the men who were woodcutting, and, allowing the
from the wormwood that grew along a boundary rut, rubbed them in his
from thee, but live so that thou mayest be ready for anything. If it be
from their positions, they could not have made this last effort, for all
from them in practical activity. But when she heard of Prince Andrew's
from them, Pierre closed his eyes, seeing a vision of the country in
from them, and took up a book, or hurried of to the Club or to Apollon
from them; even the soldiers, usually pitiless enough, instead of taking
from themselves and from everyone else, expected great things of him,
from this distressful life, and leads it to its place of recompense and
from this insuperable antipathy to her, Princess Mary was agitated just
from those parts and knew the country well. His plan seemed decidedly
from those who blame him and who profess to know the ultimate aim of the
from under a sable hood, was still sitting there, and that Circassian
from under our noses," thought Denisov, continually peering forward,
from under the roofs of the houses. He met more people in the streets
from us any co-co-counsel."
from various people and retailing the town gossip.
from village, country, provincial, or even Moscow life--we may allot
from weeping and sat down beside Dr. Lorrain, who was sitting in a
from what side the beast would come and how he would set upon it. Hope
from what was in her own heart.
from whatever point of view--theological, historical, ethical, or
from which Berthier had aroused him. He could not stop what was going on
from which he had fired. He swayed like a drunken man, taking some steps
from which spectacles have just been removed, had also a frightened and
from which the action is regarded. So that the greater the conception of
from which the shouting came. He felt both frightened and pleased to be
from which we must break a way out."
from whom she could hear reassuring words to the effect that baby was
from within.
from worldliness, but not avoid (a) the service of the state, (b) family
from you. Or are you afraid of me?" he asked again.
from yours. I don't wish to marry," she answered positively, glancing at
from, a fire flared up and went out again, then another, and all along
from. Probably she is offended by it. She could not do such a thing!"
front and almost knocked her over. But the wolf jumped up more quickly
front and in ambush long before then. "It may be a mistake," thought
front and men four abreast, spread across the bridge and began to emerge
front of her looking with pleasure at the town, she bowed her head
front of it stood carriages without horses and things were being packed
front of the conflagration. In the middle of the street stood a French
front of the house to which Balashev was conducted, and now two French
front of the infantry, who had to wait.
front of the prisoners was left; they had all disappeared. The artillery
front of them all fled the Emperor, then the kings, then the dukes. The
front of them.
front of us.
front ranks carried it swaying to the very steps of the porch. The tall
front row of the circle not far from the Rostovs. Baron Firhoff was
front!" Then, like the crowing of cocks at sunrise, this was repeated by
front, but at Durrenstein, where I was, our attack began after five in
front, leaning on a stick and slightly limping. When he had advanced
front.
front.
front. I held my sword in my left hand, Count. All our family--the von
frontier, about people he had met in Switzerland who knew Pierre, and
frontier, and I have this moment received from Petersburg a note, in
frontier.
frost so that I threw down the reins--'Catch hold yourself, your
frost-bitten, and starving--and the column that had been presented to
frost-bound air.
frost-bound stillness, the troykas began to speed along the road, one
frost...."
frowned for an instant, but immediately mastering himself went up to the
frowned, and left the room with an expression of cold dignity.
frowned--partly from an increased pain in his head and partly at
frowning and addressed the esaul, conveying his own conjectures to him.
frowning and silent.
frowning and taking his daughter's hand; he did not kiss her, but only
frowning angrily and turning away from Pierre.
frowning suddenly. "Vereshchagin is a renegade and a traitor who will
frowning, looked at him from under his brows.
frowning.
froze and lagged behind on the road (in which case the order was to
fugitives, Prince Andrew, trying to keep near Kutuzov, saw on the slope
fulfill the demands of politeness, and she firmly resolved to maintain
fulfill the desires of Your Majesty."
fulfill the one which enjoined every Mason to set an example of moral
fulfilled if but approximately. When one of the opinions expressed
fulfillment of her forbidden earthly longing) Princess Mary sighed,
full and with the horses harnessed, stood at the front door. One by one
full height and addressing Michaud with a gracious and majestic gesture,
full of false teeth, as if she were trying to cheat old age.... Ha, ha,
full of genius and Russia would have been lost and the face of the world
full of life as themselves, but now so much to be pitied. "Memento
full of nervous vivacity all day.
full of self-confidence, a quality that always influenced Alexander.
full of well-being and prosperity for all. The European system was
full purity and strength.
full speed with her dress puffed out like a balloon, and, flushed and
full uniform and prepared to visit the commander in chief. His caleche
full vigor is an aim was for her evidently merely a pretext.
full, in a pale, almost starless, spring sky. Prince Andrew leaned his
full-faced man, looked around him with a naive smile of satisfaction
full-grown hare would cross the field now I'd show you what sort of
fully absorbed in these pursuits. When men were killed or wounded, when
fully understanding what she was asking of God in that prayer. She
fun at me.... Ah, well! Let him!" And he began reading Bilibin's letter
functions remains unnoticed. She talked only because she physically
fundamental convictions your own, join our brotherhood, give yourself up
fur cloak, and, beside Sonya and in front of her mother, mounted the
fur coat and leaving to perish those who were not merely his comrades
fur coat and, having seated himself in a sleigh, galloped on alone,
fur coat said that the mistress asked him to come to her bedroom.
fur-lined coat had turned upon him. "But I did not do it for my own
furies and rages at everyone and everything, seizes the letters, opens
furious, now at Boris, now at Bolkonski. "Yes, many stories! But our
furiously up, and then all eyes were turned on an approaching sleigh
furlough after Christmas to return with him to their regiment. His
furnishing a regiment, Bezukhov at once informed Rostopchin that he
further commands and appointments from His Imperial Majesty."
further strengthened in him by the high opinion his fellow prisoners
further that he was disagreeable and unnatural.
further the accomplishment of a stupendous result no one of them at all
fussily in the easy chair, "how is it Annette never got married? How
future campaign abroad. Kutuzov made no rejoinder or remark. The same
future daughter-in-law to old Prince Bolkonski while he was in Moscow
future life..."
future sister-in-law. 'Husbands' sisters bring up blisters,' but this
future son-in-law and on his daughter's happiness. The old princess
future with Sonya, and that was all clear and simple just because it
future.
fwashing him... Well, I've had a bit of fun I can tell you!" cried
gaiety with which Zherkov spoke, and to the intentional coldness of
gaily and complacently. But at the moment the first report was heard,
gaily.
gaily.
gain some advantage would attract the Emperor's attention by loudly
gained a step on his old comrades of the Cadet Corps; how in wartime
gained for him the general good will. This was his acknowledgment of
gained. He tried to prove to the Emperor the impossibility of levying
gaining the reputation "d' une femme charmante, aussi spirituelle que
gains the victory alone. "But death and suffering?" suggested another
galere?" occurred to him, and he began to laugh at himself.
gallant... with the fair" (he winked and smiled), "that's what the
gallop and as if by agreement all said the same thing. They all asked
gallop and using his leather whip, rode an officer, disheveled and
gallop round the room. Out of breath, he took the laughing child quickly
gallop so that he outstripped the others. Ahead, the enemy was already
gallop through the Moscow streets. He liked to hear those wild, tipsy
galloped after the general, causing the staff officers to smile as they
galloped ahead of the soldiers where there was a free space.
galloped along the front as hard as his horse could go, but still was
galloped along the line. At first he rode along the line of Bagration's
galloped full speed back again. The infantry moved in the same way,
galloped on to the village where he was told that the commander in chief
galloped on.
galloped to the place whence came the sounds of firing and where the
galloped up to Kutuzov and asked in the Emperor's name had the fourth
galloped up to Kutuzov with personal reproaches for having caused the
galloped up to him.
galloped up to the commander of the corps and began upbraiding him
galloping along the courtyard, but instead of holding the reins he waved
galloping back. Rostov, picking out one on a gray horse, dashed after
galloping off past Vasili the Beatified in the direction from which the
galloping toward him. They were our Uhlans who with disordered
game of patience. When she needed to cry, the deceased count would be
game without omitting a single dish or one of the wines. These latter
game, finds that the more he considers his play the more surely he
gap left by the collar, through which Matrena's brilliant smile was
garden at the back of the house. "Wait a bit--I'm coming down."
garden.
garments and with a transparent body, flying up to the clouds. And I
garments. And having once seen this he could not help being aware of it,
gasping men.
gate in a wooden fence and, stopping, pointed out to him a small wooden
gate?" thought he. Just then Mavra Kuzminichna appeared from behind
gates and a great battle would be fought there.
gateway.
gathered round Nicholas in the sitting room.
gathered round Rostov--a fresh arrival from the world outside--gradually
gathered round him, telling them what he knew and listening to their
gathering of Speranski's intimate acquaintances already assembled at
gatherings, everyone said that Countess Bezukhova had died of a
gauntlet of the Russian army. They abandoned one another, abandoned
gave Boris a similar smile.
gave a loud exclamation, flushed, and ran out of the room.
gave an order, and the dragoons formed up in line. The crowd moved
gave expression to his thoughts, and even to the same thoughts that had
gave her his view of the matter at a small and intimate gathering.
gave him a nickname ("our gentleman"), and made kindly fun of him among
gave him a peculiar vivacity and shiftiness of expression. This short
gave him a peculiarly innocent, childlike look, such as she had never
gave him almost the status of a hero. And Pierre felt that their opinion
gave him one with the fox. Here it is on my saddle! Do you want a taste
gave him the opportunity: Sonya's reading, any remark of the count's, or
gave his hand to the plague-stricken; but... but there are other acts
gave it to Karataev. "But give me the pieces that are over."
gave it to Kozlovski, stepped quickly to the window, and threw himself
gave it, losing a quarter of his army and lengthening his lines of
gave me to understand that that was my duty. But I replied that I should
gave no further orders and silently continued to walk on in front of the
gave orders that no one should leave his post. Now you, Captain," and he
gave rein to his Donets horse and galloped to intersect the path of the
gave some orders to his men. Petya held his horse by the bridle,
gave the Emperor pleasure to utter these words. He was satisfied with
gave us time to retreat. The retirement of the center to the other side
gave zest to his pleasures. He spent the greater part of his time away
gavest Moses the victory over Amalek, Gideon over Midian, and David over
gay because she had been sad too long and now nothing reminded her of
gay not because there was any reason to laugh, but because gaiety and
gay.
gaze from Rostopchin's face muttered softly:
gaze.
gazed at her. "O God! What will become of us if she dies, as I always
gazed at him questioningly: would he approve or disapprove of her
gazed at his delicate fingers which rapidly twirled by its corners
gazed silently in that direction.
gazed with curiosity at the soldiers) were not Russians, the regiment
gazed with great glassy eyes at this crowd of dogs and men surrounding
gazing at Helene with wide-open, wondering eyes.
gazing at him through tears that filled his swollen eyes. He remembered
gazing at the floor in front of Dron.
gazing before him with a smile.
gazing by artificial light through a glass. Now he suddenly saw those
gazing fixedly before him with feverish wide open eyes. "A happiness
gazing now at the sovereign and now at the men intending to dance who
genealogical tree, shook his head, laughing as a man laughs who looks at
general and animated, thanks to Princess Lise's voice and little downy
general and ask him." He readjusted himself in the saddle and touched up
general approval were founded with which, despite court influences, the
general aspect was unchanged. The old footman, who met Pierre with a
general battle. His hour has come! Mark my words!"
general commanding that left flank with orders to retreat immediately.
general commotion. Some eight or nine young men were crowding anxiously
general engagement having been fought under its walls.
general engagement in which he was taking part, more than that, he was
general engagement then on the evening of the twenty-fourth, the first
general engagement," repeated Dolgorukov, evidently prizing this general
general historian looks for the cause of the event not in the power
general in white, accompanied by the suite, walked between the ranks.
general knew. Having heard Rostov to the end, the general shook his head
general movement; that something was constantly expected of him, that if
general of Petersburg, had received and read the then famous rescript
general of the persons they describe. The answers given by this kind
general patted him on the shoulder, with a smile.
general roar.
general safety."
general saying something to those around him. Pierre, accompanied by the
general sorrow.
general state of affairs which was far from satisfactory.
general temper of the age produced Napoleon's power. But Napoleon's
general the head steward made out to Pierre that his project of raising
general to a patriotic war. And by this visit of the Emperor to Moscow
general who had served blamelessly for twenty-two years, flushed by a
general who had succeeded Schmidt. In the passage little Kozlovski was
general who signed that capitulation had no right to do so, and that no
general who, watch in hand, was saying it was time they started as all
general's three-cornered hat, and held it, pulling at the plume, till
general, I am engaged with rice and cutlets, look after military matters
general, but at a time like this how they appoint a decrepit, blind old
general, in Russian, speaking with the French intonation he affected
general, the men themselves not knowing what, or why, they were
general, turning to an artillery officer. "Have a little fun to pass the
general. "Ilyin? No, he's safe. Have I disgraced myself in any way? No,
general. The captain's face showed the uneasiness of a schoolboy who is
general. To the Polish general he replied to the same effect, informing
generalized into one event in accord with the result produced by that
generally happens to the narrators of cavalry attacks had not happened
generally incomprehensible to us, is but a manifestation of His infinite
generally the stronger! I know very well that Count Nicholas is too
generally, and in the cold, repellent glance the Emperor gave him, he
generals I have known were, on the contrary, stupid or absent-minded
generals and statesmen of the day. The old prince seemed convinced not
generals are angry, and the result is a challenge on Buxhowden's part
generals flocked there to select caleches and coaches for themselves.
generals had taken their stand, but even from the fleches themselves--in
generals he knew personally had been killed or wounded, and the
generals in full parade uniforms, with their thin or thick waists drawn
generals in the crowded hut, feeling embarrassed as he always was by the
generals lost touch with the Russian army of sixty thousand men, and
generals of his acquaintance.
generals of the suite around him.
generals pretending to confer together expressed various opinions, all
generals who did not go to their proper places, and after adjutants had
generals who, of all the blind tools of history were the most enslaved
generals won't get on against Buonaparte; you'll have to call in the
generals, gentlemen-in-waiting, and Polish magnates--several of whom
generals, however, understood it and, leaving aside the question of
generals, officers, and soldiers, and never contradicted those who tried
generals.
generals. But one could not tell from that significant look whether he
generous, or better than you; nobody could be! Had you not been
genius of the commanders. But the assignment of these various meanings
genius of which Thiers remarks that, "His genius never devised anything
genius, but he is an honest, goodhearted lad; an excellent son or
genius, which, though concealed, was noticeable in every rejoinder.
genius.
gentle daughter and the pretty Frenchwoman who were reverently devoted
gentle look of her large luminous eyes, very beautiful at that moment,
gentle, and more affectionate than Princess Mary had known him for a
gentlefolk rode up to him at a footpace; the hounds that were far off
gentlefolk, also moved away. All were moving slowly and sedately.
gentleman of the bedchamber, and from that time he had begun to feel
gentleman of the chamber, presented himself at court and at a levee. The
gentleman who was particularly anxious to make the young count's
gentleman's" agitation, said with a smile:
gentleman," said the postmaster, entering the room followed by another
gentleman--evidently not sharing Boris' conception of the advantages
gentleman-in-waiting.
gentlemen changed his position on seeing Boris. The one who was writing
gentlemen have gone out, and his Serene Highness himself rode past long
gentlemen of the Emperor's suite ran down the stairs and went to their
gentlemen of the Tsar's suite by his poor French.
gentlemen ride onto the bridge alone and wave white handkerchiefs; they
gentlemen!" he considered them.
gentlemen" as he called them. He had ruined more than one horse in their
gentlemen, it is already time for me to go," replied Prince Andrew
gentlemen, messieurs les marechaux, * Murat, Lannes, and Belliard,
gentlemen-in-waiting he had formerly despised: they were empty, stupid,
gentlemen. Pierre, who had come downstairs, walked through the rooms and
gentleness and affection. He could not refuse the post, or rather the
gentleness to his companions, and his capacity for sitting still and
geometry lessons," said Princess Mary gleefully, as if her lessons in
geometry were among the greatest delights of her life.
gesticulated, shrugged his shoulders, and finally, without saying a word
gesticulating.
gesticulating. The conversation was about Speranski--the news of whose
gesture with his trembling arms: "How dare you, sir, say that to me? You
gesture.
gesture. "Admirable!"
gesture. Anna Pavlovna meditated.
get Nicholas back and wished to go herself to join Petya, or to get
get angry or sulky with her; but the serfs fulfilled no one's orders so
get angry--that at his slightest inattention she trembled, became
get any rest? Theatricals, hunting, and heaven knows what besides! But
get anything we want from his hothouses. I have to see him in any case.
get away as quickly as possible, she would not hear of leaving before
get away to attend to her duties as hostess. But Pierre now committed
get away!" and then, turning to the soldiers, shouted:
get everything packed. The countess had fallen asleep and the count,
get hot... by heaven!... There he is!... Vive l'Empereur! So these
get in) "I only wished to say that we are wrong to fight pour le Roi de
get into boats, and saw how Napoleon--reaching the raft first--stepped
get it for me and put it under for a moment," he pleaded in a piteous
get more rewards by doing nothing on the staff, and had succeeded in
get not more than two hundred rubles every four months, even with the
get on," he added, and, stepping off the raft, he looked up at the sky
get ready to dance in the large hall, and the sound of the feet and the
get rid of them.
get there till evening."
get there. The rest either starve or get killed. So isn't it all the
get things settled? I couldn't possibly do it."
get up behind the carriage, and come with me while I make some calls.'"
get up!"
getting his letter to the Emperor. The Emperor!... He is here!" thought
getting in someone's way again, galloped after the adjutant.
getting married! Then Bezukhov, eh? He is here too, with his wife. He
getting neither better nor worse. He was unconscious and lay like
getting on in years, uselessly and joylessly passing the best years of
getting on, it will all be settled today." Anna Pavlovna threatened
getting out caldrons and rye biscuit, and feeding the horses. A third
getting past the Russians by night by making semicircles to the right.
getting ready and again boiled some muddy water in the samovar. But
getting to know an officer in just such a chance way and attaching him
getting up.
giddy even on a staircase," exclaimed several voices.
gift will be a pledge of your purity of heart to her whom you select to
gigantic footman in his bass voice, entering the drawing room. The
gilt frame, new to him, containing the genealogical tree of the Princes
gilt-edged... it must be exactly like the sample. Varnish, sealing wax,
gingerbread, and poppyseed sweets (of which Petya was particularly
girdled with a broad ribbon just below the breast.
girl (it was strange to see the color rise in that shaggy, bibulous,
girl might have done.
girl was Petya. A clown was Dimmler. An hussar was Natasha, and a
girl who has either lost the man she loved or been cruelly deceived by
girl, such tact, such masterly perfection of manner! It comes from her
girl, the little girl, what am I to do with her if she's not theirs?"
girl, with the same artificial smile, and the princess found herself in
girlhood and her own first ball. The host also followed Natasha with his
girlishly enchanting.
girls of about ten and twelve, dressed in dirty short frocks and cloaks,
girls--who are prettier than Mademoiselle George--I won't know you! My
girths.
gist of the matter lay in that.
give contradictory replies to that question, while the historians of
give her lessons."
give it to him if he treated me as he does those ladies."
give my life, anything, to put you at ease," said Nicholas. "I would
give no opinion on such an important government order, and Berg laughed
give thee what the Tsar bestowed on me.' I saw it myself, master, the
give their blessing to such a marriage. Nicholas, for the first time,
give them all, and her too, peace and happiness. And it seemed to her
give them strength to move on and endure their present privations. So
give this order in my brother's name; and tell them that what is ours is
give us the value of the unknown factor but gives us a ratio between two
give. She was glad such cares presented themselves, enabling her
given a shirt to sew was in that shed.
given an order, to do what was clearly, distinctly, and definitely
given away for nothing.
given him by the commander in chief and his fellow officers, Prince
given him, he was to advance from the left through Borodino to the
given his name, announced that he had to communicate to his Serene
given not to let them in, so that must be right. And the peasants are
given that they should find in them the help and protection due to
given to directing and commanding, take less part in the direct work.
given to raise recruits, ten men in every thousand for the regular army,
given), which under his leadership will be directed against the redoubt
given, to clear himself of the crime of abandoning Moscow. But this
gives a report quite contrary to what was said by the officer
gives expression to the essence of freedom.
gives himself the airs of a monarch."
gives the singles and snatches the doubles!"
giving an opinion the speaker always stopped, or was stopped, at the
giving her instructions how to get to her Aunt Malvintseva at Voronezh.
giving him a mild expression, rode up to Bagration and welcomed him as
giving him some information, speaking in low tones as they all did.
giving him the salute, he looked at them silently and attentively for
giving him time to reply to her affectionate words. "I am very anxious
giving his saber to Bagration in Italy, and the recollection was
giving them employment; to the legitimists of that day that it was the
giving them time to finish the parade they had begun, and in two twists
giving tongue. He bent down his head and listened, shaking a warning
glad and not cry."
glad indeed, that my brother has distinguished himself so. You are all
glad to see him hanged, but I was sorry for my father--that again is for
gladsome and mysterious to one another.
glance at Ilyin, who was pressing close to him. This officer, a lad
glance at all those in the room and noticing the count's confessor
glance at him.
glance at the esaul and Denisov one saw that the latter was wet and
glance became more animated as his conclusions became more hopeless.
glance, and then to her joys he saw that "Granddad" said something to
glance. She wrote to him formal, monotonous, and dry letters, to which
glance. What do you think of Natalie? Could she be constant in her
glanced angrily at Berg, then, meeting his eyes, hid his face behind the
glanced angrily at her daughter, and her sigh seemed to say: "Yes,
glanced askance at her husband's face, and her own assumed the timid,
glanced at Berg with a smile.
glanced at Dolokhov and, bending his finger as he had been shown, fired.
glanced at Helene and smiled at her.) "My dear Helene, be charitable to
glanced at Rostov with a feigned smile and waved his hand in greeting.
glanced at her there was not the least shadow of a smile: only her eyes
glanced at him and turned to Pierre.
glanced indifferently at the portrait and gave her attention chiefly to
glanced round in alarm.
glanced up at her through tears of laughter, and again hid her face.
glanced vacantly around her, and seeing Natasha began to press her
glanced with pity at the excited face of Ilyin, who talked much and in
glances without coloring, but even the old countess and Natasha blushed
glancing at Denisov.
glancing at his master with whom he had lived on the best of terms for
glancing at those near him and at the troops who were approaching and
glancing that way he noticed behind that door a plump, rosy, handsome
glancing up at him from under her brows, smiling, and almost crying from
glass and shrugging his shoulders, "so it is! They'll be fired on at the
glass at her pale, sallow, emaciated face in which her eyes now looked
glass flung it on the floor.
glass from the table he went up to Pierre.
glass of Madeira for him.
glass of lemonade and a spiral wax candle--moved close to the bed, and
glass of vodka and the dinner; and the staff officer with the signet
glass, "or I won't let you go!"
glass, making an effort not to cry. "And how can Sonya love Nicholas
glass, smiled, and walked toward the other door. Natasha was about
glass. Letting her arms fall helplessly, she sat with downcast eyes and
glasses of wine mechanically into his large mouth he felt a pleasant
gleam.
gleamed from the east and the sun's rim appeared solemnly from behind a
gleamed white in the mist would have been safer because it would be
gleamed, so did the ladies' toilets and the gold and silver of the
gleamed.
gleeful sarcasm he would remark, "There, I said the whole affair would
gliding slowly across it. "How quiet, peaceful, and solemn; not at all
glimpses of whom could be seen through the windows.
glittered brightly and its bells were ringing particularly clearly.
glittered with effort and exasperation as he mustered his remaining
glittering eyes and no sign of a smile.
glittering eyes rapturously turned toward her, and especially his neck,
glittering like stars in the sunlight.
glittering ornaments, he rejoined his suite who were respectfully
glittering teeth and sparkling eyes. She told of an accident they had
gloat over it! Gloat over it!"
globe, and he sank into water so that it closed over his head.
gloom, but a dark sea swelling and gradually subsiding after a storm.
gloomy thoughts that oppressed Sonya. She was glad to find escape
gloria mundi."
glorious task for which he was chosen. I shall await your most gracious
glory and grandeur. One after another they hasten to display their
glory of that achievement of genius to different men and dispute as to
glory of thy rule, sings in exultation, 'Hosanna, blessed is he that
glory that awaited him.
glory were led to destruction. Go, Princess Mary. Go and tell Lise. I
glory, to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, now and forever, world without
glory.--And after all what is glory? The same love of others, a desire
gloves, he said: "Dear brother, these woman's gloves are intended for
glow from the fire, Pierre experienced a joyful emotion. "There now,
glow were in Moscow?" remarked one of the footmen.
glow! Natasha, do look! You can see it from the window," she said to her
glowing eyes and his resolute gait, the terrible indications of that
go Natasha came in with rapid steps, not having done up her hair or
go away and the couple, left alone, still remained silent. They rarely
go away without having heard from the staff--and this interested him
go away, but the officer would not hear of it. He was so very polite,
go away.
go back in the sleigh with Dimmler, and Sonya with Nicholas and the
go back. But Pierre did not understand him and remained near the post,
go home alone, see his sisters, brother, mother, and father, confess
go near him. When he did so and heard the subdued moaning with which
go of its nuts. Ten minutes after each regiment had entered a Moscow
go off by themselves in different directions hoping to find food and
go straight to him and give the message Dolgorukov had ordered him to
go to see his Highness.
go to the devil!" Pfuel was one of those theoreticians who so love
go to the dressing room to rearrange her dress, that Helene had followed
go to. All orders as to where and when to move the guns, when to send
go when she marries, should not neglect her accomplishments, should be
go! You see how I am suffering!" Natasha cried angrily, in a voice of
go!"
go.
go.
goal, its impetus ever increasing as it neared its aim, just as the
goal--their native land--was too remote, and their immediate goal
goal. Suddenly the threads that moved them began to slacken and become
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
gobble the same food as the gentry."
godfather," she added, as if she attached no importance at all to the
goes hand in hand with self-assurance and consists in a tacit assumption
goes up to Auersperg and says: 'Prince, you are being deceived, here are
goes without saying that one must be conscientious and methodical."
going as a cadet. There's no one to interest himself for him. To whom
going in to supper I looked and he had broken everything on my table to
going into a tiny recess behind a partition to change, but found it
going on around him or not. One thing was certain--that he was suffering
going on in Russia without despair and without dismally racking his
going on in front. Whether all the enemy forces were, as we supposed,
going on there he had no idea that this was the field of battle. He did
going on there, but he had no time to dwell on that idea.
going straight on through the conservatory, neither seeing nor hearing
going to church every day for a week and not once missing Vespers,
going to happen and what would be revealed to him; but most of all, he
going to the battle (she knew he enjoyed the thought of the impending
going to the door and looking into the nursery.
going to the right place? Go to Kolyazin where a wonder-working icon of
going too. Besides, all the same I can't study now when..." Petya
going with us."
going, when you might remain here? You are faced by one of two things,"
going. The Emperor was wounded, the battle lost. It was impossible to
going: and besides--I am not Joan of Arc or an Amazon."
going?" she asked.
gold lace glittering in the bright June sunshine.
gold only if it is serviceable not merely for exchange but also for use,
gold snuffbox, which he took.
gold, of carts and horses, kept rising, but the value of paper money and
gold, so universal historians and historians of culture, not answering
gold-embroidered velvet bag. Her pretty little upper lip, on which a
gone and that his wife was no more. "Oh, how good, how splendid!"
gone from under her wing, that today or tomorrow either or both of them
gone into another room, to which the countess hurriedly followed him, he
gone on for some time; suddenly one of the combatants, feeling himself
gone through the same process as the Rostovs, but with less flurry--for
gone to Petersburg, but Prince Andrew was glad to hear this. His mind
gone with others to the cathedral, whence they were fetching the
gone, so why,' she says, 'don't we go?' And he began beating and pulling
good French society--will have been forever destroyed, and then..."
good and beneficent? Their activity would not have existed: there would
good and gallant Fatherland to such rabble and implanting feelings of
good and noble in you will be lost. It will all be wasted on trifles.
good as another, as you know) and even if it is only over a fire brigade
good as another, that could be made as long as it was quite unknown
good as to look at the map and listen." Langeron lifted his eyes with an
good gifts? Are you content with yourself and with your life?"
good match, and almost a newcomer, with a halo of romance on account
good natured playfulness.
good old days. Denisov, flushed after the mazurka and mopping himself
good or evil but only "grand" and "not grand." Grand is good, not
good society" consisted of the fascinating Helene, forsaken by her
good thing, as those vehicles could be used to carry provisions, the
good!" said Natasha, rising and going to the looking glasses.
good-by to the holy folk and went."
good-by yet. I will call round in case you have any commissions for me,"
good-for-nothing. When Kutuzov, conforming to a custom of Catherine's
good-humored laughter from the soldiers that it infected the French
good-natured smile at his coat and boots) "my things are worn out and I
good-natured tenderness of his smile vanquished her. She smiled just
good-natured, and her position now is a very hard one."
good-natured, pale, young face to look back. A shudder of terror went
good-natured, sincere, and animated levity. "But you see... another
good-naturedly, and sent him on errands. But to Pierre he always
good-naturedly, pointing to Natasha, "only brightens up when you're
good."
goodness, and truth are absent.
goodness, to give us as sovereign! To say nothing of my brothers, this
goods lay in a heap: featherbeds, a samovar, icons, and trunks. On the
goods left behind by the French. The owners of houses in which much
goods--and there were factories and workshops, palaces and wealthy
goods."
gossip and tittle-tattle."
gossip in drawing rooms of the Club, from gossip to carousals and women;
gossip," he continued. "Just now they are talking about you and your
got Petya transferred from Obolenski's regiment to Bezukhov's, which was
got back last night," he said glancing at Natasha; "I want to have a
got back to their horses. Two were misdirected and the shot went too
got in with him. Makarin, Khvostikov, and a valet seated themselves in
got into bed, all kept awake a long time that night.
got it, Makeev?"
got out of their carriage at the chapel, the sultry air, the shouts of
got out, in their soaked and streaming clothes, they shouted "Vivat!"
got up and Nicholas sat down at the clavichord. Standing as usual in the
got up and went with the soldiers. They took him to the upper end of the
got up to go and the two young men rose to let them pass.
got warm in his corner, he fell asleep and did not leave the hut till
governed only by infinite love for us, and so whatever befalls us is for
governesses, lived three miles from the Rostovs.
government allows it. Not merely is it not hostile to government, but it
government in Russia, or a Revolution in France and a subsequent
government offices removed; now distributed quite useless weapons to
government officials to his table, had unexpectedly selected Michael
government, and to Napoleon III. When explaining these rapid transfers
government, thousands of enemy stragglers, marauders, and foragers had
government--be it what it may--I know it is my duty to obey the
government. And if Arakcheev ordered me to lead a squadron against you
governments began). "I told them just one thing in Petersburg."
governments can continue in their customary course and do everything
governor's wife began to speak of Rostov in Mary's presence, praising
governor, the representative of authority and of the Tsar. "Had I been
governs all?"
gown tied round with a towel, and who evidently enjoyed the respect of
gown, spectacled and wigless, shouting in an angry voice.
gowns. The first person Rostov met in the officers' ward was a thin
grace!" thought Mademoiselle Bourienne.
graceful pose under a portrait of Catherine, leaning his elbow on a
graceful, was first, even danced the pas de chale, but at this last ball
graciously.
gradually compelled her to go into details which she feared to recall
gradually weaker Pierre kept away from him. Pierre did not know why, but
grain is good and one sometimes hears that, too."
grain, and the smoking ruins of Semenovsk, which had been burned down,
grains that fell. Some crows, scenting blood, flew among the birch
grand is bad. Grand is the characteristic, in their conception, of some
grand, *(2) and his soul is tranquil.
grand-patience as usual, when Pierre and Natasha came into the drawing
grandee of Catherine's day was giving a ball and midnight supper. The
grandee of Catherine's time who now lay dying in Moscow. The young man
grandfather called him) smiled at Pierre and let himself be taken in
grandfather called him). The baby Prince Nicholas lived with his wet
grandfather, wore it in all his wars." (She still did not take out what
grant rewards, and he was himself often surprised at the rapidity of his
grant that in his presence I may rather see my own vileness, and behave
grant." Nor did he say to himself: "Pierre is a rich man, I must entice
granted.
grapeshot range now."
grasp its meaning for a moment.
grasp the meaning of what was happening.
grasp their meaning. He could not disavow his actions, belauded as they
grasped the cold door handle.
grass, and gazing at the dust that covered his boots; now he took big
grass, the first leaves on the birches, and the first puffs of white
grasseyement, "the prince has been scolding Michael Ivanovich. He is in
grateful for the benefits conferred on them. Everywhere were receptions,
grateful look fresh in his mind, had gazed at the comet that seemed to
grateful look, but was still expectant and looking for someone. The old
gratefully, she let him see the hidden, kindly sides of her character.
gratitude.
gravely.
graven in his soul: thoughts of the Contrat social and the French
gravitation, or heat, or the force that makes things grow; for reason,
gravity and glancing round at his comrades, "there is an order to stop
gray stallion that had not been ridden for a long time, and when
gray, sat beside countess Mary with his general's tunic unbuttoned;
grayish color.
great achievement and great happiness.
great agitation. He knew from experience the tormenting expectation of
great and infinite merely because it was not clearly seen. And such
great and small; Thou art God, and man cannot prevail against Thee!
great battle of la Moskowa. Sacre Dieu! It was splendid! That deluge of
great deal from the deceased," said Prince Vasili to him, handing him a
great effort, evidently not because they wished to sing, but because
great haste and in the greatest disorder. The road was so obstructed
great men," says history. And, indeed, human reason replies: every time
great merit"--this of the man usually so described.
great on the bridge of Arcola, and in the hospital at Jaffa where he
great precision and formality.
great redoubt held out well, by my pipe!" continued the Frenchman. "And
great sacrifices of us... I am ready to submit myself in all things to
great things and blasphemies," the same number 666 was obtained; from
great, but so are his ancestors, his brothers, his stepsons, and his
great, excitedly bustling activity began which lasted till the morning
greatcoat. "Peter Petrovich!" said he. (Konovnitsyn did not stir.) "To
greatcoats, and some with horsecloths over their heads. The horses,
greater amount of freedom to it. In the case of a crime we most urgently
greater embarrassment. She again glanced rapidly from Pierre's face to
greater or lesser dependence on the causes in relation to which we
greater or lesser readiness to fight and face danger felt by all the men
greater part of the enemy's opened out from this battery. Just facing
greater reasons."
greater the pain and shame in her soul. She knew for certain that she
greater zeal than his duty as a commander. Thanks to the strictness and
greatest confusion, the most important results of the whole campaign
greatest efforts of us; and so, led astray by pride, losing sight of
greatest glory of the Russian army. Many heroes have been described to
greatest glory of the Russian people. The lady who, afraid of being
greatest happiness,'" Rostov fancied the sovereign saying. And passing
greatest number of monuments have remained: kings, ministers, generals,
greatly improved during these last five years, having softened and grown
greatness of soul?" said the little princess, smiling and drawing her
greatness, and again--as a horse walking a treadmill thinks it is doing
greatness, the unimportance of life which no one could understand, and
greatness.
greatness. He rode hurriedly from the battlefield and returned to the
greatness...."
grecque looked tenderly and gaily at him out of the gilt frame. She
greediness that he wanted it, but simply from a conscientious desire for
green already.... How early! The birches and cherry and alders too are
green dress.
green plums they had dropped.
green sheath which he had bought at the Sukharev market with the pistol,
green. It was dusty and so hot that on passing near water one longed to
greet the young man.
greeting was riding quickly. When the soldiers of the regiment in front
greetings deafened Natasha, and the light and glitter dazzled her still
greetings, she rode up to them. Ilagin lifted his beaver cap still
greetings, they sat down.
grenadiers stood there in blue uniforms unfastened in front and with
grenadiers were splendid, by heaven! I saw them close up their ranks six
grew and passed from one instrument to another. And what was played was
grew calm, but was not immediately ready to reply to the Emperor's
grew dim, red blotches came on her face, and it took on the unattractive
grew in harmonious triumphant strength, and Petya listened to their
grew still kinder. The younger sisters also became affectionate to him,
grew still louder and merged into a general roar that only an army
grew the countess. She began to think she would never live to see such
grew tranquil and softened? With all his soul he had always sought one
grew weary waiting to be relieved. Prince Andrew halted to have a look
grief and by her own personal feelings which she shared with no one.
grief began to be overlaid by the impressions of daily life, it ceased
grief for Mamma... business difficulties... muddles, terrible muddles!
grief to forget what he had said), that it was impossible to expect
grieved for a moment at parting from him. And Pierre began to feel in
grieved him and yet he was pleased.
grim face at the new arrivals. One might have thought she was angry with
grimace. "I have long wanted to ask you, Andrew, why you have changed
grimace. "Really it's no time for your stupid jokes," and he left the
grippe; grippe being then a new word in St. Petersburg, used only by the
groan, said to herself with a sigh that things were still the same.
groaned and swayed his head.
groaned, and slipped down into the arms of the Cossacks and adjutants
groaned, sighed, wept, screamed, swore, or asked for vodka. Some were
groaning aloud and swinging his arm which had just been hurt, while
groans, which seemed to melt into one with the darkness of the night.
groom in attendance on him, while the count himself was to drive in a
groom.
groove he seemed to have lost the sense of his own significance and to
ground all night, had he beaten her or made her fetch wood or water, it
ground floor, and clapping Pierre on the shoulder ran with him into the
ground like cliffs and slopes. Anywhere, on any side, one might
ground that looked like asparagus, which, for some reason, they called
ground was more open and level than elsewhere. It was evident to anyone,
ground with an aspen stake to fix him down. What a lot of men he's
ground, and again looking at the Frenchman and the Armenian family.
ground, and he fell upon Eykhen, threatening him with his hands,
ground, artillery and troops in blue uniform were seen. These were the
ground, beside the trunks, sat a thin woman no longer young, with long,
ground, bleeding from a gash in its side.
ground, clouds of powder smoke seemed continually to spring up out of
ground, eager to rejoin its fellows, he watched his squadron draw
ground, or plaited baskets from the straw in the cornfield. All seemed
ground. The gory, dust-stained, half-shaven head with its long neck
group at the height of the guerrilla enthusiasm. Since early morning he
group was destroyed, as well as the old habits and traditions, and step
group was gathered round Mortemart and Anna Pavlovna.
group where the vicomte was still talking, and again pretended to
group.
growing dark last night.
growing excited. "What about your son, your sister, and your father?"
growing impatient, and stamped her foot, ready to cry at his not coming
growing louder and more frequent. Evidently our guns had begun to reply.
growled at everybody because he thought he was being pushed and that
grown-up men cry, though angry with himself for doing so. In the crowd
grownup young people: Vera beside Berg, and Pierre beside Boris; and on
grudge thousands more to benefit her, or had he not known that if her
grudged losing a laborer--that's how I regard him--but you want to cure
grumbled at his wife when she asked how his leg was. "Oh, the old fool,"
guard for fear of binding himself in any way. To all questions put to
guard remained in the Dorogomilov suburb, where they had ample room. The
guard. Ill with fever he went to Smolensk with twenty thousand men
guardian of all that the nations hold sacred, utilizes religion for the
guarding against the shock--for they had been running together at full
guards began cursing and the French soldiers, with fresh virulence,
guerrilla band, less than a mile from the road, sitting on a wagon
guerrillas, Kutuzov was almost sure that the wound was mortal. But he
guessed that the best position for an army after its retreat from Moscow
guessing by the sounds of the battle and by Scherbinin's looks that the
guessing by the voice that it was not Konovnitsyn.
guest of honor and hero of the Austrian campaign, Prince Bagration, to
guest.
guest. "Poor girl, she's devilish ugly!" thought Anatole.
guests surrounded him. Magnitski, addressing himself to Speranski, was
guests were Gervais, Magnitski, and Stolypin. While still in the
guests were all conversing with one another. "The Razumovskis... It was
guests, first the vicomte and then the abbe, as peculiarly choice
guests, knowing of the affair with the bear, looked with curiosity at
guests.
guests. He was just going to take it when Dolokhov, leaning across,
guided only by their private interests, and they were the very people
guided the event.
guilt suddenly becomes terribly serious when the other is no longer
guilty of not carrying out a prearranged plan were they not tried and
guilty you are. You know that yourself. But when your father comes back
guilty. But Helene, like a really great man who can do whatever
gun to another with a frowning face. The young officer, with his face
gunner in a merry voice, standing to attention.
gunner with his shako knocked awry, pulling one end of a mop while
guns and men lost--than Krasnoe had been, as the figures show.
guns had been intended to cannonade the valley, he was firing incendiary
guns were advanced, the artillerymen blew the ash off their linstocks,
guns, that had not ceased for ten hours, wearied the ear and gave
guns.
guns. On the contrary, the energetic action of that battery led the
gypsy choirs, schools, subscription dinners, sprees, Freemasons,
ha! Mary!"
habit began with the princess, the prince suddenly grew furious,
habit of walking, had been swept: the marks of the broom were still
habit, and Pierre answered the countess' questions as to whether Prince
habit, but soon realized that he could not sleep. Having lit his candle
habit, glanced now at Kutuzov and now at the door with a look of
habits of life without which the count and countess could not
habits of the military? The aim of war is murder; the methods of war
habits, passions, and impulses toward goodness, beauty, and truth--that
habitual ease and animation some new, sinister, hidden feeling showed
habitual to him. His face took on the stupid artificial smile (which
habitual, offering his puffy cheek, but Bagration kissed him on the neck
hack at and strangle everything--Magnitski, Arakcheev, and tutti
had Alexander not felt insulted, and had there not been an autocratic
had European life, politics, Freemasonry, philosophy, and philanthropy
had I lived. But now it is too late. I know it!"
had a bad cold on the twenty-fourth of August may seem logical and
had a double meaning.
had a large estate in Orel province, and he occupied a temporary post in
had a lucky escape this time," he added, pointing to the damaged plaster
had a vast number of such actions under observation, our conception of
had accumulated at the sight of all that was being done in the army.
had against his will more than once entered his head. For himself
had all been thought out and he knew all there was in Sonya, but it was
had all day beaten back an enemy force twice as numerous as his own.
had all settled down in the drawing room and were obviously trying to
had already been approved. As soon as Prince Andrew began to demonstrate
had already descended into the valley toward the ponds and lakes and
had already done in that direction. If he were now to leave Moscow like
had already entered Prussia and our second war with Napoleon was
had already left for Moscow.
had already once been given in detail: "and tell the hussars that
had already promised Prince Anatole to come to his gathering; "besides,"
had also convinced the sovereign Emperors of.
had also quickened their pace--rode down a hill, and passing through an
had always imagined battles to himself), nor could he help to fire the
had always seemed to him that he really was very kind and intelligent.
had always seen at a distance, but the timid, feeble face she had seen
had always seen him.
had an inkpot, and sat down to write.
had an opportunity of getting a good look at him, for Pfuel arrived soon
had any news. On their familiar faces he read agitation and alarm. This
had any orders to give. Petya and Natasha on the contrary, far from
had any significance, and that Napoleon himself would be ashamed of them
had aroused and flew off after the hounds. The count, like a punished
had arrived from Bald Hills and had those horses got ready for
had at last been realized. In the clear morning light he gazed now at
had at the opera--gratified vanity at his admiration of her and fear at
had become habitual to him in speaking of the present war.
had become more intimate when Prince Andrew was in Vienna with Kutuzov.
had been accustomed to see from quite a different point of view from
had been added to Mademoiselle Bourienne's toilet which rendered her
had been admitted. Had he not told her, yes, told her to make a list,
had been bayoneted in the back before his eyes, for hardly had he run
had been carried out and in what state were the serfs whom God had
had been concentrated on the Russians, as he had ordered, but that they
had been confined and in which her greatest comfort had been prayer.
had been decided to advance immediately and give battle to Bonaparte.
had been defending himself against the hussars. When Petya galloped
had been diminished by a third, their obligatory manorial work had been
had been drawn up and sent to Kutuzov for his guidance. Though this plan
had been drawn up on the supposition that Moscow was still in our hands,
had been dug and from which a few guns were firing, was the most
had been from the cold, ours would not have rotted either. 'But,' he
had been got ready for him, glancing now and then at the newcomer, who,
had been happiest together, they suddenly had a feeling of estrangement
had been hit--a large crowd had gathered near the second battalion.
had been in attendance, considered young Prince Drubetskoy an invaluable
had been insulted through his daughter. The insult was the more pointed
had been killed at the beginning of the engagement and within an hour
had been leaning, and--with an air which intimated that he knew what he
had been made much of in Russia, Poland, and abroad. They spoke of the
had been made, the same dispositions, and the same proclamation courte
had been on the Semenovsk heights the artillery commander had proposed
had been ordered to look for the commander in chief, he could not, did
had been ordered to return to military service--and especially since his
had been placed on his camp bed he lay for a long time motionless with
had been present at the beginning of the battle.
had been previously enduring were suddenly concentrated at one moment
had been received in Petersburg, a detailed plan of the whole campaign
had been recovered and would be restored to him.
had been repulsed, employing this military term to describe what had
had been revealed to him.
had been sent him by someone unknown. One thing he continually realized
had been sent to Vienna with some Austrian banners captured from the
had been set to it, beginning: "Alexander, Elisaveta, all our hearts you
had been sitting there with her other children, and he asked whether
had been so blocked by vehicles and troops, so many things had been
had been so humiliating in her morning's visit.
had been taken aback by her serious annoyance when on his first trip he
had been the preparation of some papers he meant to leave at his death
had been thinking about something else. But she had to force herself to
had been torn off.
had been under fire.
had been used to from childhood and, unable to realize how hard it was
had been wounded in the engagement the day before. The peasant drivers,
had better go."
had broken up the French troops.
had brought from town. The old prince went up to him and began to talk
had brought, and his own replies to both generals. Then he told him all
had but recently left their regiment, rode up to the colonel. After his
had carried you off... do you think they wouldn't have found him?
had changed greatly during that period. In the expression of his face,
had changed in appearance only by the loss of a tooth, which left a
had come from the Archduke Ferdinand, who was in command of the advanced
had come in civilian clothes, that he had difficulty in getting a
had come intending to show Pierre that in spite of his ingratitude she
had come into Pierre's room after the funeral. With drooping eyes
had come out from Moscow, joined them. This brilliant company separated
had come personally to point out to the princess the necessity for her
had come straight from the bath... Papa used to..."
had come straight to his house, and Pierre had put him up and lent him
had come with news that the French were already near Mozhaysk and that
had come with the carts resounded as they shouted to one another in
had contrived to remain at headquarters after the changes. He had
had counted on her fingers with Boris after they had kissed four years
had countermanded an order of his, and the servants now came to her
had cried "Vive l'Empereur!" at the sight of the portrait of the boy
had crossed that line and not only was there nothing terrible, but
had dashed out so impetuously, the conversation had been more amusing
had disappeared, but at French infantry who had come into the hollow and
had disappeared.
had done Sonya, felt herself to blame toward her, and imagined that her
had done at the start. It was here that the prisoners for the first time
had done before, but really well, and by being a perfectly first-rate
had done her utmost to make him love her husband as she loved him, and
had done to the things on the table. He flushed and went up to Nicholas.
had done, but Berg did it a trifle late for he should have struck his
had doubts about this marriage.
had driven the old prince to town returned bringing papers and letters
had entered and left the town with their bands playing, and by the Grand
had entered. The most solemn mystery in the world continued its course.
had everything removed, and it only remains for me to weep over the fate
had evidently been drinking.
had evidently run out of that room to give vent to the sobs that were
had expected, at his first glance at her his face assumed a cold, stiff,
had fallen in battle. From this beginning the succeeding terms of the
had fallen the previous day--the day of the battle. Reviewing his
had filled his solitude at Bogucharovo and then in Switzerland and Rome,
had finished his story someone else was anxious to relate something
had first seen the enemy and fired the first shot, and that the corner
had first wanted to effect a diversion in Greece and then in Warsaw but
had followed, and only the heavens promised peace. Toward morning
had formed in France unites into one group with the peoples of Central
had formerly been in love. In the state of intoxication she was in,
had formerly seemed to her so unapproachable and important and was now
had given up to him.
had gone out somewhere and with whom he wanted a talk.
had gone to Bogucharovo, only a few remained.
had gone to see his father, could not explain his absence to herself.
had gone, and so had Princess Mary. Of his intimate friends only the
had grown accustomed to him. Metivier came to see the prince about twice
had grown much older.
had grown so dark that one could not distinguish the uniforms ten paces
had guarded and which is now no more. They reek of decay and death. Only
had had a cough for some days. She was, as she said, suffering from la
had had to retreat and had made their withdrawal in perfect order. The
had halted. He stood on a knoll in the stubble, holding his whip aloft,
had happened and to which she could find no answer.
had happened during that half-hour to the troops entrusted to him, and
had happened or what she felt. Everything seemed dark, obscure,
had happened so quickly proved that it had not come from God to whom he
had happened to him, but could not do so. Such a storm of feelings,
had happened. What had happened? Nothing. He had merely understood that
had happened; and he was only dissatisfied that her indisposition
had he got rid of his hat before he ran into Prince Andrew's room with a
had he not been hindered, first, by his membership of the Society of
had he retained power--Alexander I, having fulfilled his mission and
had heard of her trouble and sympathized with his whole soul. As soon as
had heard that a rumor of his duel had reached the Emperor and that it
had immense consequences for him and for all his family.
had in fact slipped. For a moment as he was rearranging his cloak Pierre
had involuntarily overheard her. Natasha blushed at that recollection
had it not been for two friends who had borrowed large sums from him and
had it not been that just then they heard the rattle of musketry and a
had joined Kutuzov at Braunau now separated from the Russian army,
had just the appearance of any Russian regiment preparing for an
had kept him, and Prince Andrew noticed this affectation of modesty.
had known and always slightly feared. He was in a woman's dress, with
had known him before, and despite his abhorrence of the civil service,
had last met on the old prince's name day, she had answered at random
had learned to see the great, eternal, and infinite in everything, and
had left Moscow, and though everybody tried to persuade the countess to
had left Paris and how he had liked that city. Anatole answered the
had left the room Kutuzov gave a sigh of relief and went on with his
had left the room all the officers burst into loud laughter and Mary
had liked sitting in this room to watch the ladies who, as they passed
had lived till then, and sorry and almost ashamed as she felt to leave
had lolled in Anna Pavlovna's easy chairs and with half-closed eyes had
had long been sinning against himself.
had long since promised to hand over to him some papers of her deceased
had long wished to have this happiness--ever since the Naryshkins' ball
had looked for it. In everything near and comprehensible he had only
had lost more horses than the money he had from them would buy. But
had made him drunk on champagne and Madeira, which he loved; and he knew
had made the house stuffy.
had made up his mind to atone for his fault by serving, not as he
had managed affairs badly in Moscow, he dispatched Yakovlev to
had managed to deal with the Grand Duke when the latter made a tour of
had meant.
had met Rostov, tried to enliven the conversation. One of the Frenchmen,
had misfortunes, but he is a man. He knows what's what.... If he wants
had needlessly plunged into the river should be enrolled in the Legion
had never seen so resolute yet gentle an expression as that in those
had no friends: during this visit to Moscow she had been disappointed in
had no idea and could not imagine what state he was in, all I wanted was
had no idea how long he had been there. In the middle of the night three
had no time to grasp fully what they were talking about. "If grown-up,
had no time to utter the decisive word which the expression of his face
had no time. He was afraid of falling behind the hussars, so much afraid
had none of the advantages and pleasures of city life. She did not go
had not already broken faith with Prince Andrew, and again she found
had not been content to take only one Frenchman or because he had slept
had not been foreseen and was not fortified. By crossing to the other
had not been precisely executed. He kept laughing sarcastically, he
had not been time to move. The Emperor, surrounded by his suite
had not come to the front entrance but to the back door. While he
had not finished saying what was necessary, thudded into the ground near
had not gone away.
had not known for a long time.
had not known it I should not have addressed you. Your view of life is a
had not received a single reply to his repeated announcements of his
had not returned.
had not the slightest doubt, and the guiltlessness of Dolokhov, who had
had not told all and that there was something in his feelings for the
had not understood a word of what they were saying. Suddenly, however,
had not yet been held) both those who went away and those who remained
had not yet begun. Not wishing to agree to Dolgorukov's demand to
had not yet come home when Rostov rode back early in the morning from
had not yet entered either the military or civil service, as he had only
had not yet finished reckoning up how many stages still remained to
had not yet gathered courage to enter the circle.
had not yet shed its leaves, he stopped and beckoned mysteriously to
had noticed at their first halting place after leaving Moscow had now
had noticed her in the theater and said of her: "C'est un superbe
had noticed on many of the faces he had met came into his face.
had now become absolutely necessary and inevitable. He must remain in
had now, as if purposely, sent his men to the very woods the Rostovs
had occurred between them. Whatever her father's feelings might be, she
had on the Spasski Hill which might have been serious for her in her
had ordered two guns to be unlimbered and made a show of firing at the
had passed and Petya realized for a moment that this Tikhon had killed a
had passed off safely. After admitting the doctor, Princess Mary sat
had perished in the fire, and demanded relief. And Count Rostopchin
had petitioned the Emperor to make him a German. The men of that party,
had plainly shown before had now quite passed off. With a deep and
had played a little air with variations on the harp, she joined the
had prayed, but by some ordinary coincidence.
had presented it to him. Someone obligingly took the dish from Bagration
had produced a good epigram, a fresh one that would be repeated. His
had quite abandoned the hope of getting married. She saw the coldness
had reached Braunau at the same time, was in splendid condition. There
had reached her from the corridor, went into Princess Mary's room.
had read thus far, he crumpled the letter up and threw it away. It was
had read, and listened to what was passing in the nursery. Suddenly he
had recognized in the corporal's words and in the roll of the drums.
had recourse to his new judge was when a French prisoner, a colonel,
had regarded with surprise and amusement at Otradnoe, was just the right
had remained uninjured and needed only slight repairs. Life did not
had replied that she could give no directions about state institutions
had resolved to endure her troubles uncomplainingly and that her husband
had ruined his own happiness.
had run in announced, with a frightened face: "He's arrived!"
had run up and was looking down on the stretcher.
had rushed out from the wood. He saw Karay seize the wolf, and checked
had said she was "charmante."
had said so-and-so and this minister so-and-so, seemed to him very
had said, "the war should be extended widely," and whom Bagration so
had said, but from his look it was clear that he had uttered a tender
had said. On hearing that he was going to Petersburg Natasha was
had scope for its development in Africa. Whatever he does succeeds. The
had seemed as extraordinary to her as if there had never existed the
had seen Anna Semenovna.
had seen a visitor off he returned to one of those who were still in the
had seen before) rode up to the ditch, struck his horse with his spurs,
had seized the loaded pistol which they had not had time to recover from
had sinned against God. One told how he had taken a life, another had
had slept badly that night, those around him reported. The cause of this
had some terrible intention. "The count is away. What am I to do? Write
had sown in earlier years. But to the old countess those contemporaries
had spent even more on his, but that the best thing about Bezukhov's
had spent in the country.
had spent their time pleasantly in the company of the charming Frenchmen
had spoken to him on behalf of her only son Boris on the evening of Anna
had stared with merry surprise at his hat (perhaps the very men he had
had stolen some boots from the recruits; I should even have been very
had strained Natasha's physical strength.
had striven only for his people's welfare, the originator of the liberal
had stuck labels on the corresponding paragraphs of the different codes.
had suddenly softened and that this softening and gentleness were signs
had suddenly turned into a low, solid vault that weighed him down, in
had suffered and lacked life during his own absence, and of how she
had sunk in, and her eyes were dim.
had sunk, her lip was drawn up, and her eyes drawn down.
had surrounded the French on three sides and when its aim was to capture
had taken a box.
had taken place in herself. From the moment she recognized that dear,
had taken possession of their souls at the consciousness of the
had taken refuge here from the fire with their belongings, there were
had taken while passing through Moscow, he left the kvass to Morel and
had that day been transferred.
had the air of a man happily performing one of the most solemn duties of
had the air of one who has suddenly lost faith in the whole human race.
had the benefit of the diplomat. Another group was at the tea table.
had the right to choose, and these posts never changed hands. Before
had then felt. She recalled his long sad and severe look at those words
had thought of all the young ladies without exception whom he had met
had time to secure quarters the soldiers ran out into the streets to
had time to think of what lay before her.
had to be counted before being let out.
had to be made ashamed of their visits to the French theater and aroused
had to be ordered to keep the "will" in.
had to be punished, he always felt undecided and consulted everybody in
had to die, so I asked why that angel Lise, who not only never wronged
had to do, not with fools, but with men who could teach him something in
had told her other suitor; that is, she put the matter so that the only
had told him: "I made you King that you should reign in my way, but not
had tormented him all dinnertime rose and took possession of him. He
had understood the peasants' tastes and aspirations, had learned to talk
had undertaken on his own responsibility, and began looking at the enemy
had undressed, but without washing off the cork mustaches, they sat a
had up for a second examination, were the hardest of all for Pierre.
had vanquished. The French dragoon officer was hopping with one foot on
had very important results for him, it seemed to him--as it seems to
had witnessed without taking notice of them--assumed in Karataev's a
had, or had not, a hundred and thirty inferior fire engines. Deserted
had. It was full of officers.
had. Yet in spite of this your vow was binding. You swerved from it.
hadn't interfered... Oh, my God! What is it all? What is it? Sonya,
hail, following a track freshly made by the artillery over the furrows
hair above his broad forehead which reminded one of a lion, and the deep
hair dressed a la grecque.
hair falls from a man's head."
hair in his beard or on his head, and his whole body gave an impression
hair was bound round, workman fashion, with a wisp of lime-tree bast,
hair, both curtsied in the same way, but the hostess' eye involuntarily
hair, perfumed, and in a new uniform, looking just as smart as he made
hairdressing was almost done. Sonya was finishing dressing and so was
hairs over his bald patch, also asked them to dinner. Sometimes on his
hairy, red hands with their short fingers deftly turned the ramrod. His
half over a sticky, muddy road, Bolkhovitinov reached Litashevka after
half-closed, rather humid eyes, or so firm a smile that expressed
half-contemptuous smile on his lips, scarcely touching the peak of his
half-open door of the corridor, intending to conceal himself as soon
half-open door.
half-ruined houses. The seniors tried to collect straw and potatoes and,
halfway. Fine orders!" was being repeated on different sides.
hall all sat waiting, silently and alert. In the outlying serfs'
halted and drew in the Square. Several French officers superintended the
halted for three quarters of an hour.
halted, spoke to the commander of the regiment, and rode up the hill to
halted, the Austrian argued that not he, but the higher command, was to
halting place and wherever they spent a night, Natasha never left the
halves: one half is she, and there all is joy, hope, light: the
hammering them, we're to receive double kits!"
hand and answered his question by saying that, on the contrary, she
hand and for some reason drawing it downwards. "Arrange that affair for
hand and hid with her behind a birch tree, not stopping to pick up some
hand and kissed her husband, and asked him why he was angry with her.
hand at the salute and resuming the game of adjutant and general for
hand begins to brandish it. Then let us imagine that the combatant who
hand he drew Bagration toward him, and with his right, on which he wore
hand now to speed and now to stay the enormous, popular tide that bore
hand of his betrothed in silence, looking at her beautiful bosom as it
hand on the dial of human history.
hand over the thin grizzled strands of hair combed back across his bald
hand the French had occupied Moscow. On the other Kutuzov felt assured
hand the squadron over to the next in seniority and appear before
hand them to the Emperor after my death. Now here is a Lombard bond and
hand to his ear toward Weyrother, with the air of a man absorbed in
hand to show that there was no need to ask the question. He wished to
hand to the captain.
hand, "so this is how we meet again. He spoke of you even at the very
hand, I shall go forward and break whatever is in front of me."
hand, and screwing up his eyes scanned the whole company.
hand, he left the room with quick resolute strides, without looking at
hand, impelled by instinctive fear, squeezed his throat ever tighter and
hand, lacking the spirit to die stinging him; the rest are dead and fall
hand, lay Prince Andrew Bolkonski bleeding profusely and unconsciously
hand, rode up smiling to the Emperor to congratulate him on the victory.
hand, was clearing manure from the cowhouse, looked out, and his face
hand.
hand.
hand.
hand. "But, Mamma, is he very much in love? What do you think? Was
hand. "Do you know, I have not once been in to see the count. He has not
hand; and the same feeling of pity, tenderness, and love took possession
handicraft, gardening, or anything else you please. But why intellectual
handing a pipe he had finished to an hussar riding behind him, with as
handing him several papers, "make a neat memorandum in French out of all
handing on to posterity of a certain important mystery... which has come
handkerchief and rushed from the room.
handkerchief he took out of his cap.
handkerchief to his wounded cheek and pointing to the fleeing soldiers.
handkerchief) to illustrate the theory that all men are equals, and had
handkerchief, and listened to what the housekeeper was saying.
handkerchief, and pipe.
handkerchiefs to their eyes, and just in front of them their eldest
handle, let it go again, and went to the window from which he had a
hands away and to bite them with her slobbering mouth. Pierre was seized
hands for a quarter of an hour, Princess, I'll drive round to see Anna
hands meekly folded on his knees, sat close to Helene and, with a
hands of the French. The Russians retreat and abandon their ancient
hands of the French. The adjutant asked whether Napoleon wished the
hands of the Russians, or that after Moscow there were other battles
hands of the watch, and the valves and wheels of the engine, and the
hands smelled of incense, and how on her last visit to Kiev some monks
hands still pressed on the seat, glanced at him glumly. Denisov, having
hands which show the time, so the result of all the complicated human
hands with a passionate movement.
hands, kissing them and pulling them away, and again began kissing each
hands, looked attentively into Prince Vasili's eyes evidently resolved
hands, with hairy wrists visible from under the shirt cuffs, laid down
hands. It is essential for him to combine his movements with those of
hands; the ammunition wagons he had been approaching no longer existed,
handsome adjutant approaching their box with a self-assured yet
handsome adjutant. This was Prince Bolkonski. Beside him was his
handsome exterior, that I loved in him. I divined his noble, resolute,
handsome horse despite its game leg--had the happy air of a schoolboy
handsome insolent eyes, Pierre felt something terrible and monstrous
handsome officer of the Horse Guards who passed by them with head erect,
handsome open face of the man who might perhaps be her husband absorbed
handsome they both are!"
handsome, happy young face, he experienced a feeling tenderness and
handwriting. On receiving it, he ran on tiptoe to his study in alarm and
hanged," said Prince Andrew with a smile. "So I am serving because I
hanging body, and how the workman sat down, his head hanging unnaturally
hanging down (she had handed her reticule to the countess), and only her
hanging lifelessly just in the pose she used to stand in when she
hanging on his benumbed left arm. The wrist felt as if it were not his.
happen and my heart tells me it will."
happen and what has happened? I am well and strong and still the same
happen to them when they were free, but he insisted, though reluctantly,
happen!" she said, looking at herself in the glass. "How shall I enter
happen. You may cease to... all right, I know I am not to say that. Only
happened because they all want to show how well they can fight. But
happened during those last days and during the first days of their
happened had Napoleon been in time to penetrate into the rich southern
happened had that action not been performed. The farther I go back
happened only when, as was the case that day, her husband returned home,
happened to be directly facing Natasha, and was struck by a curious
happened to fall into one of the fainting fits to which he was subject,
happened to her, but she felt herself the representative of her dead
happened was due to chance and was independent of the commander's will,
happened, were talking loudly among themselves, but as they passed
happened.
happened. So all these causes--myriads of causes--coincided to bring it
happened." He saw the frightened and then infuriated face of the dragoon
happened..."
happening and has to happen. There is no step, no crime or petty fraud
happening around him that evening was in some way essential.
happening in front of him. Nesvitski with an angry face, red and unlike
happening in the world. Little Nicholas alone had changed. He had grown,
happening--Kutuzov seems to them something indefinite and pitiful, and
happening--what did it matter to him whether Rostopchin attributed the
happening. We kept wetweating and wetweating. Did you take part in the
happens at critical moments of life. Whether it was from respect, envy,
happens solely for the attainment of their sheepish aims; they need only
happiest, merriest times for him and the whole family. Nicholas brought
happiness I wish for," she added, feeling that she was telling an
happiness and of children, but her strongest, most deeply hidden longing
happiness and that this happiness had something to do with the Gospels.
happiness did not appear impossible to her. It was at those moments that
happiness for me," and he took her hand and pressed it as he had
happiness in life, that in a fit of absent-mindedness she sat still, her
happiness in life."
happiness! And my affairs are in such a bad way that my position is now
happiness), feeling the eager bustle around him, and hearing the fitful
happiness, as well as by jealousy of her brother's love for her. Apart
happiness, she loves him so passionately, and so passionately repents. I
happiness, that happiness is within him, in the satisfaction of simple
happiness--floated continually in her imagination like temptations
happiness.
happiness.
happiness. And those thoughts, though now vague and indefinite, again
happiness. The presence of Sonya, of her beloved Natasha, or even of
happiness. There is much, much before us. I say this to you," he added,
happy I may be with such a friend and such a husband! Husband? Can it
happy because she had someone to adore her: the adoration of others
happy day in inactivity, was all the more depressed.
happy event in the family of the old Rostovs. Count Ilya Rostov died
happy eyes at her sister-in-law.
happy faces round the carts. The news that carts were to be had spread
happy in these novel surroundings that she only feared the trap would
happy look of resignation to the will of God on her face. Their box was
happy they would be. On Natasha's table stood two looking glasses which
happy though uneasy face of Pierre. It seemed as if the very light of
happy when she is his wife. She is so unfortunate, a stranger, alone,
happy world of his own. She fancied a child, her own--such as she had
happy! You understand me? I know you are glad for my sake."
happy, and as widow of the Grand... the prince would no longer be making
happy, smiling Circassian, with mustache and beaming eyes looking up
harboring a feeling of hatred toward him which I vainly tried to
harboring such strange thoughts that he was frightened.
hard, and (in her own way) proud princess.
hard.... For ages, from our forefather Adam to our own day, we labor to
hardened by a varnish left by the thousands of looks that had scanned
harder from behind.
harder his position became and the more terrible the future, the more
harder than before. The saturated road no longer absorbed the water,
hardly able to restrain her tears and maintain the artificial smile
hardly any of the staff were there--they had gone to the church service.
hardly be found nowadays--but is she contented with her lot? And who
hardly daring to dismount and always expecting to be pursued. By the end
hare.
hares had already half changed their summer coats, the fox cubs were
harm would be done to the inhabitants, and if they remained they would
harmful in an army; that a sovereign should reign but not command the
harmful, for it is impossible to say for what it was useful or harmful.
harmful, or hated, or guilty, were simply unnecessary. Some Russians
harming no one but necessary to the happiness of others--are called away
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
harness bells; she hears him coming! He comes in, just in the shape of a
harness disks and from the eyes of the horses, who looked round in alarm
harnessed to a small conveyance with a leather hood.
harnessed. Four borzois with collars were pressing close to the wheels.
harp and to play only the guitar. She asked "Uncle" for his guitar and
harsh, are conscious of it, but cannot restrain themselves and grow more
harvest, Nicholas pointed to the red-spotted bitch.
harvest, and asked himself whether he had not forgotten any of the
harvesting," thought Alpatych.
harvesting.
has Michael Kutuzov? No, my dear boy," he continued, "you and your
has a heart of gold."
has abandoned himself altogether to this mysticism" (Pierre could not
has an influence on him and controls at least some side of his activity.
has beaten the Germans. They beat no one--except one another. He made
has become acquainted with them. But the same series of experiments
has been degraded to the ranks and Bezukhov's son sent back to Moscow.
has been degraded, you know. Now he wants to bob up again. He's been
has been destroyed are hurrying: some from the heap dragging bits of
has been reinstated, but how could they fail to do that? I think there
has been written to the Emperor in which the count asks for Pierre's
has brought us to! Barbara Ivanovna told me the mob near killed her
has completed a full circle, this change was shown by an increased
has flowed since then! In what distress we all seemed to be then, yet
has gone? Eh, what people! 'Against God's might our hands can't fight.'"
has happened."
has his own peculiar, personal, novel, complicated disease, unknown to
has left Moscow? Are you sure? Eh?"
has lived through.
has no right to stop in his search for the cause. The man who explains
has only to observe that hive to realize that there is no longer any
has protested against the seizure of the Duke of Oldenburg's territory,
has received a St. George's Cross? I am so proud of him."
has since lived peaceably and harmlessly in society seems less guilty
has spread out and disappeared. Do you understand, my child?" said the
has the inconvenience--in application to complex and stormy periods in
has them to serve a general purpose incomprehensible to man.
has this advantage over other branches of knowledge in which the
has to admit an unexplained force acting on the resultant. And that is
has, besides abstract reasoning, experience by which he verifies his
haste at the Frenchwoman, her voice breaking: "It's horrible, vile,
haste packing their belongings and preparing for their departure. The
haste to satisfy all their expectations.
haste to say what he had to.
haste, trying to escape notice, closed the door, and began to read the
hastened to act.
hastening her steps. "You young ladies should not know anything about
hastily that the Frenchmen with the wagons had all been killed; only a
hastily), "is in Russia, and in the army again. What do you think?"--she
hat and green tail coat.
hat in hand and with a smile on his face was the last of the guests to
hat! Strange!" thought Pierre, continuing his way to Tatarinova.
hate her she gladly prayed for him as for an enemy. Only at prayer did
hated her and was forever sundered from her. Despite Denisov's request
hating Barclay, rode to visit a friend of his own, a corps commander,
hatred against anyone, and only desired that the plan, formed on a
hatred and shame in all our subjects? What are we scared at and of whom
hatred for the French in words proved insufficient, when it was not
hatred of the French.
hats. Princess Mary lowered her eyes and, tripping over her skirt, came
haunches and sliding, the horses descended with their riders into the
have a friend like the prince," she said, smiling at Prince Vasili. "I
have a look at it"--and Kutuzov with an ironical smile about the corners
have a love letter from him in her hand?
have a nook of one's own in which to be quiet. And now there's this
have a party."
have a stronger effect on the sincere seeker after wisdom and virtue
have a tete-a-tete with Natasha--Mademoiselle Bourienne remained in
have adopted in similar cases, simply and easily pick up the first
have already heard much of you in Petersburg and wanted to get to know
have any children by me."
have any ill feeling for me. I beg you to forgive me."
have anything to do with a young lady seemed to him impossible. He
have armed themselves in Thy Name, and gird their loins with strength
have attained the same end," returned Prince Andrew. "Every courtier
have attracted our attention, and to study the movements of the herd
have been "stupid fellow"... or "the whole affair will be ruined," or
have been a merchant's son. What men!... and they say he's not the right
have been a prisoner if Suvorov had had a free hand; but he had the
have been agreeable--she did not know--but she had no time at all for
have been any other. To imagine it as free, it is necessary to imagine
have been applied word for word to himself in relation to his wife.
have been changed. To historians who believe that Russia was shaped by
have been conceived. It's as if it had been done on purpose, on purpose.
have been difficult to stop that crowd, it was even impossible not to
have been done for, as his troops had neither provisions nor ammunition.
have been even less reason to expect a disturbance among the people
have been expected to be eager to attack--employed his whole strength to
have been more surprised than Mademoiselle Bourienne at the change that
have been no life, there would have been nothing.
have been no war; but had all his sergeants objected to serving a second
have been obvious to Napoleon that by advancing thirteen hundred miles
have been proud to let him see us. There now--you talk of my absence,
have been sent him from here, and his Serene Highness says he will
have been summoned here not to discuss whether it's best for the empire
have been there to show that fellow Bolkonski that connection with him
have been wasting time."
have brought away.... The icons, and my dowry bed, all the rest is lost.
have come to Melyukovka," thought Nicholas.
have come to it," said he.
have come... I am a relation. I shall not disturb him, my friend... I
have cried "Vive l'Empereur!" at any nonsense that might be told them.
have dared to say so, knew it and blushed scarlet every time Dolokhov
have done anything but make a return movement toward Moscow, describing
have done at that moment had Helene not fled from the room.
have done she felt bound to say and do. She went into Prince Andrew's
have done so; he continually made the gesture of a man wishing to say
have done them.' Father took her when she was homeless after losing her
have expended millions, when you are in alliance with England, and when
have felt myself, a part of that vast invisible chain the beginning of
have given the Emperor Alexander Moldavia and Wallachia, and now he
have got some notion or other in your head. You hide everything from
have had to retire of their own accord, for they had no water for men
have hastened to take all steps to that end. May I have succeeded!' The
have heard it described by others, and as sounds well, but not at all as
have heard the sobs. It seems as though mankind has forgotten the
have known you had I met you by chance," and I thought to myself, "Am I
have liked to sympathize with what Pierre was saying, but could not.
have lived so long?"
have looked, if nothing had been done, if there had not been those pills
have mercy upon us! This foe confounding Thy land, desiring to lay
have moved his army to the Kaluga road long before reaching Fili, and
have no end.
have no money, so I was going to ask the count..."
have not arrived. Gallop off to him at once and say I'll have his head
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
have not quitted Moscow."
have of hope and strength merely weighs you down and torments you with
have one, I will pay the man well, and..."
have pity on a young man in misfortune. You know he has important
have proceeded to fight the Russians because it was inevitable.
have proceeded. When Newton enunciated the law of gravity he did not say
have received very little, Prince Vasili nothing, and it is Monsieur
have rescued her from the fire. But this is a monster and neither a
have run there, but the clerk who had taken the young gentleman under
have said that I should be a soldier and a captain of dragoons in the
have said. And he was still more angry at having omitted to say it. He
have secrets from your mother."
have sent to ask. I think you must be tired, Princess."
have separated into detachments to defend themselves--congregated into
have some water blessed. That will help them to get well quicker. I,
have some."
have something to tell you. Here, here!" and she led him into the
have suggested to your heart, if it is sincere, more than words could
have taken lovers (des amants), but I have not done so," said she.
have the courier horses. It was plain that he was lying and only wanted
have the pistol."
have the wolves eaten you? Fetch some more wood!" shouted a red-haired
have their limits and that those limits are very near together; that the
have thought!..."
have thrown off all that had been forced upon him--everything military
have to be sold, so that it was impossible to give it to Vera. Nor had
have to die."
have to march with no road into unknown parts of the Bohemian mountains,
have to prove to them what he had not merely convinced himself of, but
have to repent is not enough. I lived like that, I lived for myself
have to share that fate. Still less did Pierre think about himself. The
have to unite his fate with hers. He might perhaps have been able
have to... the Metropolitan himself... and even then it can't be done.
have told you"; and not replying a word to Berg who was now mute beside
have tried to put them somewhere under cover," Nicholas continued
have two estates in Penza and the Nizhegorod forests). Anna Mikhaylovna
have two footmen behind her carriage, and very big ones. That was her
have used his Old Guards, who were intact, and the battle would have
have virtuous aims," said Pierre, feeling ashamed of the inadequacy of
have waited eighteen months for explanations. But in order to begin
have wefused a weconciliation, please pwoceed. Take your pistols, and at
have with the actual fact of slaughter and violence: why because the
have written confirmation of the order the field marshal had given.
have written to Alexander: "My respected Brother, I consent to restore
have yielded up all Europe to him, and have now come to teach us. Fine
have you come with? Eh?"
have you sent Gabriel for some wine? All right let's have some!"
haven't you taken one?"
having a greater momentum, and with equal inevitability the ball
having abandoned all the rest and all his cannon, and having crossed the
having convinced himself that he was asleep, took up a paper and in
having definite means to maintain my wife, I should be acting badly...."
having given orders to his company, sent a soldier to find a dressing
having given them to the rosy Natasha, who beamed with the pleasure
having greeted him, knowing his habits and his acquaintances, told him
having heard the slightest sound of the shots. He only saw how the
having hinted that he would burn Moscow and now repudiated the deed;
having killed so many people (they even exaggerate the number), and they
having left home a boy he had returned (as everybody told him) a fine
having lost a single man. The second squadron that had been in the front
having lost all motive and all sense of life. Drones, bumblebees, wasps,
having lunch when one can get it.
having occurred and an understanding between us will be possible. In
having once begun to analyze he ought to go on and explain further why
having ordered the infantry supports behind the battery to lie down,
having put off their departure till next morning, went to bed.
having quarreled with another, collects an army, fights his enemy's
having ridden ahead, had pulled up his horse near the bridge, with a
having solved the problems that so absorbed him. He had been engrossed
having something to eat. They hastily turned round to him asking if he
having spared you, do you want to try typhus? This is a pesthouse, sir."
having stuck an amber mouthpiece far into his mouth, was inhaling the
having taken a dozen steps he seemed to remember something and stopped.
having taken and closed the exercise book with the next day's lesson,
having to direct a battle he did not approve of, got into his caleche
having uttered this compliment, he again gazed at him in silence.
hawkers, and the shopkeepers, all looked at him with cheerful beaming
hawkers, the light and gay summer clothes of the crowd, the dusty leaves
hazard.
haze. It grew light. The evening was ending, but the night had not yet
he accepted a post in Moscow in that service, doffed the uniform of
he accepted the role of head of the Moscow opposition. In spite of this
he added rising, "you know my name and where to find me, but don't
he added that Prince Vasili was also there. When Tikhon came to her
he added, and was about to go to the drawing room.
he again came out on the road and overtook his regiment at its halting
he again jumped the ditch, and deferentially addressed the horseman with
he again started reckoning. Two French soldiers ran past Pierre, one of
he alone knew how to utter.
he also felt that on what he said now his future depended--whether he
he also told what he had at first concealed--his own position and even
he always continued to suffer. I said it then only because it would have
he always did when at the front, solemn and stern. Then came the word of
he always drove himself and never demanded anything for his work. Only
he always experienced at the sight of the enemy suddenly seized him. He
he amuses himself setting a policeman astride a bear! For shame, sir,
he any money.
he appeared before notre tres gracieux souverain * with the news of the
he appeared to them a rather mysterious and superior being. The very
he applied himself to business with zeal and perseverance and surprised
he approaches for the thousandth time the action that always ends in the
he arrested?
he arrived. The passionate tenderness with which his mother received him
he asked involuntarily, though only to himself. "Oh, yes, long ago
he asked, turning to the assistant.
he asked.
he be accused of ambition. More than once he had vexed his father by
he been doing all this time?"
he began explaining his reasons for thinking the abbe's plan chimerical.
he began sincerely to believe in his own exceptional kindness and
he began thinking of the glad vindictive moment when he would meet
he began to be conscious of the physical weariness of his aged body and
he began to cry.
he began to pace the room.
he began to wriggle and twitch his body and utter piercing, ringing,
he called "Karabakh" though it was of Ukranian breed, and went up to it.
he can get his reward just as well in the rearguard, but if he wishes to
he caught a momentary glimpse between their heads and backs of the dying
he changed his sergeant major and was unable to manage all the drunken
he clapped his hands to the musicians and shouted up to their gallery,
he closed them he saw before him the dreadful face of the factory
he collided with a Cossack who had fallen behind, but he galloped on.
he commits, which in the mouths of those around him is not at once
he considered it necessary to hear to the end, probably to arouse the
he considered the "love of clodhoppers" and the other the "love
he continued, returning to the talk in the study which had evidently
he continued, with a sudden, good-natured laugh, "was that we could not
he could attain it, it would be the end of all things. Everything ended
he could from a Frenchman into the wood. Besides, to tell everything as
he could neither remedy nor forget. He could not weep. The old man too
he could not repress as he recalled his reception at Brunn. In the
he could not stand my physical idleness, but would grow fat and die.
he could not stop short for the sake of one man's life."
he cried.
he described the whole campaign with a fearless self-censure and
he desired it the less he allowed himself to believe it. This question
he destroyed that dreadful barrier which--in the absence of such
he did not do as he was told? Balashev mentioned who he was. The
he did not do it he would grieve and disappoint many people, but if he
he did not explain to himself what these new relations were. "They're
he did not know, but some he recognized. The young officer still sat in
he did not look at them: he looked only at what was going on in front
he did not see him and had no opportunity of seeing him, he often spoke
he did, as much as possible by signs, and her tongue too seemed to move
he dreamed that the Holy Virgin Mother of the Kiev catacombs came to him
he dressed for dinner. The old prince always dressed in old-fashioned
he employed the diplomacy he reserved for important occasions and,
he even found cause for self-satisfaction in having so successfully
he excused himself for having been taken prisoner and now, imagining
he feared a court-martial and was worried over the affair, which was
he fell ill. She was terrified by his illness, and yet that was just
he felt a difficulty in expressing himself now while talking with
he felt a little confused before his son. "Now, if you would only help
he felt flattered that, after what had happened, "Uncle" deigned to
he felt himself powerless, limp, and formless. His father caressed and
he felt that in proportion to the efforts of that fatal force to crush
he felt that this did not forward matters at all. He felt that these
he fingered the money in his pocket and wondered whether it would seem
he followed the maid, overtook her, and came out on the Povarskoy. The
he forgot the sovereigns' presence. "Lads, it's not the first village
he free. How he would propose to her and how she would become his wife.
he fully appreciated the enjoyment of eating when he wanted to eat,
he galloped to the other flank of the squadron and shouted in a hoarse
he gave Boris a pleasant smile, frowned as with half-closed eyes he
he gave me a notebook, the one I am now writing in and in which I will
he gave them or could not be and were not executed.
he glanced into Rostov's eyes.
he glanced round at her. She gave him a passionately angry glance, and
he glanced round at the pool from whence came sounds of shrieks and
he good! I didn't know him! And how he dances. Dear me, there's a
he got his wound. This pleased Rostov and he began talking about it, and
he got into bed, happy and agitated but free from hesitation or
he gradually recovered and went with me into my study carrying a large
he grudged spending money on cards or anything harmful, he was prepared
he had abandoned everything and not left the city, but remained there
he had alluded to had happened a few days before--a fight between the
he had already, in some way, bound himself to do something that was
he had assigned to each of them, for her dowry, an estate with three
he had been indebted to her father for the first steps in his career.
he had been like that himself but a short time before.
he had brought from the Empress, on two chairs directly in front of the
he had come, or what was happening to her. When she saw his Russian
he had composed about various well-known Petersburg people. He was
he had composed in his imagination could he now recall. Those speeches
he had devised while serving at the outposts during the retreat. He had
he had done seven years before at Austerlitz.
he had done the day before. That something shameful was his yesterday's
he had entered into his proper position in the province--that of a
he had ever tasted. As he sat bending greedily over it, helping himself
he had finished his greeting there was a general stir, and a footman who
he had guessed them, and inquiringly repeated: "Mary, are you afraid?"
he had had time to finish giving these instructions, a chief of staff
he had heard in Vienna and which he had been trying all that evening to
he had heard the voices of the officers distinctly, but as often happens
he had himself composed.
he had just been talking. This flattered Prince Andrew. "I have known of
he had just managed to catch her, "didn't he tell you how he himself was
he had known from a child, with this new conception of her baseness,
he had lain there some time, he was told to get up, and a white leather
he had lately procured himself a large, fine, mettlesome, Donets horse,
he had learned how to manage his thoughts when in danger. He had grown
he had learned not by words or reasoning but by direct feeling what his
he had left his purchases.
he had left. All the others let him go, and he ran to her. When they
he had long been convinced that it was impossible for him to make a
he had looked over the heads of the men around him, when he should have
he had more than once noticed that such utterances were received as very
he had never seen before, filled Napoleon with the rather envious and
he had never seen such delicate whiteness of face or hands--hands which
he had no mother.
he had not thought about it until that moment. The officers' laughter
he had prepared, but what, quite appropriately, occurred to him at the
he had pushed away. "But... in short, the fact is... you know yourself
he had really been there the night before and really seen Natasha and
he had received a letter from Prince Theodore, asking him to come
he had received news that his father, son, and sister had left for
he had respected so highly as Platon Karataev.
he had ridden out at the head of the Guards, in his casque and cavalry
he had seen at Bald Hills when he passed through it.
he had so despised seven years before.
he had something more to say, or waiting to see if Pierre would say
he had spent over an hour, and of that family circle which had received
he had spoken, or say: "Oh, why did I not say that?" and, "Whatever made
he had stayed in the shed where he was first put.
he had taken from his sister and another ten thousand borrowed with
he had to deliver to them from the highest leaders of their order. The
he had to speak to the Marshal, was driving up the avenue in the grounds
he had used to Alexander himself at Tilsit. "All that, he would have
he had visited the night before with Dolokhov. The French were making
he had, but fearing that it might look like pride subscribed the same
he has caused Moscow to perish," said Rostopchin in a sharp, even voice,
he has grown physically much weaker. He has become thinner and more
he has no one. He is constantly alone with his thoughts."
he has not slept," said the orderly pleadingly in a whisper. "You should
he has received a letter and is expecting a visit from Prince Vasili. In
he has such capital things. I bought ten pounds. I am used to something
he heard in front of him, where the enemy was, the long-drawn shouts
he heard some French spoken he at once began speaking to the officers,
he heard the boom, boom, boom of firing, the thud of projectiles, groans
he held a handkerchief, while with the other he stroked the delicate
he held out his arm to grasp her waist before he had completed his
he held the hilt of his naked saber, looked just as it usually did,
he honestly considered himself irreproachable, sincerely despised rogues
he indicated with his delicate fingers what he meant by a pinch.
he is a fool, that's all!"
he is asking for you..."
he is better acquainted than anyone else, does not listen to others but
he is better, ask Pierre to dine with us. He has been to the house, you
he is dying, and you come and bleed him and patch him up. He will drag
he is excitable and easily forgets himself and other people. A Russian
he is good and magnanimous and will love her who makes his son happy."
he is probably tired of them," said another officer.
he is regretfully abandoning Moscow. Sire! Kutuzov's action decides the
he is so frank and has so much heart. He is so pure and poetic that
he is! Now don't think badly of me or of him. I don't think badly of
he is, and the count has not once asked for him."
he jumped up he did not run at once, but pricked his ears listening to
he kept nodding to show that he understood, Anatole went on translating
he knew Pierre would not like), but for just such gratefully religious
he knew it would be some time yet before the order, "Be off, in God's
he knew of the French detachment.
he knew or a stranger, so unlike himself did the corporal seem at that
he knew that the beast was wounded, and wounded as only the whole
he lacked that strength of will which he had known in himself and really
he lay back in his armchair, looking in another direction.
he lay down on the leather sofa in front of a round table, put his big
he let me be there instead of Tikhon?" Princess Mary had thought and
he lifted a glass of wine.
he liked them; liked that mad driving at twelve miles an hour, liked
he looked at Ilyin talking to the girl. Following Dunyasha, Alpatych
he looked at and listened to Willarski, it seemed strange to think that
he looked more closely at the ring, with its skull--a Masonic sign.
he looked only at the person with whom he was conversing.
he looked very grim he said nothing to anyone.
he made for himself at Bucharest! I don't speak of his capacity as a
he made up his mind that Prince Andrew had been killed, and though he
he may be, exhort him who goeth astray, raise him that falleth, never
he meant to relate to his comrades. What had really taken place he did
he met Nesvitski, with whom he shared a room, and the wag Zherkov; they
he might not be unworthy of the company in which he found himself.
he moved from the gun, when a strange, unfamiliar voice called above his
he must have returned home. The officer searched till six o'clock in the
he must retreat as quickly as possible behind the hollow in the rear,
he must ride there.
he muttered something angrily and went away along the passage.
he needed was lying uppermost, the first card in the pack. He had lost
he never knew or remembered. "This must be one of her companions," he
he nevertheless intended to pardon. Pierre remained silent. "I am well
he nevertheless on the day of his arrival went to his father's part of
he noticed that it should not have been put.
he now, after the lessons he had had in life, allowed himself to believe
he now, sleeping on the bare damp earth with one side growing chilled
he passed it. Pierre began to feel a sense of uneasiness, and the
he patted Michaud on the shoulder. "You set me at ease, Colonel."
he pitied his friend the more did he think with contempt and even with
he pities the boy.' I'll show them tomorrow whether I'm a boy. Will it
he pleases, at once assumed her own position to be correct, as she
he poured too many drops into the glass. He threw the mixture onto the
he pressed her arm.
he raised it did Pierre understand that he had to pass on the other side
he ran his fingers over the strings, something seemed to snap.
he reaches Paris, the dissolution of the republican government, which a
he realized that people might not be aware of his happiness, he pitied
he reeled and sank on the snow.
he reflected on those irrational, inexpressible thoughts, secret as a
he reflected, "there is no riding round it now. I must look for the
he reflected. "Why? But perhaps I shall go. What a good fellow he is and
he regarded such a refusal as a slur on his father's memory, which he
he reined in his horse, hesitating whether to ride along it or cross it
he released Bolkonski's arm to indicate that he had now quite finished.
he remained in the room.
he remarked at a later date.
he remarked:
he remembered the peasants and Dron the village elder, and mentally
he remembered the words the Emperor Alexander had not written in his
he reports that our losses were great, it is not true; perhaps about
he returned again, called back the cook and the club steward, and again
he returned with the horse all in a lather, he informed Lavrushka
he roared, "Hurrah!" and emptying his glass at one gulp he dashed it to
he rose superior to the Revolution, suppressed its abuses, preserved all
he sad at leaving his wife?--perhaps both, but evidently he did not
he said angrily to a general who had ridden up. "Don't you understand,
he said in a low voice:
he said to himself, "the Kiev grenadiers and the Podolsk chasseurs must
he said) for Pierre's sake, hardly exchanged a couple of words with him,
he said, addressing his favorite soldier. "And where is the wounded
he said, as if strengthening his views by this French sentence. "C'est
he said, turning to the door as he heard a tread of heavy boots and the
he said.
he said.
he said:
he sank into his place on the sofa after two bottles of Margaux he was
he sat down at the nearest table.
he sat up in bed, then got up, then lay down again not at all troubled
he saw smoke, blood, and the pale, scared faces of the Frenchmen who
he saw turrets and a church. What need to hurry? What was he now to say
he saw under her bonnet as by the feeling of solicitude, timidity, and
he saw which way the wind was blowing, and his low opinion changed into
he says: 'I'm a general's son myself, I won't go!' he says."
he screamed in the same piercing tone as when parting from his son.
he seemed a man from another world, and for a long time Natasha trained
he seemed even fonder than of his aunt, and clung to them quietly and
he should and doing no wrong. Only he prayed to God for death. Well, one
he shouted.
he shrank before the transport of groundless wrath that had evidently
he sighed and looked down.
he slept very little and, instead of sleeping in his study as usual,
he slighted them and plainly preferred the gypsy girls and French
he sought and did not find in himself the former tenderness for his son
he spoke French. Pierre felt sad at hearing them making fun of him.
he spoke it badly, offered to conduct Prince Andrew.
he spoke those words, or uttered them purposely, knowing them to be
he stepped down from the carriage just as if those two thousand men
he suddenly asked himself when he was already near the green ammunition
he suddenly stopped and performed some new and unexpected steps. When at
he supposed the Emperor to hold, and the fact that all the generals
he takes a regiment, a division-stipulates that no one is to interfere
he talked to Pierre), the old man was sitting on a large leather-covered
he thought as he looked at the tall lad flourishing his arm. And this
he thought out everything, and that is why he is unsuitable. He is
he thought that his enemy would send the squadron on a desperate attack
he thought to himself, "I have done nothing wrong. Have I killed anyone,
he thought, looking irritably at her. "She is shameless, and he ignores
he thought. "That Princess Helene will be beautiful still when she's
he thought: "But how strange it is that he should not know that now
he threw open the bearskin cloak from his broad chest and inhaled the
he told her she was still the same crybaby as ever. Princess Mary had
he told me himself... but still I should not cry," and she showed
he treated Balashev not as an envoy from his enemy, but as a man
he tried to continue the conversation he had begun with Princess Mary he
he twirled his mustache, all now seemed offensive. "I will go away
he unconsciously gave Pierre's spiritual life its due) he would not have
he understood it all, though he really did not understand anything of
he unwrapped and offered Pierre some baked potatoes. "We had soup for
he uttered a plaintive cry of pain, and that cry was fatal. The barrier
he uttered the word Poltava before Caulaincourt began speaking of the
he uttered.
he wanted to know what Natasha thought of it.
he wanted to say and nodded approval.
he was a fine lad.
he was a great genius. And for some reason he went to kill Africans, and
he was admitted to the Emperor, and an hour later he rode off with
he was advancing to certain destruction, and it must have been equally
he was afraid of finding in her a rival for Count Bezukhov's fortune,
he was apt to succumb. He felt that everything was now at an end, all
he was dealing with. "Der alte Herr" (as in their own set the Germans
he was doubly to blame, and he would have preferred to wait; but one of
he was in contact with the springs that set in motion the enormous
he was in doubt or inwardly at variance, he referred to the views he had
he was in. It was not that Moscow had been taken or that the happy
he was justified in saying so."
he was lifted and laid on the stretcher.
he was now even more experienced and skillful than before. Even the
he was quite well and unwounded. Many various, indifferent, and
he was reputed to be clever and very well read, and secondly because by
he was said to be insanely jealous and subject like his father to fits
he was saying was out of place, tactless and unsuitable, that remarks
he was saying.
he was sent immediately with a special dispatch to Brunn. To be so sent
he was sent to hard labor in Siberia.
he was sent. This was the brilliant charge of the Horse Guards that
he was silent, as if astonished, then he jumped out of bed, ran to me in
he was so high." She held her hand a couple of feet from the ground.
he was standing down below, or from the knoll above on which some of his
he was struck by a voice coming from the shed, and its tone was so
he was there, behind, so close behind her.
he was thrown amid those big, dreadful, cruel men who were fighting
he was touched, but also a gleam of irony on his face.
he was transferred to another regiment on active service. Nicholas was
he was trying to read something peculiar written at that moment on the
he was very exposed, produced in him a state of hopeless agitation and
he was wanted--that chevalier sans peur et sans reproche * as he styled
he watched the serfs, trying to understand their aims and what they
he went away in a fog, without having said what he meant to, and not
he went forward uneasily over the rough field with the awkward gait of
he went on naively looking around through his spectacles as if in search
he went on, swaying his head. "Because you are sorry for him! Don't we
he went out.
he were saying something which had long since been agreed upon and could
he who says that an undermined hill weighing a million tons fell because
he will always say the right thing and say it well.
he will show what he can do, as he did in Finland. If our army is well
he will stake his life on it that the enemy will not enter Moscow."
he wished to say, "Mon tres honorable preopinant"--"My very honorable
he worked at formulating the section on Personal Rights.
he would 'make them eat horseflesh!'"
he would be blamed for not having executed sooner the important order
he would be stopped once or twice more while they sent back to fetch
he would certainly be taken prisoner. Kutuzov remained in the same place
he would choose her for a wife, and frankly I do not wish it. But I am
he would give an opinion at the war council which would be the only one
he would have approved of is our family life. He was always so anxious
he would have done to a stranger.
he would himself have wished to be--one who explained all the facts of
he would lead away heaven only knew where. How could one capture a
he would leave that night for the army at Mozhaysk, and that his saddle
he would make the countess his mother happy, would be able to put his
he would not listen to it. He was even pleased by failures, for failures
he would not make peace so long as a single armed Frenchman remained on
he would sell for two thousand rubles; incomprehensible as it
he would understand it all. Where is he now?" she thought, and her face
he write in those idiotic broadsheets that anyone, 'whoever it might be,
he! Yes, that man is somehow closely and painfully connected with me,"
he'll soon have us, too, for his subjects! How are you?" And he held out
he's made off."
he, "I shall be sent with a brigade or division, and there, standard in
he, carrying away into the darkness a glowing stick.
he, evidently sincerely satisfied with his success. "Only, please be
he, looking at Shinshin and the count with a joyful, pleasant smile,
he, pointing to the prisoners. "Worse off than our poorest beggars.
he.
he. "Now for trouble!" Rostov looked out of the window and saw Denisov
he... he... he said he was wishing for it at the very moment I entered
head (the pains had just left her). Strands of her black hair lay round
head and again assuming his former tone of a dull, unreasoning, but
head and at the little arms and legs which showed under the blanket. He
head and began to speak rapidly.
head and leg by bullets. Around him, eagerly listening to his talk, a
head and looking like a bull about to charge, "why do you think so? You
head and looking over her classically molded shoulder as she stood
head and wearing a shabby blue cassock--probably a church clerk and
head disapprovingly. In the middle of the reading, the Uhlan interrupted
head disconsolately, told the driver to turn into the yard, and stopped
head fall on the window sill.
head he let it droop and again closed his eye.
head in perplexity--perhaps because the banner really interested him,
head long after Anna Mikhaylovna and, dashing at her, flung herself on
head of his regiment without charging anything for the show.
head of the Catholic Church--yet all keep silent! Our sovereign alone
head of the movement grows with the increased size of the group. During
head over his cap. He was evidently tipsy, and was singing a French song
head sadly, pointing them out to the Austrian general with an expression
head seemed familiar to Prince Andrew: they were lifting him up and
head slightly bent. His face was fresh and rosy, his white-plumed hat,
head steward's calculation, about two million rubles.
head that had sunk almost to his horse's mane and pulled up beside
head this way and that, she fastened on the cap and, hurriedly kissing
head thrown awkwardly back and his shako off.
head while you were asleep. Forgive me, Daddy,' he says, 'for Christ's
head with its bold features and glittering eyes was resting on his hand.
head, but the instant he turned to Prince Andrew the firm, intelligent
head, pulled it off, and showed the blood congealed on his hair.
head, with a shrewd though angry expression, standing near the first
head, with his thin neck exposed by his turn-down collar, toward the
head.
head.
head. He seemed to be unable to understand the meaning of all these
head."
head: "Captain Tushin! Captain!"
headlong speed with no time to consider what this movement might lead
headlong to the horse. "Walk him up and down, my dear fellow," he
headlong toward the porch with lifted tail, began rubbing himself
headlong up the stairs.
headlong, crushing one another, but had afterwards reassembled and
headquarters behind the village to the left, and thither Rostov rode,
headquarters, and having ascended a dark staircase, they entered a small
headquarters, and the commander in chief has to ask for a battalion to
headquarters, it was possible to succeed in many ways unthinkable at
headquarters. But on the afternoon of that day, this activity reached
headquarters. For the Pavlograd hussars, however, the whole of this
heads but theories not worth an empty eggshell and haven't in their
heads that it could have been otherwise at this meeting.
heads, terrible and low, a cannon ball whistled, and it seemed to Pierre
heal and its edges join, physical and spiritual wounds alike can yet
heal completely only as the result of a vital force from within.
health and temper became much worse. He grew still more irritable, and
health and to the certain defeat of the French!"
health of Prince Ivan and Countess Mary Alexeevna.
health, and now this vexation about his son is enough to kill him!"
health, and to reminiscences of the gay and amusing times he had spent
health, led the way to his mother, and having sat there for five minutes
healthy body, and all the affection and care of his family. "And why did
hear a word but Dolokhov is mentioned. They swear by him, they offer
hear and understand my benefactor's words." Again he covered himself up
hear him.
hear more went to the door of the room opposite the innkeeper's, where
hear that Lavrushka--that sly, bold orderly of Denisov's--was talking,
hear was: "ahahah!" and "rrrr!"
hear whether he would say anything more. But Kutuzov, with respectfully
hear?"
hear?"
heard (as he used afterwards to say), and gave expression to his
heard (without knowing whether it was a delusion or reality) a
heard Platon's voice enfeebled by illness, and saw his pathetic face
heard a rustle behind him and a shadow appeared under the curtain of
heard about you from my page, Drubetskoy. Have you heard he is getting
heard ahead. "Forward by the left. Walk, march!" came the order from in
heard around the campfires, Dolokhov turned into the courtyard of the
heard assuring an old baroness that he loved her passionately, at which
heard at the door, and the young count, handsome, rosy, with a dark
heard at the staff.
heard from that spot, of the dog's howl, of the guilty faces of the two
heard her, not heeding her words but occasionally looking up at her and
heard in Petersburg with Prince Andrew. What she drew from the guitar
heard low voices which seemed to be whispering.
heard musket fire quite close in front of him and behind our troops,
heard of her might be false. And he again saw her not as the daughter
heard of him inspired him with but little respect for the man.
heard on every side.
heard questions of where the marshals of the nobility were to stand when
heard respectfully congratulating the dying man on having received the
heard that the regiments were to be made up to their full strength, that
heard the nurse calling her and went to the nursery. Countess Mary
heard the quick rustle of the countess' dress. She came up to them.
heard the rustle of the cockroaches and the buzzing of the fly that
heard the sound of slippered feet rapidly approaching. Princess Mary
heard the words as he might have heard the buzzing of a fly. Not only
heard those days. Natasha watched him with an intent gaze that confused
heard, and out of the foggy darkness the figure of a sergeant of hussars
heard.
heard.
heard."
heard?"
hearers--who like himself had often heard stories of attacks and had
hearing a rustle, rushes straight at the hunter's gun, runs forward and
hearing him!" said the old prince, keeping hold of the hand and offering
hearing him, became still surlier and ruder.
hearing or understanding her own words, what she had told hundreds of
hearing that Prince Andrew had come, he went out with his spectacles on
hearing that they wished to see the count, said his excellency was worse
hearing the terrible sounds of the crowd, Rostopchin grew physically
hearing these words her face changed and something brightened in her
hearing what was said to him. Napoleon did not notice this expression;
hearken to his appeal. At the very moment when she would have seized her
heart a keen sportsman, knew the rules of the hunt well, and rode to
heart had a hidden dream and hope that supplied the chief consolation
heart in the presence of the unfathomable did not lessen but increased.
heart of gold to which I know no equal. He has realized, it seems to me,
heart rejoices to know that you... You have suffered so much.... But, my
heart with his love. At the gate stood Gerasim, the cook, and two
heart!"
heart"--a statement which, though gathered from an unknown source, he
heart, and then immediately starting to run along the hall and up the
heart, was now to assume another, a European, significance.
heart, with a beatific smile and obviously equally ready to cry or to
heart.
heart. "It has begun! Here it is, dreadful but enjoyable!" was what the
heart. Happy the man who wins her! With her the least worldly of men
heartily sick of them. In spite of this, or rather because of it, next
heartily wished Natasha well. As she was leaving the Rostovs she called
heartily, they started singing, dancing, and playing Christmas games.
heartless and ungrateful, while truly... God is my witness," and she
heartrending scene.... It was a convoy of conscripts enrolled from our
hearts of Nicholas and Natasha, arousing in them the same kind of sober
hearts of the people. Having learned that there were many charitable
hearts the one thing needed tomorrow--that which Timokhin has. They
heat and from running, he felt at that moment more strongly than ever
heat that peace was impossible between a legitimate sovereign and the
heated horses, exchanging remarks and smiling, had stopped behind the
heated in a fight who strikes those on his own side, shouted angrily at
heaven knows what about him.... What do you think of him?"
heaven only knows what! And they have had to suffer for it. Dolokhov
heaven!... Oh, the rascals!... See how that fellow has loaded
heaven's sake let me again have captivity and horseflesh! We imagine
heaven.
heavenly feeling. Boris was telling his new friend Pierre who the guests
heavier it grew. And suddenly Brother A. came and, taking my arm, led
heavily, panted past him, and he heard the fall of a body and saw Daniel
heavy chains. Princess Mary was particularly fond of her. Once, when in
heels--we know what that means...."
height and stoutness, and the strange morose look of suffering in his
height of happiness was reached--and so simply, without warning, or
height of joy or misery. She was not concerned about the Emperor or any
height the situation demanded. And all these groups, while talking
height without the smallest effort, his ease contrasting with the heavy
heightened color.
heir--apparent from the army--who on his own authority and contrary
heiress in the same way. All this might, he thought, turn out very well
heiress."
held at this time of his madness and they always proved correct.
held him in their power.... The ten fell to him.
held in her hand. "All I know is that his real will is in his writing
held next day. Prince Andrew, as one closely connected with Speranski
held sacred, and therefore would not hear of refusing and accepted the
held the army together. The Russians, on the contrary, ought according
held.
held.
help and strengthen me that I may walk in Thy ways! Read the Scriptures,
help being afraid," he said laughing.
help going."
help him.
help in that difficulty.
help loving Nicholas and knowing that his happiness depended on that
help me to tear from myself these dogs--my passions especially the last,
help me! My God, if Thy forsaking me is Thy doing, Thy will be done; but
help regretting having been left in ignorance of what was happening, and
help understanding? Not only Nicholas, but even Natasha understood
helped... one is sometimes a bit hasty on parade... I am the first to
helping the officers to fix up the dinner table.
helping their parents, were generally a nuisance and a hindrance to
helpless! And, oh God, how passionately she must love him if she could
helplessly and he made a fruitless effort to pull it forward. Whether he
helplessly on the sofa.
helplessly spread out, stood with his broad chest directly facing
helplessness. At sight of this smile Pierre felt an unexpected quivering
helter-skelter from the wood opposite and the whole pack rushed across
her 'God's folk.' It's really very curious."
her about so!"
her abroad for consultations there, and had he not been able to explain
her again.
her alone, that early and terrible death has had the most beneficent
her and about to crush her was some terrible misfortune, the worst
her and at the crack in the pantry door, and it seemed to her that she
her and had wounded some of her people. He rushed in and saved her...."
her and her parents feel that the childish relations between himself and
her and looking at her. She realized that those noticing her liked her,
her and picked up her reticule and drove out with her. How did it begin,
her and spoken laughingly of her brother's love, and that she again met
her and that she deserved it. "Why does Prince Andrew, who sees this,
her and to the family. His wife's demands astonished him, but they also
her and yet was beloved by everybody. And for the first time Sonya felt
her armchair and called Natasha and the count to her.
her as a distant beauty far removed from him, as he had seen her every
her at all. Anatole was not quick-witted, nor ready or eloquent in
her bare arms and neck--suddenly affected her both agreeably and
her bare feet she touched a sleeping man, stepped over him, and opened
her because he loved her too well, placing her far above everything in
her benefactors only to torture her the more painfully; she felt jealous
her benefactors, and so faithfully, unchangingly, and unselfishly in
her betrothed, found the same comfort in that love, and was still as
her box began talking to him with an amiable smile.
her brother that Papa was asleep and Mamma was in the sitting room, ran
her brother were trying to conceal, and was herself excited by it.
her brother's and Natasha's love.
her brother's wound only from the Gazette and having no definite news of
her brother, Sonya, or Countess Mary in their efforts to console her
her cambric handkerchief she began wiping her husband's waistcoat.
her chair nearer to that of the countess.
her cheeks.
her childlike face.
her company, and she had always answered him either by a brief but
her conduct and the breaking off of her engagement, receded into the
her country house on the Stone Island, the charming Monsieur de Jobert,
her dancing shoes showed, and in her mother's dressing jacket, ran up to
her daughters whom she was trying to keep from feeling dull. They were
her deliberately, but to show her that she was always to blame for
her downy little lip. "All the pretty women in society will be there."
her engagement to Boris was a jest or an important, binding promise
her expression of continual readiness to pass at once from melancholy
her eyes became serious. At that moment she was oblivious of her
her eyes but casting side glances at the newcomers, had turned her cup
her eyes filling with tears, and then not for the first time the strange
her eyes off him, and smiling and holding her breath. He gave her a
her eyes out," she said, growing more and more lively.
her eyes. She was not surprised at his having come; she did not realize
her eyes. Then he added:
her face and smile, and did not wish to diminish or add anything, but
her face in her handkerchief, and her whole stout body shook with
her face in her hands, Princess Mary sank into the arms of the doctor,
her face to the window, looked out in such a way that it was evident
her face was a friendly and strangely roguish expression.
her face, and then immediately he saw beside her Dolokhov's handsome,
her face. Her face said: "Why ask? Why doubt what you cannot but know?
her fan an old gentleman sitting not far from her, then to lean over to
her father was saying was correct.
her father was tidy. She put down the geometry book and eagerly broke
her father's illness began (perhaps even sooner, when she stayed with
her father's voice and another's--a woman's--that made her flush. It
her father, noticed his silence, and was struck by the fact that her
her fault that her face happened to assume an expression of calm dignity
her fear of Anna Pavlovna. She looked at her niece, as if inquiring what
her feeling grief for her brother with full force; on the contrary, that
her feminine self-deception immediately supplied her with consolation,
her foot into the other. Sonya, when he came in, was twirling round and
her forehead.
her forehead. His fine eyes lit up with a thoughtful, kindly, and
her former infatuations," he told himself. "There has never been
her friend.
her friend.
her from inside and outside the room and did not move. First she heard
her frontiers immutable; all future wars purely defensive, all
her future directeur de conscience, but the next evening Monsieur de
her girlhood, but I know what she is like every time we receive a letter
her gray hair, ran back to the maids who were turning up the hem of her
her grief and gave her strength.
her grief, or perhaps just because of it, she took on herself all the
her hair.
her half her life. When the news of Petya's death had come she had been
her hand and a lifted finger at each detail, "and that he had his eyes
her hand did not reach them. Petya pushed her hand away with his knee,
her hand for the last time. "Don't go!" she said in a tone that made him
her hand led her up the rickety wooden steps of the porch. The house,
her hand on her beautiful, fully expanded bosom and looking up to
her hand.
her handkerchief too. Pierre was kissed, and he kissed the beautiful
her handkerchief, that the major ceased smiling and after some
her handsome eldest daughter were in the drawing-room with the visitors
her head a lady standing on the opposite side, beyond the choir.
her head and clutching with both hands at her hair which the maid who
her head and continued in a whisper: "Has he performed his final duty,
her head out into the damp night air, and the countess saw her slim neck
her head toward the darkness of the open doorway.
her head.
her head.
her heart an impulse that was against His will. My wife--as she once
her heart and she neither could nor would speak lightly of him. Nicholas
her how he had complimented her, how he told her he was going abroad,
her husband and child.
her husband irritated her. "What do I want with them? I want no one but
her husband's intellectual and abstract interests though she did not
her husband's portrait on it.
her husband, and at the footman who accompanied them.
her husband, to whom she had from the first moment given herself up
her in Smolensk province. His having encountered her in such exceptional
her in five minutes before and, despite the fixed eyes and the pallor of
her in his arms. But seeing a stranger the sickly, scrofulous-looking
her in the large sitting room (it seemed to Countess Mary that she
her in.
her inflamed and perspiring cheeks, her charming rosy mouth with its
her joy left the child too soon, and she glanced round. The nurse with
her joy settled on Natasha's face.
her kind, weak way.
her know the state of affairs and the extent of the danger to which
her leave the village: that there was an order not to move, and that
her life in fear and constant suffering. Mademoiselle Bourienne was
her life, the thought that Theodosia alone had found the true path of
her like some little wild animal. He glanced at her occasionally with a
her lips as if to send it a kiss. Pierre, carefully stretching his neck
her long hair came down...." Here he could contain himself no longer and
her long teeth.
her look of gentle indifference to everything around.
her look, but her exclamations and the brief questions she put, showed
her look. She felt strange and awkward.
her maid, entered the room quickly and abruptly with a frightened look
her manners or with delicacy of speech, or with her toilet, or to show
her maternal instinct had realized that all Natasha's outbursts had
her melancholy, became cheerful and very attentive to Kuragin.
her might.
her mother and went out.
her mother in prayer, suddenly checked her rush, half sat down, and
her mother praying and sighing and the creaking of her bed under
her mother was still praying she ran on tiptoe to the bed and, rapidly
her mother's room. His face was puckered up and wet with tears. He
her mother, Natasha got up and went to the door.
her mother, thoughtfully, referring to some verses Prince Andrew had
her mouth drooped.
her neck as soon as she overtook her in the sitting room.
her neck.
her needs. Only by a rare glance exchanged with a sad smile
her neighbors, as Christ loved mankind. Countess Mary's soul always
her nephew's education. She was sad. Now, after a month passed in quiet
her nurse had noticed on his first visit, and Andrew's encounter with
her observations, it made everyone feel uncomfortable, not only Sonya,
her of his intention to persuade Pierre to stay with them till spring.
her old nurse and the maidservants who came running toward her.
her old self again, but with a change in her moral physiognomy, as a
her own fate and guardian and instructor of her nephew, was the first to
her own handsome face she seemed to become still colder and calmer.
her own spiritual baseness, which she had not suspected, but which had
her own way. She packed, repacked, pressed, made the butler's assistant
her parents, the consideration of all that had caused the illness,
her path.
her person, while Natasha was like a girl exposed for the first time,
her plainly as she is, or else you will make a cruel and irrevocable
her powers since morning had been concentrated on ensuring that they
her prayer. Yes, that was the prayer that moves mountains, and I am
her presence, joyous comments from the countess, who saw an intervention
her protegee aside.
her quick intuition.
her rough voice. "Do you hear what I am saying or not?" she added.
her seemed to Princess Mary, and sorry as she was to see her agitation,
her severe face said: "Well, good-by, Countess," and kissing her
her shabbiest dress and an old mantilla, Natasha, shivering in the fresh
her she may have recalled the golden, irrecoverable days of her own
her she was not vexed with these people.
her since he last saw her was immense. She had grown thin and pale, but
her sinful nature, could think this of them: they could not forget that
her sitting room, from which those who were there immediately withdrew
her smile could not for a single instant impose upon anyone, and it
her sobs. "I don't know why, but you will see what he is like."
her something, and the fact that her presence always increased his
her son, who had remained in Moscow for his equipment, was to join them
her sons!' Isn't it so, Papa?" said he.
her sorrow and her joy.
her soul, and it seemed as if she could never finish. Several times she
her spirituality and at the lofty moral world, almost beyond his reach,
her still-existing faculty of thinking--and the pretext for that was a
her straightened out a turned-up corner of the carpet.) "And how have I
her strangely, not understanding.
her sturdy little legs, and having examined the position of her father,
her surprise found her still dressed and asleep on the sofa. Open on the
her table there were extra dishes at dinner, and the servants had vodka
her tail yet further between her legs, and increased her speed. But
her talk with Dron and at the meeting, had actually had so bad an effect
her tears on her sister-in-law's knee.
her temples. Princess Mary, supporting her sister-in-law, still looked
her tenderly and attentively, said severely:
her that evening. Even those playing cards behind the partition soon
her that if he lived he would always thank God for his wound which had
her that summer for the first time with cruel clearness. She tried to
her that the old times must be forgotten, that in spite of everything...
her that things must be so, and yet it was dreadfully sad.
her to her own room and made her lie down on the bed. Natasha lay down,
her to speak quite frankly. She told him that her only hope of getting
her toes any longer. "So that's what I'm up to! I'll never marry anyone,
her treasure, her adored Petya, returned. On the twenty-eighth of August
her trunk had been taken down from its cart, and all the loads were
her turn began thinking aloud. Her thoughts were about the children.
her up, hugged her, and, smiling through her tears, began comforting
her usual smile.
her vexation that at the moment when all she wanted was to see him they
her waist.
her way in the big forest. She incoherently described the depths of
her word when she wrote giving him his freedom and now behaved as if all
her! But those!..." and he made a gesture of contempt. "And believe me,
her!"
her!" he exclaimed fiercely.
her, Princess?"
her, Rostov thought, but just now there were so many other pleasures
her, and for various reasons Princess Mary avoided her. Julie, with whom
her, and immediately began to cry. The princess looked up at her. All
her, and she will be sure to smile and say: 'How strange! He must be
her, and with unexpected strength raised her, turned her face toward
her, but in her presence he felt quite at ease, and said not at all what
her, but only picturing her to himself, and in consequence all life
her, for what she was suffering now while she was speaking.
her, is that so?"
her, kissed it on the back and then on the palm, then again turned it
her, she is so much to be pitied, so much to be pitied."
her, she recovered from her mental sickness just as suddenly and became
her, then Madame Schoss' familiar whistling snore and Sonya's gentle
her, to restrain themselves for this once precious being formerly as
her, were spoken as all sorts of meaningless words are spoken to comfort
her, while taking off his cloak, he heard her. She was practicing solfa
her--"Will he ever forgive me? Will he not always have a bitter feeling
her--thou or you?"
her.
her.
her.
her.
her.
her.
her.
her.
her.
her.
her.
her. "Do please just leave me alone!" And she ran out of the room, with
her. "Must I break off with him? Must I really? That's awful..." and to
her. And not the face she had known ever since she could remember and
her. As soon as she saw him she was seized by the same feeling she had
her. But what distressed the princess most of all was her father's
her. Doctors came to see her singly and in consultation, talked much in
her. He kissed her hand and addressed her not as thou but as you--Sonya.
her. How often when considering her character I have told myself that
her. I cannot propose to her at present, but the thought that
her. No, not that, I don't, I can't..."
her. She did not even notice the special attentions and amiabilities
her. She did not think of applying submission and self-abnegation to her
her. She knew that when he thought aloud in this way he would sometimes
her. The count was more perturbed than ever by the condition of his
her. They sang together and everyone in the theater began clapping
her. Trying to convict her, he told her she had worn him out, had caused
her. What a darling Sonya is!" he added with a smile.
her. When he appeared at the door she grew flurried, evidently undecided
her. When her toilet for the night was finished she sank gently onto the
her. When she was touched, she jerked her bound legs and looked wildly
her. Why do you say all this to me?"
her."
her."
her." And he vividly pictured to himself Natasha, not as he had done in
her; and she should have kept him talking till cockcrow, but she got
her; in deceiving yourself and her." And he vividly recalled that moment
here Nicholas only saw that something happened to Karay--the borzoi was
here above me and around... Another instant and I shall never again see
here altogether next year...."
here and there the blackened walls of some brick houses. Pierre gazed
here and will never return? He is not here! For whom then is the trial
here are people coming," he thought joyfully, seeing some men running
here beyond my feeble intelligence, but I can't make it out. Mack loses
here by the Stone Bridge, and you know there was a large icon of God
here come her suitors."
here for? But I will give her a piece of my mind. The time will come!"
here ill, as you see."
here in Moscow to Anna Mikhaylovna whom he had placed under an
here in a minute..." voices were suddenly heard saying; and officers,
here in the battery where a small number of men busy at their work were
here lives Count Cyril Vladimirovich Bezukhov so rich, all alone... that
here made the inquiries. The proclamation had passed through exactly
here that men are needed. Advisers are always plentiful, but men are
here today, the nearer I got to the house the more anxious I grew. As I
here too at the governor's party there were (as it seemed to Nicholas)
here without having done all I can for Denisov and certainly not without
here! I'll flay this scoundwel alive, and it will be found."
here!"
here, and there's nobody living in it."
here, from his peasants up to the gentry, is incalculable. On his
here," continued Telyanin. "Now then, let me have it."
here," he added, taking Gerasim by a button of his coat and looking down
here. Three times we reached the guns and three times we were thrown
here. You may be better off than we others," said Pierre.
here."
here."
here? Don't you see the skirmishers are retreating? Lead the squadron
here? Why was I so reluctant to part with life? There was something in
here?" and the artilleryman understood him.
hero Wittgenstein, this mood and the gossip of the staff reached their
hero and commander was following quite a different train of thought.
hero himself with his paltry vanity and joy in victory appear,
hero less on earth."
hero of our last campaign, Prince Peter Ivanovich Bagration!" and again
hero says that he was drawn to the walls of Moscow against his will. He
heroes and rulers, but as the resultant of a multiplicity of variously
heroism!"
heroism, Count!"
herself Anna Makarovna used to knit at the same time on the same
herself as she did with others and had shown him only the combative side
herself begin to cry over her cruel, evil nature, and little Nicholas,
herself but letting her slender arms hang down as if expecting some
herself calmly and continuously as she had done before. As soon as she
herself experienced, but they all seemed attentive to what was happening
herself from the dogs, with tail tucked in again, went forward. Karay,
herself horrified at what she had said.
herself in a difficult position.
herself in a white satin dressing gown embroidered with silver and with
herself in difficulties owing to the boorishness of these people"--he
herself incompetent, but in the depths of her soul she felt at peace--a
herself into a room adjoining the drawing room, occupied herself trying
herself most of all were those of repentance. On her way home at an
herself on her independence of thought. "God is the same every where.
herself on it, sobbing so violently that she could not stop for a long
herself or of her own relations with Prince Andrew.
herself out of this silence she ran to the servants' quarters to meet
herself recalling to the minutest detail every word, every gesture, and
herself released, and Helene's footsteps and the rustle of her dress
herself she burst into tears of vexation and left the room. The old
herself suggested that he should go to Petersburg, though she would feel
herself that she must not get irritable when teaching her nephew, almost
herself to attract herself. To adorn herself for others might perhaps
herself to her husband in her most becoming attitudes, or to avoid
herself! Glad to throw her father over! And she knew I should notice
herself, a thing then unheard of and considered injurious--she insisted
herself, and clung to her.
herself, and she could not refrain from turning round. She looked
herself, and she moved forward without again looking round and with a
herself, did not hinder the young people who came to her house from
herself, her face was pale. It was he. She knew this for certain, though
herself, while her face beamed with ecstatic happiness. Her slender bare
herself.
herself.
herself. In saying this Natasha was sincere in acknowledging Mary's
herself: a coarse smock, bast shoes, a rough coat, and a black kerchief.
hesitated whether he should not apply for leave in order to see Natasha
hesitating voice. "I thank you. I agree with all you have said. But do
hesitation, rapidly threw off his uniform and put on the shirt. He had
hidden by dense mist. Having given orders in the commander in chief's
hide it) he himself suffered from the consciousness of his own and his
hide that pleasure by pretending to be busy with other interests. In
hide the traces of their guilt as quickly as possible.
hide them and left the room.
hide there, and many of the residents at Otradnoe, hiding from Mitenka,
hide what I feel." As he spoke he kept glancing with the flirtatiousness
hiding her face with her slender fingers, and sobbing so convulsively
hiding something in the folds of her short muslin frock, darted in and
high, but the last round fell in the midst of a group of hussars and
high, high overhead, and then it seemed to sink so low that one could
high, shied, throwing back its ears; but the pockmarked Guardsman drove
high, that he might not be unworthy even of such company.
high--I always said...."
high--depends on the coincidence of the wills of all who take part
high-backed chairs at a large table under the portrait of the Emperor,
higher beings, in this vast harmonious multitude of beings in whom the
higher government circles.
higher grades of the army, and so on to the apex, the point of which
higher ground it was clearing, but nothing could be seen of what was
higher rank expressed a common feeling of awkwardness, covered by a mask
higher the human intellect rises in the discovery of these purposes,
higher to Natasha and said, with a pleasant smile, that the young
higher, his eyes shone with the light of life, and with swift steps
highest and most diverse Petersburg circles of the day. The reforming
highest aristocracy, to an ambassador's ball he had attended, and to
highest circles Boris had made it his habit to watch attentively all
highest class, respected by everyone. All the kings, except the Chinese,
highest happiness consists in striving to attain them. We must live, we
highest instructions--here..." and he handed a paper to Alpatych.
highest rewards.
highest wisdom has but one science--the science of the whole--the
highest, we see a law by which men, to take associated action, combine
highfalutin words, and Germans by logical arguments to show them that it
highly honored guest, took possession of him as it were, without waiting
highroad along which the troops were moving. But not far from Bald Hills
highroad, passing through a village with a white church some five
highroad.
hill one after the other. Their colonel, Karl Bogdanich Schubert, came
hill stumbled upon his groom, who had been to look for him in the
hills in the distance--and despite the fact that the inhabitants (who
him (as a butler at dinner informs his master that there is no more of
him Pierre, who had not been to the Rostovs' once since the ball. Pierre
him a curtsy. She fixed her eyes on him in amazement, smiling as if she
him a look of stern inquiry, as though what Pierre had just said was
him a message," said the count. "Oh dear! Oh dear! How happy it all
him a petition from some peasant men or women who had appealed to her
him about the building looked angrily at Princess Mary and Dessalles and
him all the blame of other men's mistakes is very easy, but I maintain
him all the way. He thought angrily of the pleasure he would have at
him along with it.
him amiably but behaved as if Balashev were one of his own courtiers,
him an answer.
him an appointment somewhere in Petersburg, but neither of these proved
him and Helene. "Well, what of it, if you all know it?" thought Pierre.
him and an assured position in society.
him and began speaking to him, looking at and indicating the Rostovs'
him and by his own body. I lift my arm and let it fall. My action seems
him and demanded his participation.
him and did not stop but rode on and on, continually mistaking bushes
him and drew from him an amused and gentle smile.
him and inquired where the commander and officers were. The man,
him and only wished that they would help him and bring him back to
him and said: "Terrible for you, but not for me! You know that for me
him and she wished and tried to please him as much as possible.
him and smiled quietly.
him and telling how he had blushed when Princess Mary's name was
him and, with a Christian mildness that expressed forgiveness of his
him any longer in Moscow, away from the countess whom he missed. Marya
him as a member he did not find a single one. There were many dead whom
him attended to him, unbuttoned his coat, seated him on the raised
him back on to the track of his morning's anger, which was still fresh
him be here...."
him before, they had been the result of his own wrongdoing, and at the
him but for fear of causing him to sin. To leave family, home, and all
him but the motionless earth and the stubble around him. There was warm
him by God. But as soon as we do not admit that, it becomes essential to
him by the Masons, on which he firmly believed he would be reborn to a
him die feeling that he is rendering unhappy those who..."
him disputing hotly with his visitor. Pierre was maintaining that a time
him down. Another valet, with his finger over the mouth of a bottle,
him essential to see Natasha. In the evening he drove to his sister's
him every time he moved. This man was doing something to his legs in the
him everyone began to stir: steps were audible and whispers, among which
him except Platon Karataev, who always remained in his mind a most
him expecting something to happen), all the personal desires and hopes
him experienced in the art of war. All their faces looked dejected, and
him express his feelings, but still he has taken it better, far better,
him feel confused by her smiles and her own confusion when meeting him.
him for not having stayed at the palace, and offered him his own house.
him for safe custody. I like you and don't wish you any harm and--as
him for the love of heaven to drive carefully down the hill. He knew
him for those words, bullets flew hissing across the regiment and across
him four thousand francs to send to his wife and children. Pierre
him from all parts of Moscow. Those about him had never seen the count
him from her sable furs--so close and yet so distant--in the moonlight.
him from love of him. And he does not want that. And besides, what a
him full directions which he had written down for his own guidance as to
him full liberty to remain with him during the battle or to join the
him go on.
him go.
him graciously, and promised to inform the Emperor. A few days later
him had come to pass; but Nicholas was as much astonished as if it were
him he sprang aside in terror and clutched at Pierre. (Pierre shuddered
him her intention of keeping him under her wing, Petya guessed her
him here?"
him himself, and tell him what ought to be done in a tone of weariness
him imploring him to come if only for a few minutes to discuss a most
him in Petersburg. I saw him just as I see you.... There he sat in the
him in a whisper.
him in my arms, and saw that his face was young, but that he had no hair
him in silence. It seemed to Prince Andrew that the officer's remark was
him in the same direction. On the tenth of June, * coming up with the
him in the terrible position of appearing ridiculous--that he had been
him inclined to laugh without knowing why.
him instructions and occasionally glancing disapprovingly at the
him into Russia, and we should not go to fight in Austria and Prussia
him into the arcade. Some soldiers started running away in a group. A
him just as much as ever, but that he must not yield to that feeling,
him know. I have informed him of the matter.
him like a dream.
him like ants. In that world, the handsome drunkard Number One of the
him merged in Rostov's mind into a single feeling of terror and pity for
him much that might conduce to the advantage of the Masonic cause
him myself--that would be too bold." But in spite of this he continued
him no answer. Now I recalled every detail of that meeting and in my
him not to forget to procure all the things he undertook to buy, and he
him not with hope of finding signs of improvement but wishing to find
him now. That search for the aim of life had not merely disappeared
him occurred to his mind. The Russians might fall on his left wing,
him of a victory and stated strategically the position of the army was
him of dancing, and looking at the child's round happy little face he
him of his rank and mission. Contrary to his expectation, Davout, after
him of my firm intention to attack the enemy tomorrow," said Kutuzov
him on behalf of "our dear Vyazmitinov," and in her eyes, which, for an
him or go away. "No, he does not want it!" Pierre concluded. "And I know
him out a hero or a genius instead of a traitor, and that will be still
him out of the booth at Grunth. He was shouting in a gasping voice:
him pleasant and easy during that first part of his stay in Voronezh
him right on his nose and mustache. Another borzoi, a dog, catching
him see whether I am a coward!" he thought.
him serve. But if your father is mortally sick you'll send the valet
him several riders with white plumes in their hats. In a moment everyone
him since yesterday. She must be told! Then at least she won't go on
him smilingly, and he rode off by the winding path down the hill.
him something of Weyrother, Mack, and Schmidt, and many other German
him surrounded by children whom, by the count's generosity, he was
him than any other spot on the plain of Borodino.
him than that of all the rest of the world. As he spoke now he was
him that Bogdanich rode so near in order to show him his courage. Next
him that he may marry tomorrow if he likes. She will be little Nicholas'
him that he was already under the command of the German.
him that he was chosen to give a new direction to the whole of Russian
him that he was quite different and distinct from those other retired
him that nearly all the troops were starting and there ought to be an
him that some necessary documents had not yet arrived from town, and he
him that this man could be useful, and without any premeditation Prince
him the victory at Austerlitz; and by chance all men, not only the
him there, that force alone gave them the right to demand answers
him through the troops. On reaching the broad river Viliya, he stopped
him till the next day) and to the insistence of Bennigsen, Konovnitsyn,
him to Dolgorukov.
him to await him there and rode on at a quick trot along the road to the
him to come up; Prince Bagration reined in his horse and recognizing
him to despatch part of the army abroad and to create a new condition
him to draw his covert.
him to endure his position.
him to hear something more, nodded and turned to him with a cheerful
him to his guests, explaining that he was not a civilian, but an hussar
him to hold a pair of compasses to his left breast with the other hand
him to marry my daughter and lend me the forty thousand rubles I need."
him to me!"
him to move to Moscow.
him to return to his former conception of her, that he could not break
him to see her, telling him how grieved she was about him and how she
him to tell the Emperor. What do you think he replied? 'But, my dear
him to the nurse, and went with rapid steps toward the door. But at the
him to the post he grew quiet, as if he suddenly understood something.
him to thee, could take him by the hand and show him to thee. But how
him to this condition.
him to transmit those words to Napoleon. Alexander did not insert them
him to write an order to the troops and a rescript to Field Marshal
him to you as they would a dish of choice sterlet. Dolokhov and Anatole
him toward everybody and especially toward himself, but when he came
him turn pale and cold.
him unpleasantly, and the incessant laughter grated on him like a false
him up. In battle he was always under fire, so that Kutuzov reproved him
him was reflected in his wife, all that was not quite good was rejected.
him was that during these last two years his wife had succeeded in
him where he had been. He replied. She again inquired whether
him which he rested on the back of a happy page who had run up to him,
him who was appointed chief of the artillery.
him with an apprehensive glance of inquiry. There were tears in Rostov's
him with bags and charges. The guns of that battery were being fired
him with difficulty.
him with fresh vividness. Having heard at dinner that Princess Mary
him with greedy expectation. "I can always arrange so as not to see her
him with her beautiful radiant eyes and seemed to say, "I like you very
him with her kindly, slightly quizzical, happy smile.
him with news of the successful result of the action.
him with particular warmth and the Emperor, with his head bent to the
him with the whole expression of her face, radiant with gratitude and
him without tears.
him! Do you understand?' he says. That's how it is, dear fellow. Fate
him! I hope that here in Moscow no one will receive him, in spite of his
him!" he thought enviously.
him!" she thought at such moments, with a feeling of revulsion against
him, "I have even heard of your doings in Paris!"
him, Bonaparte had made in his campaigns and even in politics. His
him, Prince Andrew on the eve of battle felt agitated and irritable as
him, and Berg who spent whole days at the Rostovs' and paid the eldest
him, and again laughed his frigid laugh.
him, and begged the officer to let the deed go unpunished.
him, and he absolved her from her sins. Next day she received a box
him, and her eyes met his beaming at her. She set herself a task on her
him, and her look asked only one thing: was he a friend, or like the
him, and of course I am glad of it. He is a fine lad, a fine lad! This
him, and repressing the terror that seized her, she pressed her lips
him, and so in his relations with that former circle he confined himself
him, and suddenly, noticing his shining eyes, stepped lightly up to him
him, and then joined the adjutants listening to what the generals were
him, and to know that you cannot alter this. Then there is only one
him, as a king and an ally, to confer on state affairs with Alexander's
him, as if she were trying to find in his face the answer to some
him, as it seemed, not indifferent to her.
him, as much a condition of his existence, as mental activity is to you
him, but Prince Andrew replied that he would probably soon be back again
him, but no one answered him, everybody was too excited; and Petya,
him, but still that happy result always remained in the future.
him, by him alone."
him, carried the infant round the battered tin font and handed him over
him, congratulated him, and pressed his hands. Crowds of officers and
him, considering it beneath his dignity to pay attention to him. But
him, each action of his seems to us free. But if we see his relation
him, feel his eyes on her now that her whole soul was overflowing with
him, for the crowd pressed from all sides, swaying as one mass with them
him, from his daughter to his serfs, the prince was sharp and invariably
him, from his weary, bored expression to his quiet, measured step,
him, having apparently lost hope of getting him to wake up.
him, he had puckered his forehead painfully as if vainly seeking to
him, he quitted Moscow, approached Kutuzov without joining battle,
him, he saw hounds and a huntsman galloping almost straight at the wolf.
him, he touched his horse and rode down the side street.
him, he's a scoundrel. Go on! Go on!"
him, how I would tell him the truth, how I would unmask his deceivers!"
him, immediately all submitted to him. But the Allied monarchs were
him, in accord with the will of hundreds of thousands of people who took
him, listening silently and with a stern frown to what Fabvier told him
him, or perhaps for that very reason, the prince, though he continued to
him, or to listen to all that was told him. The faces all expressed
him, peremptorily requested him to remain there, to move on with the
him, prepared (so Nicholas heard, he had not seen her again himself) to
him, push him, do anything but kiss him--a thing everybody did. But
him, returned to his place and sat down. In his hands he had something
him, rubbing his small white hands.
him, scarcely able to believe his own ears. That Prince Andrew's
him, smiled at Dolokhov's words, and with a sinking heart, waiting for
him, that he was seriously wounded but that his life was not in danger,
him, the Emperor liked him, and he was young and interesting. That day
him, the gloomier seemed his own.
him, there grew and strengthened in his soul a power of life independent
him, they heard, as Napoleon had anticipated, the rapturous cries of the
him, this expedient of an inquiry and trial seemed unnecessary. It was
him, though she knew that already, and remarked that they might very
him, though, between you and me, he always seemed to me a poor sort
him, to a wounded general he knew, and drove with him to Moscow. On the
him, was kneeling before him. He realized that it was the real living
him, was restraining her sobs. Her face was pale and rigid. Only in the
him, were interested in him, and wanted to meet him.
him," said the wit Shinshin, parodying the words of Voltaire. Kutuzov
him--and said that his son would not live with them.
him--in everything."
him--whether important or quite trifling--such as: Where would he live?
him--whose grandeur enabled his son to play stick and ball with the
him.
him.
him.
him.
him.
him.
him.
him.
him.
him.
him.
him.
him.
him.
him.
him. "And why should she marry?" he thought. "To be unhappy for certain.
him. "He used to have a predilection for Bacchus."
him. "It's all one to you! You'll dig up your pot of money and take
him. "More, please: more! What's he saying?"
him. "Remember this, Prince Andrew, if they kill you it will hurt me,
him. "That must be the enemy's camp!"
him. "This happiness is for those who have not in them what there is in
him. "Why? Tell me. You must tell me!"
him. A moment later everyone had drawn up round the crowd of dogs. Only
him. A week after his arrival, the young Polish count, Willarski, whom
him. After his first visit Boris said to himself that Natasha attracted
him. All he saw about him merged into a general impression of naked,
him. An expression of annoyance showed itself for a moment on his face
him. And Tikhon, purposely writhing and making faces, pretended to be
him. Balashev said that in Russia the best results were expected from
him. Bondarchuk's horse swerved and galloped past.
him. But Pierre was not sufficiently sure of himself. He made as if he
him. But she also loved Anatole, of that there was no doubt. "Else how
him. But still he and those about him retained their old habits: wrote
him. By the by, Count," he added suddenly, addressing Pierre with a
him. Half an hour later Prince Andrew was again called to Kutuzov.
him. He carried his resolution within himself in terror and haste, like
him. He did not miss a single word he uttered, and would afterwards,
him. He is such a lofty, heavenly soul!"
him. He looked at Natasha as she sang, and something new and joyful
him. He remembered Natasha as he had seen her for the first time at the
him. He stroked her hair and then patted her awkwardly on the back of
him. He tried to say something, but his face suddenly puckered and
him. He wrote to Arakcheev, the Emperor's confidant: "It must be as
him. His face with its long mustache was serious as always, only his
him. I know and understand what a spice that would add to the pleasure
him. It can't be helped!" said the count, shrugging his shoulders and
him. It was cold and uncanny in the rapid current in the middle of the
him. Nicholas Bolkonski's son need not serve under anyone if he is in
him. Not only was he indifferent as to whether he got to Petersburg
him. Now a smile at the joy of life always played round his lips, and
him. On the day of Prince Vasili's arrival, Prince Bolkonski was
him. On the way he came upon a bush, his gallant horse cleared it, and
him. Pale, frightened people were doing something around the workman.
him. Remember that, my dear, and be nice to him, as you so well know how
him. Rostov himself did not know how or why he did it. He acted as he
him. She recalled all her life with him and in every word and act of his
him. She refused to go away and her father's fury broke over her in a
him. That is why I told him... Was it all right?" she added, suddenly
him. The French had advanced nearest on our right. Below the height on
him. The more interesting his letters were the more vexed she felt.
him. The pain in his arm became more and more intense. Irresistible
him. The tune he was whistling, his gait, and the gesture with which
him. Then again he would spend a night in the dining room.
him. There now, Sidorov!"
him. This little dog lived in their shed, sleeping beside Karataev at
him. Though nothing of the kind had happened to her she was regarded in
him. Twice he had executed commissions to the Emperor himself, so
him. When he felt he was being looked at he behaved like an ostrich
him. When they brought his son to him, he pressed his lips to the boy's
him."
him."
him."
him."
him... Olga, go and see whether Uncle's beef tea is ready--it is almost
him:
him:
him: yet that burst of frankness, together with other trifling events,
him; "turn this way!" he shouted to those with the gun. "It bears!..."
him; Denisov, whose curly hair, mustache, and whiskers had turned half
him; The sword cut on his arm could scarcely be called a wound. He
him; if I seem sad and out of spirits myself, he will say (as he has
him?" Not one of the innumerable speeches addressed to the Emperor that
himself after his recent loneliness and freedom from cares so beset and
himself an insignificant atom in it) would go through fire and water,
himself and Alexander.) "From the height of the Kremlin--yes, there
himself and repeating:
himself and that lofty infinite sky with the clouds flying over it. At
himself at any moment face to face with the Emperor and being put to
himself at the head of the army, gather round him a commander in chief's
himself before his own officers, insisted on his soldierly discipline
himself began to eat greedily and quickly like a healthy and hungry man,
himself by replying to such nonsense as he was now hearing. So when
himself conversation--of which he was fond--and songs. He did not sing
himself exclusively to Natasha for whom he had always had a particularly
himself felt, that his fall was at hand. And despite his self-confidence
himself for his weakness, and raising his head addressed Michaud in a
himself for love and a feeling of envy of the legitimate husband.
himself had vanished. He was filled with happiness at his nearness to
himself he rose from the table. "One does get tired sitting so long," he
himself honored with his visits, regarding Helene as a remarkably
himself in bookish Russian.
himself in his report, written in hot haste after the battle, speaks of
himself in the crowd) that they could not let the princess go, that
himself in the position of Mack at Ulm. If Kutuzov decided to abandon
himself in the square he clearly heard the sound of bells and the joyous
himself knew it, and to escape personal responsibility they had all
himself might not be pleasant to someone else.
himself on his seat.
himself on the drunkard. Just when Pierre snatched at and struck up the
himself one with his horse, rode past the Emperor with a frowning but
himself only when Paulucci called him and everyone was leaving.
himself reflected in his wife. He felt the good and bad within himself
himself suddenly freed from the ideas that had weighed him down. He felt
himself takes part in the event.
himself that he would propose tomorrow. But in Julie's presence, looking
himself the following of the state of affairs.
himself to Bagration. Bonaparte's adjutant had not yet reached Murat's
himself to the first blows of the enemy, for there must be no doubt of
himself took part in, trivial conversations, when he read or heard of
himself undertook his daughter's education, and to develop these two
himself up like a black pillar at sight of the Emperor, Napoleon stopped
himself up to such an extent that it seemed he could not have sustained
himself up, he can hardly walk! Good lord, they've even grabbed those
himself up, slightly arching his back. It was plain that the commander
himself when going into battle, and he was more amiable to the ladies
himself whether the news was good or bad. That did not interest him. He
himself with Russia unless he were mad."
himself with a mental telescope and looked into remote space, where
himself with cowardice, he had not been able to do this, but with time
himself with society gossip, dancing, intellectual games, and bouts
himself"--and he pointed to Lavrushka.
himself, "I don't know what will happen and don't want to know, and
himself, Natasha, that same living Natasha whom of all people he most
himself, Prince Bagration sent Zherkov to tell the general in command
himself, a self-satisfied irrepressible smile puckering his lips under
himself, and at once without any effort saw in everyone he met
himself, and his ideal of grandeur and glory, which seems excellent and
himself, and in general..."
himself, and this fresh opportunity for action gave him new energy
himself, but only desires the good of mankind. And what have they
himself, but she felt that his incomprehensible words had an improper
himself, but was adored by everybody. "No, that's impossible," said he,
himself, generally letting his young men do so. But with "his gentlemen"
himself, he kept in touch with the circle which confers success and
himself, he rose, threw back his head, and with resolute steps went
himself, his faith in the right ordering of the universe, in humanity,
himself, in very diverse circumstances, he repeatedly expressed his real
himself, so that she was not invited to dinners and evening parties. She
himself, was shouting to Kutuzov that if he did not ride away at once
himself--who never left the country--in knowledge of what was happening
himself--who was fond of parleys with the French, sent envoys demanding
himself--who were all vigorously opposed to her nursing her baby
himself.
himself.
himself.
himself.
himself.
himself.
himself. "And besides, what have I done to bring it about? How did
himself. "When I was a chit of an officer no one would have dared to
himself. He remembered his mother's last letter. "What would she feel,"
himself. I am called in to help sort the letters and take those meant
himself. Sonya told Pierre this as she led him along the corridor to
himself. What angered him was that the coming of these visitors revived
himself.... Not a word! About some Denisov or other, though he himself,
himself; nor that of the Cossack who wanted more booty than he got, and
himself?
hind legs, lay down like a hare, and then suddenly jumped up and licked
hinder his conversing freely with Princess Mary.
hinder me," said he. "It will only make things worse..."
hinder the only thing that could save Russia, while on the French side,
hinder their bliss. Love would conquer all. He would steal her away and
hinder you," she said to herself, and sinking into a chair she let her
hindrance on their return journey. (5) Steps will immediately be taken
hinges, a smile appeared on the face with the attentive eyes, and from
hinted that he would burn Moscow and related how he had set fire to his
his Cossack and brought back some bags which contained about five pounds
his Persian adventures, and was leading a life of luxury, gambling, and
his Plutarch, were leading a huge army. The army was made up of white
his Russian being--what every Russian soldier felt: that the French were
his Serene Highness had petted and to whom he had given a lump of sugar
his Toulon, or his bridge of Arcola. How it would come about he did not
his absence very acutely. She attributed immense importance to all
his absent-mindedness and good nature, Pierre's personality immediately
his acquaintance and joyfully welcomed the rich newcomer, the
his acquaintances, to overtake his regiment which was already in Poland.
his actions. He employed all his ability and strength to do the best he
his acts as a private person, as a general, and as an emperor. So it
his address.
his aides-de-camp galloped off to the Polish Uhlans.
his amazement had gained him the St. George's Cross and even given him
his announcement to the Rostovs that he would remain in Moscow would all
his appointment as Commander in Chief. He told me himself that all the
his approval, that is, to the accomplished fact.
his arm and really catching the tune.
his arm as if that touch might soothe or rouse him.
his arm, began a long-drawn-out soldiers' song, commencing with the
his arm, said in a breathless voice,
his arms, and Michael Ivanovich and Mademoiselle Bourienne looked at him
his arms, and took up a book. His major-domo came in a second time to
his army; and it looks as if he planned this in order not to come under
his art, as he collected the tickets from all his visitors. There was
his attention wandered from the book and the Square and he formed in
his attention, made a gesture of refusal with his head and hand and
his awakening from sleep. And compared to the duration of life it did
his back to Natasha and now facing her, but during the whole of the six
his back, chest, shoulders, and even his arms, which he held as if ever
his back, he rolled over with the hare. A ring of borzois surrounded
his bald crown. He had a St. George's Cross round his neck and looked
his bald head and angrily pulling back toward him the little table that
his bayonet and stabs him...."
his bayonet; another fingered the strap and pulled the buckle of his
his blue eyes grew moist. "Hurrah!" cried the three hundred voices
his body, and his mind had a dim consciousness of something shameful
his boots on again. Some built little houses of the tufts in the plowed
his breast and a serene expression on his flat face. He spoke in that
his brisk little horse.
his broadsheets. They knew that it was for the army to fight, and that
his brows. "Prince Theodore and all those. To encourage culture and
his camp," said he. "What does that mean? Either he is retreating, which
his cap and crossed himself:
his cap on the back of his black head and a cloak hanging jauntily over
his career, while to renew their former relations without intending to
his careless attitude, Pierre looked at them over his spectacles unable
his catching what Pierre said, he asked him to repeat it, and by the
his character: noble, upright... but you see he has no one with him
his cheek to be kissed.
his cheek.
his cheek. Prince Andrew forced his way to him.
his cheeks twitching more than ever.
his cheerfulness was not infectious as it used to be: on the contrary it
his chest covered with orders and a scarf drawn round his stomach,
his chief aim consisted not in carrying out his design, but in proving
his coachman.
his collar as if escaping, was sitting almost asleep in a low chair,
his collar that had been wrenched loose with a bit of the cloth.
his collar.
his colonel.
his commissions and ordered the small closed carriage for her.
his company. The crowd of Russians and Frenchmen began to disperse. They
his conclusion was weaker than what had gone before, he added quickly:
his confusion, instantly continued in the same pleasant tones:
his corner and woke him up. Rousing himself, Pierre followed Anna
his correspondence with Kurbski?
his courage, had ridden on to the planks of the bridge:
his crimes, now recognize his authority, the title he has given
his cup away with his hand. "I'll drive all his Wurttemberg, Baden, and
his daughter that morning. Princess Mary well knew this painstaking
his daughter whether she was enjoying herself. Natasha did not answer at
his delicate white fingers while awaiting Berg's move, and watched his
his departure.
his disheveled gray hair hanging over his flushed, perspiring face.
his door, which creaked slightly when opened.
his dreams he still saw himself in the conditions of captivity. In the
his dressing gown and smiled slightly, as if expressing respectful
his drooping pistol. His face was pale. Rostov ran toward him and said
his dugout in a state such as Rostov had never yet seen him in. Denisov
his ear.
his early liberalism, the advisers who surrounded him, and by
his efforts--which was a thing he never allowed to happen.
his elbow for a long time, gazing at the shadows that moved past him in
his elbow on his knee and covering his face with his hand. After sitting
his elbows high arranged the reins deliberately. Anatole and Dolokhov
his elocution, was to read it. (He used to read at the Empress'.) The
his empire and in a single reign would have extended Russia from the
his energy and persistence had attained power, which he was using solely
his excellency's courtyard unseemly, told the dragoons to take it away.
his extensive reading (he had read everything, knew everything, and had
his eye as a miller wakes up when the soporific drone of the mill wheel
his eyes again and stared vacantly into the darkness around him.
his eyes and considered.
his eyes at the sight.
his eyes every minutest detail of his last meeting with the object of
his eyes flashed lightning.
his eyes from the plan of the building.
his eyes off her and beat time with his saber in a way that clearly
his eyes off his sister and drew breath in time with her. Sonya, as she
his eyes seemed larger than usual when he glanced round and noticed
his eyes, looked down at the shirt and examined the seams.
his eyes.
his eyes.
his eyes.
his eyes. "Who are they? Why are they running? Can they be coming at me?
his face at will, he drew nearer to the portrait and assumed a look
his face expressed the impossibility of altering that decision.
his face glowing from exposure to the wind and with nothing on but his
his face seemed to say. The chief pleasure and necessity of such men,
his face that the old man himself understood how untimely such questions
his face, began to talk--as one who has long had something on his mind
his face, nor a single gesture. She caught the unfinished word in its
his face, paused in front of Pierre and, not noticing his sad look,
his face, went up to Pierre and bent over him.
his face, which had been scratched till it bled by his falling against
his face. "How can you judge the Emperor's actions? What right have
his failing legs and turn to see if anyone had noticed his feebleness,
his family and entering into all the details of his children's relations
his family's efforts to console him, he could not forgive himself), he
his father about something, and Princess Mary noticed that before his
his father and Prince Meshcherski, warmly disputing and vigorously
his father and the neighbors. Throughout the whole province "Uncle" had
his father dismissed the abbe and said to the young man, "Now go to
his father with frightened eyes, but did not cry, because no one else
his father's hand, he pressed it to his lips and burst into tears.
his father's peculiarities, and partly because he needed solitude,
his father's. The field marshal made an appointment to see him, received
his father, Mary, and Natasha, than he had then. He understood it
his feet, and again turning over he fell asleep immediately.
his feet, so that he positively did not know what to do. Though he knew
his fellow prisoners. He kept one hand, in which he clasped his tobacco
his fever and particularly lively. When Pierre reached the fire and
his feverishness increased and he grew delirious. Visions of his father,
his fiancee's, would not stand a year's test, or that he (the old
his fieldglass. A little behind them Nesvitski, who had been sent to the
his fingers into his belt and smiling a little, walked to the front.
his first impulse stepped instantly and rapidly toward the coach. But
his flank and pursue him over the plain between Schlappanitz and the
his foreign uniform on an hussar packhorse and looked anxiously about
his freedom diminishes and the more our conception of the necessity that
his freedom which he needs for so many other things. When he thought of
his friend Obolenski had lately, in secret, agreed to join the hussars.
his friend) to this woman who was almost a stranger. When he afterwards
his friendship with Andrew, his misfortune with his wife, and above all
his frowning brow.
his garden a cow that had trampled down the beds he had planted, should
his gestures, that Pierre, unconsciously smiling in response to the
his glittering black eyes at Rostov.
his good horse darted headlong downhill, leaping over gullies to head
his grave, even rather gloomy, look was instantaneously replaced by
his gravity.
his gray hair.
his greatcoat as if it were a vestment, telling the soldiers in his
his groom to get the horses ready and to call him early in the morning,
his groom who was holding his horses and, asking which was the quietest,
his habit, and crowded Rostov in the narrow shanty. Rostov looked at him
his hair bristling, and probably bruised or wounded, climbed with
his hand Prince Andrew came up to his comrade, the aide-de-camp on duty,
his hand on the saddle, the Emperor turned to the cavalry general and
his hand to the lad.
his hand, was sitting there with a smile of deep emotion on his face,
his hand. Why should not the same sort of thing happen to me? I know
his hands to the blaze, and turned away his face.
his handsome face. Natasha, very still, peered out from her ambush,
his hat and gloves; another brought him a pocket handkerchief. Napoleon,
his having been picked up on the battlefield by the people of the
his head against the floor, hoarsely uttering some word which he kept
his head and pointing to the plan of the building, "tell me how you mean
his head as if in perplexity.
his head in sign of agreement with what Prince Andrew told him, and
his head on his thin pale hand. His chest is dreadfully hollow and his
his head that he was in love with Natasha; he was not thinking about
his head with his hands, rushed toward the crowd. The tall youth,
his head, and a short pipe in his mouth, came from behind a corner of
his head, and with inimical politeness lurking in the corners of his
his head.
his head.
his helplessness.
his hobby; "tell me how the Germans have taught you to fight Bonaparte
his home.
his horse and rode to his quarters.
his horse and turning purple in the face. "Vill you be so goot to
his horse he trotted away, jolting in his saddle.
his horse in front of the squadron.
his horse indolently and carelessly. Rostov recalled their quarrel of
his horse to ride once more round his hussars. It seemed to him that it
his horse was being led behind him.
his horse which would not stand still, then he rode out of the yard at a
his horse's pace.
his horse, supposing the affair to be over. But when he saw that the
his horse. Zherkov and the staff officer bent over their saddles and
his host and hostess. He walked in rapidly, bowing to right and left
his house in Petersburg, and now... she has come here and that daredevil
his house which had not been burned. He called on Count Rostopchin and
his huge spurs in violently, and the horse, flourishing its tail and
his hunt. In winter he visited his other villages or spent his time
his husbandry.
his imaginary sword, but smiling at the remembrance of that pleasant,
his in the diplomatic service.
his influence with the commander in chief to induce him to take the
his intention. He went to Tver to see Joseph Alexeevich's widow, who
his interview the previous day with Kutuzov on the Poklonny Hill but
his invasion were connected in their minds with the same sort of vague
his kind, intelligent face rather pale, rushed out of the shed followed
his kindly, simple face disposed her favorably toward him. She looked at
his kindly, simple, and modest expression. Anna Pavlovna turned toward
his knee, played with him, and looked round at Princess Mary. With a
his knee.
his knees close up to his head and one shoulder higher than the other.
his knees in the muddy field, and all one could see was how, muddying
his large eyes into Balashav's face and immediately looked past him.
his last visit to Moscow.
his leaded whip, buckled on his saber, and went out again. In answer
his leave.
his left elbow with a somewhat theatrical gesture, and, with a wink at
his legs and glancing round.
his legs and putting his hands on his knees with the air of a man who
his legs and smiling contemptuously to himself.
his lessons, teaching him Russian and music herself, and talking to
his letter would be read by the Emperor, and therefore weighed every
his letters and papers. Mademoiselle Bourienne would do the honors of
his life he had loved and still loved only one woman, and that she could
his life, like you, merely trying not to harm others. But make our
his life, on which everything depended and which made everything appear
his life. He walked about in front of the line and at every step pulled
his lifted hand with a bright and proud smile.
his limitations, would not know himself. The hardest thing (Pierre went
his lips without uttering a sound. He wished to say, "Yes, a vile, idle,
his lips, and repeating--"Excellent! Delicious!" His face grew red and
his love at the Sukharev water tower. At the time of that meeting it had
his magnanimous plans, was pacing patiently up and down before the
his master in manners and looks, who was accompanying him back to the
his medicine he sobbed and silently kissed her hand. On his last day,
his merit.
his military exploits (Prince Andrew could not endure that sort of man),
his mind at that moment, addressed Prince Andrew in French.
his mind devised reasons why he should be mentally tranquil too. The
his mind that they would be friends.
his mind to marry her. Now in Petersburg, having considered the Rostovs'
his mind with peculiar clearness and force.
his mind.
his mistake, he broke off short and, with a frown, greeted Dolokhov as a
his mood safely to his destination. And even had he not been hindered by
his mother he had never expected her to try to force him to sell his
his mother thought she loved him more, much more, than all her other
his mother's love for him, and his family's, and his friends', and the
his mother's old lady companion Belova, his wife, their three children
his mother, written without his father's knowledge, and that letter
his mother--and brother-in-law's commissions, nor the dress material for
his mouth and winking at the count.
his mouth awry, prepared to shout. The regiment fluttered like a bird
his muscular legs as if sailing along, stretching himself to his full
his musket resting on the ground, still stood near the pit at the spot
his musket walked away.
his mustache. "Will you now be so good as to tell me with whom I have
his name in connection with Bonaparte's more than once vaguely presented
his name.
his neck, turned his long neck twice this way and that, sighed, and
his new uniform, sat beside his wife explaining to her that one always
his nose growing redder as he gave a smile which showed where two front
his nose, and greedily sniffed at it.
his nose, buttoning his coat, and, hastily stepping up, without a word
his nose.
his nostrils having been torn off, "all in due form" as Karataev put it,
his old friend and the possessor of such enormous wealth, to the caprice
his opponents' reluctance to fight, and his own childish audacity and
his opponents, the frankness of his falsehoods, and the dazzling and
his order had been executed. An attendant came in with punch. Napoleon
his orders. He desires to end your misfortunes and restore you to your
his other foot down and sank deeper still, became stuck in it, and
his own children in the battle? I would not have taken my brother Petya
his own life--is just what makes the choice of occupation insolubly
his own mind.
his own pleasure, chose to chat with Lieutenant Drubetskoy. More than
his own softened and uplifted soul, now blossoming into a new life.
his own soul--vividly, plainly, terribly, and almost as a certainty. And
his own supporter, Wolzogen:
his own way, gave an order. No one said anything definite, but the rumor
his own words.
his own, goodness only knows why, he leaves me and locks me up alone in
his parents in which they told him briefly of Natasha's illness and the
his parents' house.
his participation in that action.
his partner with a merry and triumphant air, suddenly stamped with one
his partner with him. He glided silently on one foot half across the
his pipe and emitting rings of smoke.
his pistol and, instead of firing it, flung it at the Frenchman and
his pistol, and then he felt with surprise that of all the men he knew
his pistol. So now the general explicitly forbade his taking part in any
his place she concluded, from the rapid manner in which after taking
his plight. But Simon was no longer there. He was galloping round by the
his plump hand, with his one eye open, meditating and peering into the
his pocket, left the shed.
his pockets stood staring at her, motionless and silent.
his position were. He could not have believed it! Had he not at one
his power was limited. The armies were divided, there was no unity of
his power, and so that way of life proved economical.
his powerful mind, indulging in such nonsense!"
his presence there now as a newcomer free from party entanglements can
his prestige--do not appear upon the scene till he is no longer there.
his protection stopped him. The firing was still proceeding when
his protege Kutuzov, but remained silent when the commander in chief was
his quarrel with his son, had harbored nasty suspicions of him, making
his questions as to who had won. At dawn next day Pierre was approaching
his r's, and pronouncing the Latin words with a French accent.
his rain-soaked underclothes, said his prayers, drank tea, got warm,
his reassuring thoughts.
his red nose, stepped forward from the crowd as if expecting the Emperor
his regiment and was soon taken as orderly by a general commanding a
his regiment, when he recognized red-haired Dementyev and saw the
his reign and during 1812, but acted badly by giving a constitution
his relation to Natasha. To get better acquainted she asked that one
his relations with old friends, all his plans for his future, were
his reputation being so well established that he did not fear to ask so
his reputation fighting them."
his retreat from Smolensk to Orsha. Then his heroism at Krasnoe is
his rider's knee against a tree.
his right, listened to Rostov as a general listens to the report of a
his room.
his rooms upstairs.
his routine, retired as usual after dinner. The little princess was
his saber, and put on his cap.
his saber, the soldiers all continued to run, talking, firing into the
his saddle.
his sake and only met because he was there. To the one camp belonged
his seat, lowered his hands, moved a little to the right and then to
his ship is sailing, but on the day of battle--heaven knows how and
his shirt, and sobbed so that I could not calm him for a long time.
his shoulder.
his side pocket a well-filled notebook, which he asked permission to
his sight! It's a sin to speak so. God will punish you," she said
his skill in dealing and conversing with those in the highest spheres.
his sleep and breathing evenly.
his slightest movement.
his smile.
his sons there, it could have had no effect except perhaps on some dozen
his sorrow he only this year quite recovered his spirits. He has again
his soul: "Because there is a God, that God without whose will not one
his speech, which he used in extreme cases when special persuasion was
his speech. "Vous comptez vous faire des rentes sur l'etat; * you want
his state was very critical, but the doctor said there was now more
his stature, saw over the heads of the others what so attracted their
his stick again but hurried into the house.
his strength before he could go on. A door opened to the right, and an
his strength in an effort to recover his senses, he moved a little, and
his strength increased tenfold. He rushed at the barefooted Frenchman
his study and showed them his choice collection of Turkish pipes.
his study telling her that if she did not go away it was all the same
his success. In the course of conversation he mentioned Moscow and
his superior.
his superiors by his promptitude and accuracy and had arranged his money
his supposed power, his intellect, his experience, and his knowledge of
his thighbone had been extracted, the torn flesh cut away, and the
his third bowl. All the young soldiers smiled gaily as they watched him.
his third cup of tea and getting up. "Ours must have got the best of it.
his thoughts, yet could not get rid of them. Suddenly, on one of the
his throat and sang his favorite hunting song:
his throat to draw attention.
his throat. "I'm galloping to the commander of the corps. How do matters
his time there.
his time. But he is growing old, and though not exactly cruel he has too
his timidity. She felt that he wanted to say something to her but could
his track. Anatole Kuragin promptly obtained an appointment from
his trap. The innkeeper stood at the gate.
his tribute to the melancholy mood of the hostess, and then amused
his tumbler, and adding some rum to it asked Mary Hendrikhovna to stir
his typically southern French face during the whole time of the reading,
his uncomfortable habits was to blame for the condition of the family
his undertaking, going over its minutest details in his mind. In his
his uniform wearing all his orders and go down the garden to review his
his valets were still taking off his things, he picked up a book and
his vanguard, driving off the Cossacks, crossed the Russian frontier,
his view of what was good for the people, we must inevitably assume that
his voice said crossly:
his voice which reached her from the garden. Suddenly several men came
his voice. "Who invented Him, if He did not exist? Whence came thy
his volition. But his will--which forms the essence of his life--man
his waistcoat.
his way far into the forest and came upon the left flank of Murat's
his way forward and approached that very captain who as the corporal had
his weak, human, unheroic sides; but as it was, Speranski's strange and
his wealth, his education, and his social position had given him in
his weapons clean and polished to the utmost, and every horse groomed
his weary eyes on the paper, began to read them with a fixed and serious
his whole body and eagerly listened to her story. "Yes, yes... so he
his whole soul what the stranger said. Whether he accepted the wise
his wife occupied in court circles. He was gloomy and absent-minded. A
his wife with him, and had settled down with her in their covered cart,
his wife with the royal prince, Pierre had unexpectedly been made a
his wife's affairs, and his official duties. He regarded all these
his wife's beauty to him and from that time till they came to Moscow had
his wife's drawing room as one enters a theater, was acquainted with
his wife's room. She was lying dead, in the same position he had seen
his wife, and the destruction of the French.
his will and despite his indecision, his lack of a plan, and all his
his will, I expect." (One of the prince's favorite occupations of late
his will, then evidently a cold affecting the manifestation of his will
his will, very variously and indefinitely directed. Amid a long series
his wish for a gallop across a level field; and in the same way the
his wont, as if intentionally contrasting the briskness of his manners
his words for the solemnity of the moment, as he spoke. "I imagine..."
his words which would explain his feeling for her.
his young master, with the fox tied to his crupper. While still at a
his. In the regiment, everything was definite: who was lieutenant, who
hissed viciously, and tugged with all her might at the portfolio.
historian Thiers, like other of his historians, trying to justify his
historian is again obliged to fall back on power--the force he had
historians (to the effect that Kutuzov hindered an attack) is unfounded,
historians address to him, based on their knowledge of what is good for
historians attribute such conceptions to Napoleon and his marshals,
historians give, from the compilers of memoirs and the histories
historians say that power rests on a conditional delegation of the will
historians still employ the conception of power as a force that itself
historians tell us with naive assurance that its causes were the wrongs
historians themselves tell us that from Smolensk onwards he wished
historians who described the event later and the men who then surrounded
historians' language.
historians' usual expedient when anything does not fit their standards);
historians, another, newer force--the idea--is added, the connection of
historians, we shall have the history of monarchs and writers, but not
historians.
historic character is first the product of his time, and his power only
historic characters and perceive the cause of the effect they produce
historic leaders but in the nations themselves, what significance have
historic persons may perhaps explain much in the domain of jurisprudence
historical accounts of battles, involuntarily pictured to himself the
historical accounts. On the contrary it is a very mild expression of
historical events and termed "power."
historical events this way or that; yet there is the same difference
historical events, that is, as not subject to laws, is the same for
historical laws deduced by observation and by which man is controlled,
historical leader which serves to express the people's life, as other
historical personages does not in most cases produce any effect, that
historical persons, from monarchs to journalists, as the expression of
histories of culture, to which all general histories tend more and more
histories of the culture of that period.
history and predestined from eternity.
history as the recognition of a free force moving the heavenly bodies
history begins--that theory explains nothing.
history books say he did) the position of the Russians from Utitsa
history deliberately avoid seeing that this flank march cannot be
history has invented.
history lies precisely in that force.
history of the Godfreys and the Minnesingers has remained the history
history shows us that neither a Louis XI nor a Metternich, who ruled
history supports that view. For instance..." Kutuzov seemed to reflect,
history's essential question: what is power? The universal historians
history, as at present expounded, can be dealt with, and anyone who
history, in which it has not a free but a predestined significance.
history, the state and power are merely phenomena, just as for modern
history," he concluded.
history.
history. But to arrive at these laws, resulting from the sum of all
history: to say that the field of battle at Borodino remained in the
hit Alpatych, the overseer, had not the latter instinctively avoided the
hitherto puckered brow became smooth as a sign of pleasure, and with a
hitting men and that afterwards someone had shouted "Cavalry!" and our
hitting the first man who came in his way a swinging blow on the back.
hitting, throttling, and tearing at Vereshchagin were unable to kill
hive. There is no longer the measured quiet sound of throbbing activity,
hoarsely. Prince Andrew winced and, clutching his head, went out and sat
hold of Dolokhov's shirt.
hold their position till reserves from the center come up. In that case
holding a cigar between the thumb and little finger of one of his small
holding fast to plait, would allow.
holding high her fifty-year-old head with its gray curls, she stood
holding him down by the sleeve in a friendly way to prevent his rising.
holding his baby son, who was again awake, on his huge right palm and
holding his breath, and running so lightly, frightened Rostov. He seized
holding his nose as he ran past the men at work.
holding his thumb extended, drew his long hair from under his dalmatic
holding in her hands the old ball dress (already out of fashion) which
holding it a little longer in his own.
holding on with a boat hook to the ship of the people and himself
holding the Order touched one of Lazarev's buttons. It was as if
holding the casement and not closing it. "With lanterns. Most likely the
holding the horses. Balaga took his seat in the front one and holding
holding up his saber, his spurs jingling, he ran up the steps of the
holding up his sword, he addressed Chernyshev and asked in German where
holding up the folds of her dress, and the smile shone still more
holiday so noticeable as in Marya Dmitrievna's broad, stern face, which
holiday time. "Seize the moments of happiness, love and be loved! That
holiday: everywhere were blackened ruins, and the few Russians to be
holidays and Sonya's love, had opened out to him a vista of tranquil
holidays spent with Nicholas at Otradnoe were what she recalled oftenest
hollow. On reaching the bottom, Dolokhov told the Cossacks accompanying
hollows and snow-covered pools of water.
holy order and is too preoccupied and satisfied with the outer man to
holy science of our order all is one, all is known in its entirety and
holy secrets of Providence while we remain in this flesh which forms
home Natasha placed herself in the position of a slave to her husband,
home and meet one of your own people whom you want to talk everything
home now for the first time after eighteen months again brightened his
home reading a book and trying to fathom the significance of the Square,
home receiving no one and going nowhere.
home. Difficult and strange as it was for him to reflect that he would
home. She waited on the old countess, petted and spoiled the children,
home. Should he go to headquarters next day and challenge that affected
home; and secondly, from his hussar point of view, he regretted not to
homes and families. Respond, therefore, to his benevolent intentions
homes and go to Moscow and to get carts ready for tomorrow morning
homme." *
honest eyes, with the tears rising in them when she herself had begun to
honest is crushed! Everyone sees that this cannot go on. Everything is
honest, practical man and we have nobody better. Give him real power,
honest, that's the chief thing. I'll be sure to send it to you. Or
honey fly timidly and shiftily. They do not sting, but crawl away from
honey like the others, and bees fly in and out in the same way. But one
honor I can't allow anyone to use."
honor and mark of favor at the French court.
honor should be appointed a member, but without a salary."
honor you, but all the same remember that the future belongs to us."
honor!" He paused. "I missed you at Bucharest, but I needed someone to
honor, a fine set of Grenadiers mostly wearing decorations, who were
honor, there are bushes here," came the voice of an hussar, past whom
honor, whether they should group themselves by districts or by whole
honorable Count," or, "Were he as clever as you," and so on, till
honorable to admit one's mistake than to let matters become irreparable.
honorable, and brave, but if he robs his fellows there is no honor in
honorable, of Bezukhov? And Fedya, with his noble spirit, loved him and
honored by his presence. Kutuzov had received the Order of St. George
honored guests sat, everyone seemed to be in high spirits and under the
honoring him. "Why, I have not yet had time to settle down!"
hood. "Foo! You are cold! Now take off your things, quick!" she shouted
hoofs and shouts were nearing the village.
hoofs and the jingling of showy cavalry in blue, red, and green braided
hoofs and wheels. Amid the general rumble, the groans and voices of the
hoofs.
hooked a fine fellow! I am glad for your sake and I've known him since
hope and that if Nicholas refused the match she had found for him, she
hope it will not be, for it is mined and orders have been given to
hope of recovery. It was impossible for him to travel, it would not do
hope that he may consent to reduce the term by four months."
hope, inspire us with true love one for another, arm us with unity of
hope. Sonya and Natasha were nursing him.
hoped they would not be noticed.
hoped to lead he still lived the old life, only in new surroundings.
hoped. She prayed for her brother as living and was always awaiting news
hopeful by the expression he read on the faces there, he smiled sadly
hopeless movement with his arm and went away.
hopeless: "The sovereigns, madame... What have they done for Louis XVII,
hopelessness)--at any rate, Pierre longed with his whole soul to believe
hopes and your lies."
hopes of saving his life. She took turns with her beside his sofa, and
hopes to bring upon us recoil on his own head, and may Europe delivered
hoping to arrange to leave before then and take Petya with her as their
hoping to see a messenger from Dolokhov.
horizon--from that day the problem of the vanity and uselessness of all
horizontal wrinkle between his brows, stood in civilian dress facing
horrified by her spiritual baseness and trying to arrange her thoughts
horror of death, through privation, and through what he recognized in
horror that had seized her when she touched him and convinced herself
horror that no barrier lay between him and her.
horror, as by a presentiment.
horror-struck. And yet with his experience of war he did not order all
horror-struck. But when she saw that Pierre's sacrilegious words had
horror.
horrors that occurred did not stagger his soul. He boldly took the
horse a little in front of his marshals. He gazed silently at the hills
horse and his Mameluke, Rustan. Napoleon received Balashev in the very
horse and loosening his rein galloped forward, not heeding Denisov who
horse fancier, a sportsman, the possessor of some century-old brandy
horse fell in among the hussars. Nearly all the French dragoons were
horse had splashed mud over some foot soldiers.
horse keep pace with the company.
horse of a batman or groom of some important personage and began to
horse still struggled.
horse), from the sight of all these things a fantastic world of his
horse, Bedouin, and sitting as though falling backwards in the saddle,
horse, and a civilian--an accountant who had asked permission to
horse, dangling fragments of its shaft behind it, galloped past, while
horse, paced for a long time by the Kammer-Kollezski rampart, awaiting
horse, rode up to the porch, swung his leg over the saddle with a supple
horse."
horse; another was perched up behind an hussar with his arms round him;
horseman and keen rider to hounds. Before the hunt, by old custom, the
horsemen could be descried. The officers said that either Napoleon or
horsemen did not dismount and that the wolf shook herself and ran for
horsemen. Pierre also looked at them, trying to guess which of the
horses and calves were straying in the English park. Prince Andrew rode
horses and the infantry collecting wood.
horses got ready for the princess' carriages and eighteen carts for
horses jostled one another and neighed, not disturbing the choir but
horses near the window, Prince Andrew felt that something important and
horses neighing. The secrecy of the undertaking heightened its charm
horses should be sent there. This could not all be arranged that day,
horses were already galloping. Rostov heard the thud of their hoofs and
horses were harnessed. They were both pale, and the superintendent of
horses were. This difficulty had arisen chiefly because the hussars did
horses would sink. We must ride round more to the left...."
horses' feet at the wolf.
horses, and not a soul was to be seen there. In the great drawing
horses, let them be off to Vladimir, and not leave them to the French."
horses, past sentinels and men who saluted their colonel and stared with
horses, polished their arms, brought in straw from the thatched roofs in
horses, so that though everything has been packed up since morning, her
horses.
horses.
horses. Hayne, the same groom who had been at Austerlitz, led up the
horses. Some of the horses were drowned and some of the men; the others
horses. The rain was descending in torrents, and Rostov, with a young
horses; I told Yakov Alpatych so."
horses; ragged men who had fallen behind from various regiments
hospital at Ostrolenka till I recover. In regard to which I humbly
hospital more than fifteen thousand men, and had we attacked this would
hospitals could no longer accommodate all the sick and wounded, yet the
hospitals, and asylums--on all the estates before the master arrived.
hospitals. The one and the other may serve as a pastime. But what's
hostess look toward the door, and now and then glance at one another,
hostess' hand and taking a seat beside her. "I am so sick of it."
hostess. A young man, looking distraught, pounced down on the ladies,
hostile to Napoleon, which had been sent to all the European courts.
hostile to him since she had felt herself under obligations to him after
hostile, some dreadful, terrifying, and repellent mystery!" And hiding
hostility and suspicion. For some seconds all were silent.
hostility but yet with respect, in the guardhouse to which he was taken.
hot. Pierre, however, felt excited, and the general desire to show that
hot."
hound could be heard.
hour alone with the dying man, passed out, slightly acknowledging their
hour to do so, and came out upon the square where the streets of the
hour with her without once mentioning Prince Andrew. "I couldn't begin
hour, was over, Rostov said nothing, and he spent the rest of the day in
hour.... Tell me all you know about the will, and above all where it is.
hours! Only the near one died of it."
hours' sleep before morning and felt cheerful, bold, and resolute, with
house Prince Andrew had built at Bogucharovo, ever in the same state,
house and back again, shouting confused instructions to the hurrying
house and in Brunn itself. I want to entertain him as far as I can, with
house and now managed all his affairs, stepped softly into the room.
house and some shops were on fire. This fire was already burning itself
house before Mass.
house dress in which Prince Andrew thought her even prettier than in her
house in Vilna from which Alexander had dispatched him on his mission.
house in the company of the stout princess, his wife, and his beautiful
house near the Crimean bridge. On his way through the streets Pierre
house occupied by Kutuzov, asked for Bolkonski. Prince Andrew was in and
house of moderate size, situated on the very banks of the river. Neither
house on the Sivtsev Vrazhek.
house seemed topsy-turvy. All the doors were open, all the furniture was
house thinking out a letter to his father about the battle and his visit
house two doors off. The whole household, servants included, was bright
house was brilliant with lights shining through its lofty windows. The
house was crowded on account of an approaching name day), Prince Andrew
house was dominated by the same feeling that Princess Mary experienced
house was one to thank God for. When Father and we went out mowing
house was scrubbed and cleaned on Saturdays; neither she nor the
house with Prince Bagration and Weyrother. Weyrother was the Austrian
house!"
house!"
house, and the ball, as everyone said, was a great success. There were
house, aren't they?"
house, now and then opening her door when someone passed and watching
house, remarkable for its extreme cleanliness (suggesting that of a
house," said Rostov. "Of course, it's our house! Denisov, Denisov! We're
house.
house.
house. Having repeated her order to Dron to have horses ready for her
house.... She's very pretty," added the adjutant with a smile. At
house?" said Natasha.
household both among themselves and in his presence expressed their
household, a common anxiety, a softening of the heart, and a
household, and the whole family moved from Marya Dmitrievna's house to
household, surprising the prefect by his memory of minute details
houses and moved it to their own, pretending that it was their property.
houses and slay their fellow men? What were the causes of these events?
houses at once, and don't let one of your voices be heard!"
houses filled with luxuries, hospitals, prisons, government offices,
houses in Povarskaya Street. Natasha was evidently pleased to be dealing
houses into this or that house, it would be unfair to allow its owner to
houses off.
houses, were in uniform--some in that of Catherine's day, others in that
houses--in any case a troublesome and dangerous thing to do), arson
housing at our Moscow estate. I am sure Andrew would do even more in
how Dolokhov, who had fully recovered his former position after the
how I long to dance, how splendidly I dance, and how they would enjoy
how attentive, and how he remembers everything," he thought, looking at
how badly the Note was worded," remarked Count Rostopchin in the casual
how carefully and at what length everything relating to form and
how could he speak like that in her presence? The only explanation was
how fond the count is of her."
how good it is, what more does one need?" thought he. And suddenly
how he could ask such a question. Pierre went into the study. Prince
how he had that day seen Kutuzov, the newly chosen chief of the
how he presented himself, with his hand to his cap, and really it
how his actions might affect others or what the consequences of this or
how is it you don't see that if the count has written a letter to the
how it is with me. A demain, mon cher." *
how it is you don't see the charm of these delicious marvels."
how it offended me... because... well, for that reason...."
how long his unconsciousness lasted. Suddenly he again felt that he was
how many battalions, and how many prisoners. Asking about the Russian
how much anxiety one has had to go through that we might rejoice in
how one day soon after his marriage he came out of the bedroom into his
how our troops are distinguishing themselves. It certainly does them
how she had gone to look for mushrooms the previous summer and had lost
how the man who put them there behind the hill could have made so gross
how things would be after his death, and how her new, liberated life
how things would be at Otradnoe and what he would find there. Thoughts
how to get the greatest gratification from one's dinner, did not then
how we and Nicholas, all three of us, talked in the sitting room after
how you propose to deal with the memorandum I have presented," said
how, but don't you remember that it could all be arranged and how nice
however much they left her in peace she could not now be at peace, and
however they might change the setting and adornment of that face, it
however, began to turn to irritability, and not long before Boris'
however, for he will leave, us again to take part in this unhappy war
however, it was not, and could not be, possible to explain the burning
howitzers of Dessaix's and Friant's divisions, will move forward, open
howitzers of the Guard's artillery against either one or other of the
howling there." (This meant that the she-wolf, about whom they both
http://gutenberg.org/license).
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
hubs of the wheels, and the infantry sank ankle-deep in that soft,
huge family coach in which she had traveled to Voronezh, a semiopen
hugging and kissing him. Another and yet another creature of the same
hum with voices. On all sides soldiers were running to and fro, throwing
human agencies; I do not understand why this occurs and I talk of
human baseness or folly, he was not horrified as formerly, and did
human being. He reflected for a moment.
human desires. And with this aim, in one of her talks with her Father
human dignity--Napoleon is the object of adulation and enthusiasm; he
human life.
human minds roam, the better we shall please God, who rejects all
human needs, and that all unhappiness arises not from privation but from
human race, and his own progress to the highest degree of perfection?
human understanding cannot grasp, it seems to me rather useless to spend
human wills produced the Revolution and Napoleon, and only the sum of
human wills, is continuous.
humanity and of the peoples, the first question--in the absence of a
humanity fifty years ago as a present-day professor who from his
humanity's essential question, serve as currency for some purposes of
humanity's movement. The most usual generalizations adopted by almost
humanity, modern history has postulated its own aims--the welfare of the
humanity.
humanity."
humiliation of arrogant Austria and that in a week's time he might,
humiliation.
humility before something great and incomprehensible, seized her when
humility.
humming infantry as by a frame.
humming of tens of thousands of bees with their abdomens threateningly
humor and dissatisfied with the affair, and so did not exert themselves
humor, it seemed to him that everyone regarded him with aversion and
humorist, showing his teeth chaffing Pierre. "Awkward baggage!" he added
hundred and thirty thousand men this side of the Vistula. The Turks will
hundred paces in front of the knoll and below it. This was Borodino.
hundred rubles each, and furniture, mirrors, and bronzes were being
hundred rubles he had a long column of figures scored against him,
hundred rubles he had not only to keep himself, his mother, and Sonya,
hundred rubles, and have only one twenty-five-ruble note. I am in such a
hundred serfs; but one of these estates had already been sold, and the
hundred thousand rubles' worth of goods. Can they be saved when the army
hundred thousand strong reached Krasnoe with only fifty thousand.
hundred thousand. Yet the shrewd and experienced Kutuzov accepted the
hundred yards after that before he saw to his left, across the whole
hundreds good-humoredly ending their days in Moscow.
hundreds of thousands they moved like a whole nation.
hundreds of years the peasants of Borodino, Gorki, Shevardino, and
hung a signboard, GENERAL STAFF, and throwing down his reins, he entered
hung low over the field of battle on the horizon. It was growing
hung not only over Bolkonski but over all Russia, shut out all other
hunger and fatigue, need these supplies as well as a few days' rest.
hunger on the road, many returned of their own accord, and the movement
hunger recalled him from these reflections; he had to get something to
hunger, finding no food on the sun-parched meadows. Only at night and
hungry and indispensable soldiers to give to the French who, though not
hungry, exhausted men would have to detain for days the whole enemy army
hungry, ill-shod soldiers, and losing a third of his men as stragglers
hunts, theatricals, dinners, and music. He was glad to see Prince
huntsman.
huntsman. One crossed himself continually, the other scratched his back
hurrah!" Petya stood on tiptoe and pushed and pinched, but could see
hurried there and back again. Then the crowd hastily retired from
hurriedly along the path they had trodden down, to the dressing station.
hurriedly he entered the shed.
hurriedly in reply to Chernyshev, and smiled ironically on hearing that
hurriedly interrupted.
hurriedly rising from his seat and going up to the table on which an
hurriedly unclasped his hands, stopped at a table as if tying the
hurriedly, evidently no longer trying to show the advantages of peace
hurriedly: "I will tell you some time how it all happened. But you know
hurry to get where he was not.
hurry up and come and marry her!" thought he on his way to the house.
hurry, the meeting with the courier who talked casually of how badly
hurry. "How can I think of the bright side of life when, as you see, I
hurry. However, he put his horse to a trot in the direction of Tushin's
hurry?"--Nicholas began to settle down in his old home world. His father
hurrying along by the fence, he turned several times to look at her.
hurrying away on her old legs, went through the back yard to the
hurrying past them.
hurt himself to be beaten. The pursuit of the Russian army, about which
hurt the back of his head; then when they propped him against the
husband is away in Tver or I would send him to fetch you. You must come.
husband more easily.
husband moved in his sleep behind her.
husband that for her it was the surest sign of something being wrong
husband's became more and more melancholy and solemn, as though there
husband's.
husband, Mortemart, the delightful Prince Hippolyte who had just
husband, as well as several droll incidents from his recollections of
husband, took a very prominent place. She was visited by the members of
husband.
husband. It was not what he was saying that pleased her--that did not
husband. Natasha on the contrary had at once abandoned all her witchery,
husband. Prince Andrew's eyes were closed, so weary and sleepy did he
hussar and began lifting him.
hussar beside him.
hussar in this battle, had been wasted. Their squadron remained in
hussar regiment went and his jealousy had become a standing joke among
hussar revels and life in the fighting line, the other of the pleasures
hussar shouted back.
hussar who had the prisoner, rode to the left across a ravine to the
hussar with cold, red hands, and raising his eyebrows gazed about him
hussars began carefully aligning their horses. Silence fell on the whole
hussars formed line for roll call, kept things in order, groomed their
hussars hastily dismounted, not knowing what they were to do. The men
hussars to retreat with the infantry. They were cut off from the line of
hussars with mustaches. Along the Tverskaya Street rode the hussar with
hussars, told them to follow him, and trotted downhill in the direction
hussars.
hut was made in the following manner, which had then come into vogue. A
huts of that large village. The Rostovs' servants and coachmen and the
hypocrite, a rascal who has himself roused the people to riot. Didn't
hypothesis unconfirmed by the experience of history.
ice and into the water and oftenest of all among the crowd that covered
ice that covered the millpool.
ice. Crowds of soldiers from the dam began running onto the frozen pond.
idea never occurred to any of them that they could not know the disease
idea that he was one of those same retired Moscow gentlemen-in-waiting
idea that there is not and cannot be any science of war, and that
idea.
idea. She consulted a Russian priest as to the possibility of divorce
ideas every day--especially the foreigners, who did so with a boldness
identical.
idiot!... But what's the good?..." and he waved his arm.
idlers have failed to beat the Germans. Since the world began everybody
if Andrew got married he himself would marry Bourienne--had evidently
if His Majesty would let him have another division.
if I am myself the cause, teach me what I should do! I shall perish of
if I still value my life it is only because I still hope to meet such
if Kutuzov won the battle it would be felt that everything was done by
if Louisa Ivanovna (Madame Schoss) would go with them, the young ladies
if after the battle of Borodino, when the surrender of Moscow became
if all the powers of his soul were concentrated on passing the commander
if anyone came to see him he was glad.
if asking everyone whether he was doing the right thing. After the
if complaining of Kutuzov.
if convinced that Balashev, as a Russian, must be flattered by his
if guessing what it was about.
if he asked on behalf of all who begged of him, he would soon be unable
if he didn't, he would go to the drink shop or fall ill. Just as I could
if he had come out of a Russian bath--in a short coat and with his hair
if he were prepared that instant to kill himself and everyone else, but
if in it lay the gist of the matter.
if in reply to it, came the sound of guns ahead of them.
if in search of something. Before dinner the old prince, of whom she was
if in search of something. On his way to the aunt he bowed to the little
if it could not succeed it would not do to take young ladies and house
if it had been forgotten there.
if it is to last. Prince Vasili knew this, and having once realized that
if it must be!" and she slammed the casement.
if it were all a lost and unappreciated bliss, long past. He could not
if it's in my power..."
if looking for something.
if not understanding what was said to him. Wolzogen, noticing "the old
if not, they'll know how to arrange matters." And really, during the
if one were in the country."
if part of his soul had been torn away. He lost the power of thinking
if punishing someone for those secret illogical emotions that stirred
if she had been to blame toward her, but that she could not be his wife.
if she saw straight into their souls. Yesterday, for instance, Mitya was
if speaking to himself.
if the black spaces were clouds. Sometimes the sky seemed to be rising
if the matter concerned some brief conflict in which only a small number
if the peasant is naked and hungry and has only one miserable horse, he
if their differences would be settled there amongst the bullets. They
if these battalions went away, the guns would remain without support.
if they were saying, 'Ah, she's not the one I'm after, so it's not worth
if this aim coincides with yours, you may enter our Brotherhood with
if to allow them a respite, a quarter of an hour passed during which
if to reassure Prince Andrew.
if to say that this was no more than she had expected.
if you have firmly resolved to join our Brotherhood." (Pierre nodded
if you still try to defend the infamies and horrors perpetrated by that
ignoble departure from Africa, leaving his comrades in distress, is
ignominious death awaits those who make any attempt on your persons or
ignoramuses--have taken the work of the naturalists who deal with one
ignorance of what steps to take, and the enormous number of advisers and
ignorance, or evil intention in every deviation from that theory. To
il n'y a qu'un pas.
ill and could not walk, the officer replied that the order was to shoot
ill and did not leave his study.
ill luck takes us. They say we are going to Olmutz, and Olmutz is a very
ill on the journey. But the very difficulties and preoccupations of the
ill that he may die at any moment, and Dr. Lorrain has come from
ill! I was only there a few moments and hardly said a word..."
ill, and God knows what! It's hard, Count, hard to manage daughters in
ill-humor. But today she quite forgot that and was hurt that he should
ill-spent. He is worth it!"
ill. Perhaps this is only a rumor."
illegitimate son, and petted and extolled when he was the best match
illimitable within him and that limited and material something that he,
illness continued he would not grudge yet other thousands and would take
illness of the old Georgian princess, of Metivier's disappearance from
illness of the wealthy and celebrated beau of Catherine's day, Count
illness, and so the sound of her voice surprised and delighted him. He
illness. Prince Vasili said something to Lorrain in passing and went
illuminated by the candles burning before it and by the morning light
image rose in all its womanly beauty.
imagination Andrew's face as she remembered it in childhood, a gentle,
imagination Natasha this time gave him a different answer. She stopped
imagination a new plan of life. On the previous evening at the Lodge, he
imagination at this still and mystic hour of night. And these pictures
imagination been playing the role of director of the popular feeling
imagination he mentally compared them with Ramballe's tales. Listening
imagination he was that terrible moaning personified. When she saw an
imagination pictured an occurrence of four years ago, when Dolokhov,
imagination she said other tender and loving words which she might have
imagination she went over her whole conversation with Kuragin, and again
imagination, and "the bird restored to its native fields" galloped to
imagination, though he had long known that Moscow would be abandoned he
imagination. Pierre maintained the contrary, and as his mental faculties
imagine and saw no interest in imagining how it would be if things were
imagine any result more opportune than the actual outcome of this
imagine how he would have arranged things in this or that battle--the
imagine that their children have no secrets from them. "I know I shall
imagined all sorts of movements of the Napoleonic army as a whole or
imagined himself to be Napoleon in person and to have just effected the
imagined oppressors whose victims he would rescue. Of the three
imagined that they were accomplishing a most noble and honorable
imagined, but worse, much worse, than anybody else in the world. But
imagining himself still speaking to his foe.
imagining that they have discovered and appraised the peculiarities of
imbibe," he said. "Can I receive that pure liquid into an impure vessel
imitators; and secondly because you are one of those gentlemen of the
immeasurable height. When the old man began to speak too loud, Speranski
immediately afterwards cannon began firing from somewhere and smoke
immediately brightened on seeing Rostov. "Schon gut Morgen! Schon gut
immediately dispatched Adjutant General Wintzingerode, who was in
immediately diverted by an exclamation at the other side of the table.
immediately dropped his own beside it and picked it up without touching
immediately fell asleep.
immediately fell ill. When he came to himself after his illness he saw
immediately felt this.
immediately overtake the enemy he had selected. That Frenchman, by his
immediately saw all the chief generals of the army together, and among
immediately seizing him by the shoulder and looking amiably into his
immediately the sound of axes and swords, the crashing of branches,
immediately vanished and were replaced by eager excitement. He quickly
immediately, but yet looks about him and straightens the cap that is
immediately. I won't say another word to him," thought Pierre. He
immediately. Perhaps he has come and is sitting in the drawing room.
immense number of bodies splashing about in the dirty pond.
immense number of the delving insects prove that despite the destruction
immensity of the power they constituted.
immersed himself in the quiet life to which he had formerly been
immobile for a few moments. Then wrinkles ran over his face like a wave
immortally victorious name on the Pyramids, would affect this enfant du
immutability in the enchanted, sleeping castle. But though externally
impassioned he became in these moments of almost morbid irritation.
impassive face of Oriental type, came out after the commander in chief.
impassive on the face of a loved one who is dead, tapping the last on
impatience. Konovnitsyn's firm, handsome, and kindly face was lit up by
impatient and sets to work himself and finds letters from the Emperor
impatiently awaiting his notice. The women and girls flirted with him
impatiently awaiting the order to mount. His face, having been bathed
impending action. From privates to general they were not expecting a
impending battle, under a heading which he also read out:
impending battle. All he had seen that day, all the significant and
impending danger.
impending war.
impenetrable eyes, and felt that it had been ridiculous of him to have
imperceptibly from the cradle to manhood, did not exist for the
imperceptibly moving.
imperials... or do you wish to make it a hundred?" added he, addressing
imperturbable calm she did not begin to speak in front of the valet.
impetuously toward the embankment to watch the firing. Petya too would
implanted in us merely to torment us and never be satisfied. But Pierre
imploringly at her, evidently afraid that she might not understand.
import of what was taking place lay in the personal struggle between
importance and that no time must be lost. He did not consider or ask
importance of the coming campaign.
importance relating to Andrew Bolkonski and his betrothed. Pierre had
importance, who was the first to arrive at her reception. Anna Pavlovna
importance. In front of Tuchkov's troops was some high ground not
importance. It was something white by the door--the statue of a sphinx,
importance. To make up for this, at home Pierre had the right to
important French official in a carriage and pair driven by a soldier,
important and poetic.
important episode of the war of 1812 was the movement of the Russian
important in itself but only as a pretext for disputes and intrigue.
important matter. Pierre saw that there was a conspiracy against him and
important old lady dismissed Nicholas after repeating her invitation to
important part. The man who does not understand the construction of
important person. "Come, Nicholas! You know you let me call you so?"
important personage whose complete confidence he enjoyed, and he was
important personages of the town. This was Malvintseva, Princess Mary's
important personages that much that was concealed from others was
important point of the battle.
important post in Vienna. Both the foreign minister and our ambassador
important than verses, and Bagration, again preceding all the rest,
important these pictures appeared to me, with what profound meaning they
important, it's all the same--only to save oneself from it as best one
important. And so he thought it necessary to take an interest in these
important."
important..." he paused, "than to have a good sleep."
imposed upon himself as a duty, but which afterwards became a habit
imposing and stately appearance one sees in men of forty who live in
impossibility of crossing the frontier with a crowd of tatterdemalions,
impossibility of going to sleep on such a night. It was light enough to
impossibility, as in fact thought Kutuzov, who when he received the plan
impossible for him to live otherwise than as he did and that he had
impossible for them as it is for the monkey to open its paw and let
impossible in the heat of battle to say what was happening at any given
impossible not to notice his face. Dolokhov was a man of small means and
impossible not to see that there could be no such direct cause of the
impossible to continue studying the Ptolemaic worlds. But even after
impossible to defer the journey to Moscow any longer. Natasha's
impossible to describe the movement of humanity without the conception
impossible to express all one thinks; and that he had never felt the
impossible to get back the way he had come; the maid, Aniska, was no
impossible to go back to the same conversation, to talk of trifles is
impossible to imagine any two people more completely adapted down to the
impossible to imagine two different courses of action in precisely the
impossible to make the story of the retreat fit their theory. But
impossible to pass any judgment.
impossible to picture a future with Princess Mary, because he did not
impossible to prevent it. Three regiments have been here and spent
impossible to say what would happen if he lived another year that he
impossible to sit down anywhere without disturbing its symmetry,
impossible to stop him, she rallied her forces and joined the vicomte in
impossible to stop them," he reported.
impossible to treat her with more delicacy, greater care, and at the
impossible to wait for her recovery. Prince Andrew was expected in
impossible!..."
impossible, but she stopped because she had seen by the sudden change
impossible, visionary, sinful happiness. Prince Andrew had loved his
impossible.
impossible. I only wish I could spare my brother the first moments. I
impossible... Oh, how pleasant it was at home!... The knave, double
impracticable, he arranged for the erection of large buildings--schools,
impressed Alpatych, but in thinking about his own business he soon
impressed on them that to leave Moscow was shameful. They were ashamed
impression his news of a victory would create, or recalling the send-off
impression of the misfortunes and sufferings of people and of being
impression of those voices and faces and a sense of loneliness merged
impression on me. Just as you ask destiny why your splendid brother
impression. "But that is a matter of perfect indifference to me," he
impression. Whether Dolgorukov and Weyrother, or Kutuzov, Langeron, and
impressionable, smiling young faces (smiling probably at their own
impressions he had become accustomed to during the last few months
impressions of the recent battle, picturing pleasantly to himself the
impressions--such as the retreat from Smolensk, his visit to Bald Hills,
impressively, blocking the way to the bedroom and preventing the other
imprisonment were such that he seemed not to know what fatigue and
imprisonment, now again controlled his existence. It was terrible, but
improve, but on the other hand felt anxious as to the effect this
improved without my having noticed it. And above all, what tact and
improvement of the human race by striving for such purification. Which
improvement. His satire has been less bitter of late, and there was a
improvised ball, and the Rostovs stayed on. Anatole asked Natasha for a
imprudent to "overresist" them without an armed force, and would it not
impulse.
impulsive and hearty way he took Boris by the hand with a friendly
impulsive man who had always moved in the highest administrative circles
impulsive nature, does get into mischief (a boy can't help it), he will
impurity we are unworthy to receive, or seek the reformation of
imputed to him as a fault. His childishly rash, uncalled-for, and
in 1805, and who saw in him not only all the virtues but all human
in 1812 was on the Kaluga road. So it is impossible to understand by
in 1812, and the Russian army in its pursuit of the French strained its
in Anna Pavlovna's drawing room. Pierre removed his feet from the sofa.
in Austria or Prussia, for we have to draw our information from French
in Bolkonski's emphatic opinion yet not feeling able fully to credit it,
in Count Arakcheev's waiting room.
in Dresden, the diplomatic negotiations which, in the opinion of
in France, then in Italy, in Africa, in Prussia, in Austria, in Spain,
in French captives also. Denisov then relieved him from drudgery and
in French. "They are like wolves whom nothing but flesh can appease."
in French. It was Count Rostopchin. He told Kutuzov that he had come
in Germany. But we, thank God, have no need to recognize his genius
in Great Russia, which formed the larger part of his property, and left
in Kishenev with only a Moldavian peasant woman to help instead of a
in Mary Bogdanovna's trembling white hands.
in Moscow and that the ladies about his father--who were never favorably
in Moscow but no one else. Some said that a deputation of some sort must
in Moscow yesterday. Do you know that she has lost her father?"
in Moscow. In addition to the formal evening and dinner parties, a large
in Moscow. What a chance those girls have missed! Your peasants,
in Moscow. When he saw the first hussar with the unbuttoned uniform of
in Natasha two days before that she would not only not be hurt if Pierre
in Perkhushkovo, he learned that there had been a great battle that
in Petersburg at Anna Scherer's reception.
in Petersburg is this: the Emperor does not look into anything. He
in Petersburg. Natasha with animated and excited face was telling him
in Pfuel's own expressions, it was clear that the others knew, and Pfuel
in Rostov's soul! And this something was apart from everything else
in Russia, had sunk greatly in the esteem of society after his
in Russia, to be placed in this position--made the laughingstock of the
in Russia. The Petersburg Freemasons all came to see him, tried to
in Thy mercy; smite down our enemies and destroy them swiftly beneath
in Vienna knew him and valued him. He was not one of those many
in a camp.
in a carved and painted lantern and the intricate, skillful, artistic
in a circle of friends, and his guests, understanding his wish, tried
in a crowd, Natasha in her lilac silk dress trimmed with black lace
in a dirty little room sat some ten factory hands. Tipsy and perspiring,
in a folding armchair, and continually cleared his throat and pulled at
in a frieze coat.
in a frightened whisper when the sergeant major had passed on.
in a hoarse broken voice, with an arm thrown round the nearest soldier.
in a hollow behind a hazel bush. The hounds had scarcely been loosed
in a letter that reached Kutuzov after the battle at Tarutino) Since
in a merry mood, sitting down now by one, now by another, of the guests.
in a moment. Petrushka!" he called to his valet: "Come here, take these
in a most masterly way. The whole army feels great suspicion of the
in a normal state in that respect. All the powers of his mind were more
in a pathetic whisper what had become of her husband who had remained
in a semicircle. The crowd consisted of a few Russians and many of
in a shady corner by the window.
in a shovel--the guests who had been scattered about in different rooms
in a toyshop, did not know which way to look, afraid of missing any
in a voice familiar to Prince Andrew. "Houses are set on fire in your
in a weak state as you know," said the old servant.
in accord with the accepted tone of the moment. But the general opinion
in actions that follows from the consciousness of freedom? That is a
in advance of him, and he and his son arrived next day.
in all his activity he was never once untrue to it?
in amazement.
in among some ranks of infantry marching ahead of him. He tried to pass
in among the plants and threw down the doll. "Closer, closer!" she
in an historic event never understands its significance. If he tries to
in an historical sense involuntary and is related to the whole course of
in and saw him she paused. "Is it possible that this stranger has now
in and that the countess was being attended by a charlatan who might
in animals, and will go back into animals again."
in any case dishonored by being unable to fulfill the great and
in any other way that he had the right, since he had the might.
in anything they had been able to get hold of, were standing in the road
in as far as that was in his power.
in attendance on him two of his servants, Terenty and Vaska, who had
in bed they would begin talking and go on till morning. They spoke most
in chess you may think over each move as long as you please and are not
in chief with full powers over the armies and over the whole region
in chief would be. Though the aide-de-camp did not know these
in chief's suite. He was in a state of suppressed excitement and
in chief, and from the noisy laughter of the Cossacks holding the
in chief, especially at a difficult moment, has always before him not
in clean notes, was lying ready under a handkerchief on the countess'
in cold water, was all aglow, and his eyes were particularly brilliant.
in connection with the affairs of the Ryazan estate of which he was
in couples and he himself rode along the line trying to master the
in danger, it was said that Smolensk had surrendered, that Napoleon had
in despair, and you all ruined.... No, my dear, you and Sonya ought to
in discussion with the sole object of offending one another. But the
in dismay, as though seeking help. But all eyes demanded that he should
in disorder of late, chiefly because of his first wife's debts--had
in doubt for over a second. The wolf ran forward and jumped heavily over
in each soldier."
in earnest; but Natasha noticed that her father was flurried on entering
in enemy hands while the sick Russians left behind were among their
in everything, so he frowned and did not answer immediately.
in excuse of that gardener would be that he was very angry. But not even
in face of her sorrow. Without any need of self-restraint, no wish to
in fact, Murat, now called "King of Naples." Though it was quite
in fact, at which he had had the well-remembered pleasure of seeing her.
in five years. He received ten thousand rubles a year, but now resolved
in followed by a black one, and everything was in confusion; the borzois
in force, and only the presence of visitors hindered his speaking of it
in forestalling the French he was to delay them as long as possible.
in former years, that is, entertaining almost the whole province with
in front he caught glimpses of an open space with a strip of red cloth
in front of her leaning on his stick. "If you think something more is
in front of him and that the enemy must be at least six miles away.
in front of him.
in front of the position where the battle was accepted. Why was it
in front of the ranks with tail stiffly erect till suddenly a shell fell
in front of them, and that the columns moving near Pratzen constituted
in front of them.
in front were pushing back those who had pressed too close to the
in front with lanterns.
in front, behind it the artillery, and behind that again the infantry.
in front, who had seen and heard what had taken place before them, all
in front. There were about thirty officers, with Pierre among them, and
in full force."
in future note down all my actions.
in general I can tell you, Papa, that such a heroic spirit, the truly
in general something extraordinary was happening, and that is always
in general, food for the men. The younger ones occupied themselves as
in groups; they greeted Pierre and spoke of the town news. The footman
in half were for the moment repulsed. Our reserve units were able to
in hand.
in her arms and her kerchief torn from her head, burst through the door
in her eyes and her lips curved with a strange smile.
in her former place. It was dark in the room especially where they were
in her gruff voice: "So wives of living men have started marrying
in her male attire she seemed quite a different person. Louisa Ivanovna
in her mind. The countess knew this, but what it might be she did not
in her reticule. "Besides, the trousseau is ready, so there is nothing
in her room crying like a child, blowing her nose and sobbing. Sonya
in her room, making her eat and drink, and talking to her incessantly
in her sister-in-law's room. Prince Andrew in a traveling coat without
in her vexation, "if you won't obey the doctor and take your medicine at
in him.
in his art, grasping his partner firmly round her waist, with confident
in his breast and a tickling in his nose, and tears dimmed his eyes. The
in his coffin with his chin bound up with a white handkerchief. And the
in his constant comings and goings between the two camps became confused
in his customary bass.
in his hand was approaching the window, from which the light of the sky,
in his hand. This room had probably been a music room; there was still
in his hat and black hair curling down to his shoulders. He wore a red
in his heart his former love for her. Something in him had suddenly
in his horse before the Emperor.
in his horse, said to him:
in his large elongated hand on blue paper as follows:
in his legs and sat up, seeking a firm center of gravity. He sucked and
in his letter to Napoleon, because with his characteristic tact he felt
in his life.
in his mind an unsettled question he always tried to stifle, one about
in his mind as to whether what he had undertaken was right or wrong.
in his movements, in his walk, scarcely a trace was left of his former
in his own room. Around him thronged Moscow's most brilliant young men,
in his own soul, and in God, had been destroyed. He had experienced this
in his pocket, folded up his papers, and called in Alpatych who had long
in his power to regain faith in the meaning of life.
in his presence invited Rostopchin to dinner on St. Nicholas' Day, and
in his soul in connection with that tree. During this journey he, as
in his study with folded hands, morose, sallow, and taciturn.
in his voice a sincerity and weakness Pierre had never observed in it
in history, and that history can only be explained by introducing a
in home and foreign affairs.
in horsecloths. Then came a cart, and behind that walked an old,
in hospital.
in hospital. This was Speranski, Secretary of State, reporter to the
in how far she was to blame for what had happened. She could not eat
in human affairs, and therefore history ought to give other answers.
in human beings in space, in time, and in dependence on cause forms
in it an Order on a red ribbon. Napoleon, without looking, pressed two
in it by spring.
in it, but each time she looked at the procession her eyes sought that
in it. Moscow when occupied by the enemy did not remain intact like
in its entirety, but resulted--moment by moment, step by step, event by
in its progress and tried to explain his own conception of it to her,
in itself false.
in just the same way. "Trakh-ta-ta-takh!" came the frequent crackle of
in lace-frilled drawers, and feet in low slippers--was just at that
in life, one she had not yet experienced, irreparable and
in love with you, my dear."
in loving him, were being vainly wasted, with no advantage to anyone,
in low shoes, Iogel flew first across the hall with Natasha, who, though
in many churches that had not been burned. Donors contributed
in me, but I and Russia have a right to expect from you all the zeal,
in memory, or what is the same thing the farther I go forward in my
in more wecwuits, and the sov'weign" (that was the way he referred to
in my brother's name," said she.
in my hands and is clear and definite in my head. When the time comes to
in my house again," and she glanced at Helene.
in my house--let him marry and live by himself. Perhaps you will go and
in my own, if I preferred my own happiness to my love and duty to the
in name,' he says. 'Shout loud at them,' he says, 'and you'll take
in nothing more than in what they consider right and wrong."
in obedient submission to circumstances, he chose the latter and yielded
in on Vereshchagin. He turned away. "Go fas... faster!" he cried in a
in on his beauty sleep.
in one who is alive. Evidently only with an effort did he understand
in order to hide our shame. We have paid for the right to look at the
in order to puzzle or test his sister.
in order to stifle thoughts that were too oppressive and too intimate.
in our army. His own strategic plan, which obviously could not now be
in our lack of understanding we see only our weakness and His
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
in peace.
in perfect order and readiness for him in his father's house; he himself
in perplexity, and only later grasped that a stroke was an attack of
in perplexity. "But no, he has preferred to surround himself with
in position?"
in practice.
in proportion to the present forces. The soldiers, who are worn out with
in reaching the Emperor--he even thought how surprised everyone would be
in reality it was simply a fortified point on the left flank--and
in regard to which the majority of members were stingy and irregular.
in relation to everything coexisting with him. This is what makes it
in reply to Balashev's bow. "Let him have mine, he has a long way to
in retirement and had now no influence in political affairs, every high
in secret be turned against them; let them fall before Thy servants'
in sections--against Petersburg, or against him, or to outflank him.
in separate piles, began counting them.
in silence and frowning angrily.
in silence. "In the first place, there must have been such a confusion
in smaller groups in retreat, unconsciously confirms the truth that the
in snow) to somewhere else, and how so-and-so "routed" and "cut off" the
in so far as they are harmful or useful. And most of them are harmful,
in society or money, which he borrowed from anyone and everyone and
in society, and those who met her there were not pleased with her
in society, nor as he had for a long time, and at one time rapturously,
in solitude on his island, justifying his actions by intrigues and lies
in some respects a brilliant match for the dowerless, orphan girl. From
in some way) telling him about Denisov's affair, asking him whether,
in space. Every human action is inevitably conditioned by what surrounds
in spite of himself (although he knew how far it was safe to trust
in spite of his cold which had grown worse from the dampness of the
in spite of his youth wished to serve his country; that youth could be
in spite of much that was interesting and had to be discussed, the baby
in spite of the burden of his equipment, rushed out to the front
in spite of this, both the face and words of his new acquaintance were
in such affairs. I think it would be best not to bring it before the
in such cases they omit all that makes for the contrary. And the more
in such relations that the more directly they participate in performing
in that timid tone and considered it her duty to do so.
in the Apocalypse. Moreover, by applying the same system to the words
in the Bazaar and the Povarskoy, as well as the barges on the Moskva
in the Emperor's eyes, Michaud--quoique etranger, russe de coeur et
in the Gachina suburb across the Dnieper, at the inn kept by Ferapontov,
in the Viennese drawing rooms and often had an influence on matters
in the absence of opponents, between two councils would simply solicit
in the action and directs his activity chiefly to commanding.
in the action itself and that their activity is exclusively directed to
in the affirmative.
in the air, nor manures, nor special plows, but that most important
in the air; a third was striking the horse Kutuzov himself rode. Having
in the anteroom. All the affectation of interest she had assumed had
in the army, besides the subordination and discipline prescribed in the
in the assumption that between the person they so address and themselves
in the baggage train he had passed that morning on the Znaim road seven
in the baggage wagons. So it had been at Lodi, Marengo, Arcola, Jena,
in the bantering tone he habitually adopted toward her, always feeling
in the bass, picking out a passage she recalled from an opera she had
in the battle before Moscow, they cried "Vive l'Empereur!" just as they
in the best possible manner, and feeling that he was doing it well he
in the black dress was a good, kind, excellent creature who would not
in the brightest frame of mind, continually urging on the driver so as
in the caleche, dozing and waking up by turns, and listening for any
in the cart.... Why, those are settings taken from some icons, by
in the center and rendering it impossible for them either to kill him or
in the chill dusk of the autumn evening, experienced one and the same
in the common motion the result and aim of which are beyond its ken.
in the crowd could be heard saying. "Quite a young fellow too... must
in the crowd was turned to her; evidently they were all trying to avoid
in the crowd. The interpreter addressed an old porter and asked if
in the deathlike stillness of the study, calm and significant memories
in the direction of the Lubyanka Street.
in the discharge of duty, ran out and touching Pierre lightly on the arm
in the divine significance of Napoleon, but for anyone believing in
in the doorway and behind hers other faces...
in the drawing room, talking to the little princess and Mademoiselle
in the drawing room, waiting for Boris to come out. She was already
in the drawing room.
in the elder's presence about loyalty to the Tsar and the country and
in the empty house of his deceased benefactor, Bazdeev. This is how it
in the evening," reported Rostov, stooping forward with his hand at the
in the events, and that a Napoleon's influence on the course of these
in the expression on their faces--one of them glanced timidly at
in the eyes of society, and even of the court," he added, lowering his
in the fable she was to pine apart from me.... But it was much simpler
in the face without a sense of awkwardness. Boris, with one leg crossed
in the fact that the commonest events--sometimes just such as Pierre
in the false mold of a European hero--the supposed ruler of men--that
in the forest by night, making their way round as best they could, and
in the forests while the dew lasted was there any freshness. But on the
in the front corner. Her husband, the doctor, lay asleep behind her.
in the garden, or superintending the building that was always going on
in the garden.
in the hair, the hair combed up, and the blue scarf arranged lower on
in the hero's honor. Bagration, on seeing the salver, glanced around
in the house almost as members of the family, or persons who were, it
in the house.
in the immense importance of which she firmly believed.
in the least! Please change it."
in the light of the dull autumn evening, mounted men coming toward him.
in the manifesto. In all these words she saw only that the danger
in the meadow behind the village, three of them are dragging something.
in the meaning of his words.
in the middle of the line that had seemed so terrible--and now he
in the midst of his army, it was clear that there was nothing for it but
in the military profession, so to an even greater extent Bilibin gave
in the morning and had started the whole movement that followed was like
in the morning but had not reached it by five in the afternoon."
in the other the letter, and pressing them alternately to her lips.
in the other. Both passed the examination successfully. As there was
in the passage and porch. The tall lad waved his arm.
in the possibility of attaining perfection, and in the possibility of
in the possibility of being useful and in the possibility of happiness
in the possibility of the brotherhood of men united in the aim
in the present case it is similarly necessary to renounce a freedom
in the provinces at a distance from Moscow, ladies, and gentlemen in
in the relative strength, and an advance had become inevitable. And at
in the retreat but of losing in that retreat all I held dear--not to
in the right hand, taken his sword in the left, and gone forward. Of
in the right. Balashev began to feel uncomfortable: as envoy he feared
in the saddle. Where our men were, and where the French, he did not
in the same tone.
in the schoolroom? I shall never forget it: I felt sad and sorry for
in the service, heard with pleasure of the things done in Petersburg
in the shadow at the other side of the fire.
in the shed in which Pierre had been placed and where he remained for
in the shops and houses--but there was no army.
in the sight of your most gracious presence. I raise fervent prayers to
in the silence that followed the heavy breathing of the men was audible.
in the smoke, and the roar of cannon and musketry did not diminish, but
in the solitude of the journey, they seized him with special force. No
in the soul of every soldier and found expression in their joyous and
in the sound of his voice, in the stirring and deafening noise of the
in the street. A shopman who entered told her that her husband had
in the streets of Petersburg in an old uniform. He made friends with
in the thicket. After going through the wood for about a mile and a half
in the tone of a servant who wants to remain good friends with another
in the tone of decided refusal and disagreement in which he had firmly
in the town and where her darling Bory, who had only just entered a
in the vestibule and tried to take the pistol from him. Pierre, coming
in the village of Gorki.
in the way. The senior officer moved with big, rapid strides from one
in the whole universe there is a kingdom of truth, and we who are now
in the wood. I beg of you, I beg of you," he repeated, "to occupy the
in the woods; finally, in its march from Moscow to the Oder the Russian
in the world and above everything in the world. "What were losses, and
in the world, it seemed to him, depended entirely on his will.
in the year 1812 when the French emperor was forty-two. This prophecy
in their accustomed places: Nicholas beside the stove at a small table
in their conflicts with one another is expressed in wars, and that as a
in their conversations were only discussing what would happen after its
in their flight and spread out over a distance of twenty-four hours. In
in their former battles, instead of the news they expected of the
in their own play.
in their primary form. The man who worked most with his hands could not
in their statement as to the force on which the authority of some
in their wish to let everyone see that they knew her.
in theory rejected the view held by the ancients, it still follows them
in there. In the farthest corner, on a bench beside a bed on which
in these difficult circumstances. The Empress Marya, concerned for
in this conclusion by the fact that Dolokhov left immediately after
in this part of the house and did not even know of the existence of
in this regiment."
in this way toward an understanding of the laws of history; but it is
in this way, but posterity and history have acclaimed Napoleon as grand,
in this way, the study door opened and on the threshold appeared
in this world and never known anything so disgraceful!"
in this world there is neither honor nor justice. In this world one has
in time and himself takes part in what occurs.
in time and in relation to one another, to explain the connection of
in time to be fired at. Toll, who in this battle played the part of
in time to lock the door though he painfully strained all his powers. He
in time?" replied Balaga. "Didn't we get you to Tver in seven hours? I
in to the Minister of War. Five minutes later he returned and bowing
in to the utmost, their red necks squeezed into their stiff collars, and
in training near Moscow. Though Petya would remain in the service, this
in uniting them all; and then my idea is so clear and simple. You see,
in various directions on the floor and walls of the hive. Instead of a
in violation of the laws governing human action would destroy the
in war a battalion is sometimes stronger than a division and sometimes
in what lay before him, and was tortured--as those are who obstinately
in which Kutuzov entrusted them to the humanity of the enemy; and
in which a post had been set up. Beyond that post a fresh pit had been
in which direction. His faculties were quite numbed, he was stupefied,
in which he had given a detailed account of his meeting with Princess
in which inquiries were made about yesterday's occurrence. The adjutant
in which it has not been possible to retain many troops; for with the
in which man is situated, that knowledge can never be complete, for the
in which most people see the chief interest of home politics. Denisov,
in which she had her being.
in which the figures of the Emperor and Volkonski could already be
in which the lucky ones, such as the squadron commander, had a board,
in which the more this person expresses opinions, predictions, and
in white and was now in light blue. They did not drag her away at once,
in words. She had become convinced of it at her last interview with
in your own heart. The source of blessedness is not without us but
in yours!"--he had cheerfully taken up his familiar business, and--like
in, and settled up with the innkeeper. The noise of wheels, hoofs, and
in, the wooden roof was collapsing, and the rafters were alight. The
in. "So you're a messenger of victory, eh? Splendid! And I am sitting
in. Then who was executing him, killing him, depriving him of life--him,
in."
in.... It's all nonsense! I'll go in and hand the letter to the Emperor
in...."
inability to enter a room and converse in it was, however, redeemed by
inaccessible to me.
inactive and has left the university to join the army. I will confess to
inactive, would also soon have to meet the enemy.
inactive? If the Russian army at Krasnaya Pakhra had given battle as
inactivity of the French (who even lost sight of the Russian army),
inattentive, but you had talent--oh yes, you had talent!"
inaudibly, now covering herself up head and all, and now peeping at her
incalculable wealth, is in Napoleon's hands. The Russian army, only half
incapacity already in 1807."
incendiaries the rest of Moscow burned down.
incessantly pulling and pressing his arm and always dragging it in one
incessantly tortured by the thought of the dangers to which her brother,
incessantly with other people and suddenly remembered that this could
incessantly, kissing her head, her hands, her face, and feeling her own
incessantly, repeating Petersburg reminiscences and even phrases. Prince
incessantly. A little behind the guns stood infantry. When ascending
incidents of the war," says Thiers, narrating this episode. In
inclination--practical business.
inclinations was apparent. She had to eat, sleep, think, speak, weep,
inclinations, allurement by the grandeur of the preparations, and the
incline before reaching Bogucharovo, and Rostov, outstripping Ilyin, was
incline to make it something like a road. The wounded, bandaged with
inclined to the most reasonable opinions, he made no confusion, did not
inclined to think he had been taken prisoner because Pierre's strong
inclining his head.
included scarcely a hundred and forty thousand who spoke French. The
includes also orators, learned men, reformers, philosophers, and poets).
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
incoherent words without waking up. Natasha felt so lighthearted and
incoherently and blushing.
income which was said to amount to five hundred thousand rubles a year,
incomparably higher than a general, and according to which what was
incompatibility of free will and inevitability does not exist as it does
incomprehensible conceptions of freedom and inevitability.
incomprehensible task.
incomprehensible why he should be King of Naples, he was called so,
incomprehensible--the death of one she loved.
incomprehensible. And yet more incomprehensible is the cessation of that
inconceivable otherwise, because it must be so and that it is a law. The
inconceivable without the physical, the cause of the event is neither in
inconceivable.
incontestably reason and experiment may prove to him that it is
inconveniencing him by being too exacting. She acted in contradiction
inconvenient, unseemly, and impossible to do so.
increased Pierre's doubt of his own capacity to understand military
increased by a half. And so Pierre was delighted with his visit to his
increased by the fact that the Russian commanders--not having fully
increased crowd, dropped behind and returned to his tavern.
increased tenfold, and their life, which seemed to have been passed in
increased the fame of these dances. What distinguished them from others
increased their pace. The near side horse, arching his head and breaking
increased, the handsome mouth was drawn to one side (only now did Pierre
increased, we never reach a conception of complete freedom, that is,
increases my astonishment. I am sending this by Adjutant-General Prince
increasing her speed, bounded on in the same direction along the hollow.
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
increasing. It was getting lighter and lighter, but the mist still hid
increasingly triumphant sounds. "Now voices join in!" ordered Petya. And
incredible boldness and smartness of this little girl who had dared to
incredulously; and even more abashed, I said that though I was living
inculpate him. And so, as they had the power and wish to inculpate
indecision appeared to him majestic and enchanting, like everything else
indecision.
indeed get somewhere, though not to their right places; a few eventually
indeed he only had to lie down, to fall asleep like a stone, and he
indeed, quite French," and he kissed the tips of his fingers. Hippolyte
indeed," he said, looking at her significantly. "You'll come to the
indefinite feeling of shame and awkwardness. The conversations he heard
indefinite. Then all preferred listening to speaking.
indefiniteness), but certain persons whose opinions he wished to know in
independent of reason. Through his reason man observes himself, but only
independent of that position in which he found himself were the joyful
independently of any cause, but my wish to perform an action without a
independently of anything the Russian army might do.
independently of their meaning, in a loud and singsong voice alternating
independently with its own enormous motion, the boat hook no longer
indescribable charm of sorrow and self-forgetfulness that her father
indestructible.
indicate a wish to get rid of him, and therefore Prince Vasili's opinion
indicate how profoundly he valued and comprehended the Emperor's words.
indicate that he was about to say something witty. "Buonaparte?" he
indicated by her attitude her consciousness of the pathetic importance
indicated that if he was not dancing it was because he would not and not
indicated that no one approved of what was being done in the political
indicated, holding away with one finger the coat collar which chafed
indicates that patience is exhausted.
indicating a captive French dragoon who was being brought in on foot by
indicating her to the gentlemen, said: "Voila Marie!" Princess Mary saw
indication was that three out of their huge retinue disappeared
indications accompanying every vital phenomenon, these historians select
indications, he saw clearly that the allies believed him to be far away
indicative of dissipation and the exercise of authority.
indifference whether he remained there for a few hours or for the rest
indifference, and benevolence toward all, which cannot be acquired
indifference.
indifferent air, and glanced into the little drawing room. Pierre and
indifferent hands of the Minister of War and the polite adjutant. The
indifferently at all the prisoners, he ordered the officer in charge
indifferently quiescent till the moment when motion is transmitted
indifferently to his wife's chatter with Prince Hippolyte who had also
indignation against the foreigners and an increase in patriotic zeal.
indiscretion, nodded and said: "I hope to see you again, but I also hope
indiscretion, one might ask about our plans.
indispensable because they satisfied a mental need of the invalid and
indisposition was the strong impression made on his sensitive mind by
indistinct shape in the corner, and mistook his knees raised under the
indistinct words, shrugging his shoulders and gesticulating.
individual commanders and inquiring into details of the action and our
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
individuals who appear to us to have established that mode of government
individuals, and should have been induced to do so by an infinite number
individuals, without orders, dealt blows at the French without needing
indubitable, as indubitable as the deduction Voltaire made in jest
indulgence and silly talk she was spoiling little Prince Nicholas. The
inertiae--pressed forward into boats and into the ice-covered water and
inevitability and a maximum of freedom.
inevitability governing the actions of these people is clearly defined
inevitability in themselves, and then ranging the phenomena of life
inevitability itself, that is, a mere form without content.
inevitability to which it is subject (from the fact that every man dies,
inevitability today use that law as a weapon against religion, though
inevitability without any element of freedom is just as impossible as
inevitability without any freedom, we must assume the knowledge of an
inevitability, to destroy the conception of the soul, of good and evil,
inevitability, we must imagine him all alone, beyond space, beyond time,
inevitability, what is unknown to us we call vital force. Vital force is
inevitability.
inevitability. In every action we examine we see a certain measure of
inevitable abandonment. How could the commanders lead their troops to
inevitable conditions of a commander in chief's actions describe to
inevitable results which prevent our considering anything else possible.
inevitably have to learn what lies the other side of death. But you are
inevitably he lapsed into falsehood. If he had told the truth to his
inexplicable (unless he wished to show that he, too, could have an
inextricably mingled and overlapping. But only what was really good in
infantry and cavalry and took up its appointed position. Not only the
infantry in different uniforms; now was heard the rhythmic beat of
infantry regiment, but learning from Lavrushka that the transport
infantry to shoot or horsemen to ride down the Russian infantry--all
infantry to the right of the battery came the sound of a drum and shouts
infantry, and having reached the village of Gruntersdorf they halted. It
infantry, and now cavalry: they appeared, fired, fell, collided, not
infantrymen ran to the Kutafyev Gate. Beams and wooden screens had been
infants in arms met him to thank him for releasing them from hard
infected her fellow travelers, they approached Yaroslavl by the end of
infected the whole crowd with a feeling of panic.
infected with the merrily excited mood that goes with the commencement
infinite in all His attributes?..."
infinite motion without a moment of rest and is unthinkable otherwise.
infinite number of space relations, an infinitely long period of time,
infinite something. He had only felt that it must exist somewhere and
infinitesimals, mathematics, the most exact of sciences, abandons the
inflammable material on the bridge must be reinspected."
inflammation of his bowels, which were injured, were in the doctor's
inflict punishments justly and unjustly. It is those people I pity, and
inflicted on the Duke of Oldenburg, the nonobservance of the Continental
influence of a variety of exciting sensations. Only Pierre and
influence of advisers and other people introduced by the universal
influence of the dark, graceful girl who loved another.
influence of the depression that possessed him he valued neither his
influence of the external world, we never get a conception of freedom
influence of wine he said to himself: "It doesn't matter. I'll get it
influence on me and on my brother in spite of all our grief. Then, at
influence than anyone else on the staff, had begun to avoid him, Kutuzov
influenced the whole army and directed it along the Mozhaysk (that is,
inform him of the facts, in her son's presence, but unable to restrain
inform you... But, don't be uneasy," he added, noticing that the count
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
information received of the movements of the French was never reliable.
information. It followed that there must have been a victory. And at
informed and more skillful general--of whom Austria has so many--and to
informed him that she had a promissory note from Anna Mikhaylovna for
informed him that the princess had gone to her own apartments, and that
informed, my friend, but I am aware that there are Masons and I hope
informing the prince that as soon as the action began he had withdrawn
infringement of the real power; or (2) that the will of the people
infringers of the true power, while a Republican and a Bonapartist will
ingratiate themselves with him, and it seemed to them all that he was
ingratiating and appealing smile, and took his hand that he might not go
ingratiatingly at Pierre. But as soon as Pierre turned toward him he
inhabitants hiding in the cellars the little they have left, even have
inhabitants left against his wishes. If the government offices were
inhabitants of Moscow wished to be armed, weapons were ready for them
inhabitants of Moscow. It was long since people had been as gay in
inhabitants on whom they were quartered. Braunau was the headquarters of
inhabitants, but he also thought he controlled their mental attitude by
inhabitants, robbing them or stealing to provision the army, and fraud
inhabitants. But Pierre did not know this; he was entirely absorbed
inhaled the frosty air with a full breast and, looking at the ground
inherit everything under the will? And if the will and letter are not
inheritance on the death of a cousin he paid his debt to Pierre as well.
inheritance together with the obligation to pay the debts.
inheritance; but I do know that since this young man, whom we all used
inherited by his son, whose guardian he was.
inhuman, to take advantage of the weakness..." She did not finish.
injure you in the eyes of other young men who visit us, and above all
injuries--and that men attribute the greatest merit to skill in killing
inlaid portfolio. Pierre signed the deed and after that the princess
inmates of the house and strangers crowded into the drawing room round
inmates of the house dispersed to various rooms. It was the dullest time
inn, and a corn dealer's shop in that province. He was a stout, dark,
inn, where two roads parted. Both of them led downhill and troops were
innate love of death or of rebirth to a new life." These words are all
inner harmony which had so impressed him in the soldiers at the battle
inner laboratory of his mind in a portable form as if intentionally, so
inner voice tells us we are in the wrong if we are idle. If man could
inner voice told her that now or never her fate would be decided, and
innkeepers, and ladies--frightening and funny--bringing in with them the
innocence and youth, his voice was pleasant and musical. But the chief
innocent child of seventeen, daughter of the bewitching marquise. The
innocent to have the strength to perform all a mother's duties. As a
innovations in his fatherland--now that he seemed to possess the utmost
innumerable circumstances was needed without any one of which the event
innumerable combinations of the maladies of those organs. This simple
innumerable crowd of people of whom not one was nearer to him or farther
innumerable lights. Police were stationed at the brightly lit entrance
innumerable people who took part in the war acted in accord with their
innumerable voices suddenly shouted after the ball had struck the
inquire after the count's health, came himself that evening to bid a
inquiring doubt. He should be limited, firmly convinced that what he
inquiring eyes with which he has so often looked at me, and then I would
inquiring look. He was about to stoop over her hand and kiss it, but
inquiring to what set they belonged, here looked down on them.
inquiring whisper, then pointed to the quilt. The eyes and face of the
inquiringly at Pierre.
inquiringly at his monitress and saw that she was again going on tiptoe
inquiringly at the French colonel. The colonel respectfully informed His
inquiringly.
inquiry about Caulaincourt. "Looks as if he were a king! All the same,
inquiry in his tone. Pierre bent his head. "Your baptismal name, if you
inquisitive?"
inquisitively and alertly scrutinizing the people driving or walking
insane--unprofitable to himself, to the count, and to the serfs--made
inseparable from power; a character who at every moment of his life
inseparably interconnected infinitesimal elements of free will.
inside it was quiet and dark. For a long time Pierre did not sleep, but
inside. He was not at all surprised by what he saw. Hoping to enter on
insignificance before him. The King of Prussia sends his wife to seek
insignificance beside her in the spiritual world, and rejoiced all the
insignificance, aware of being but a drop in that ocean of men, and
insignificant in comparison with eternity; again the question: for what?
insignificant people appeared before him. He talked to them and
insignificant people. But the army, the Russian army, everyone declared,
insignificant tool of history who never anywhere, even in exile, showed
insignificant, but when used appositely suddenly acquire a significance
insisted on Natasha's going with her to consult the doctors.
insisted on having the pieces returned that were left over and asked
insisted on her coming with me."
insisted that battles, which were useless then, should not be fought,
insisting that Moscow must be defended. His aim was as clear as daylight
insolent intelligence of his eyes, produced an effect which made it
insolent, hard, and mocking face as he had seen it at the banquet, and
insoluble and terrible as ever, and Pierre hastily picked up a book, and
insoluble problems, so he abandoned himself to any distraction in order
insoluble.
inspected the allied army of eighty thousand men.
inspection anywhere in the heart of Russia.
inspection business," remarked the visitor.
inspire in a romantic and loving young girl like yourself.
instant let his shoulder move a hair's breadth. It would not ache--it
instant of delay might cost him his life; but he did not know what
instant, as if to give the visitor time to greet her aunt, and then
instant, glanced at Pierre, Prince Vasili read a congratulation on his
instant, scrambled out on all fours, all black with the wet, and ran on.
instant.
instant. Not only do we know this ourselves, but Christ, the Son of God,
instantly forsook him, and without noticing it he passed into his
instantly noticed her brother's condition. But, though she noticed it,
instantly unfolded itself in his soul as if freed from the bondage of
instead of Barclay, been in command) and on the other an ever-increasing
instead of a land worker he did so without the least hesitation. He
instead of black. The regimental commander walked with his jerky steps
instead of going away sank into an armchair, and looked sternly and
instead of our dear Wintzingerode you would have captured the King of
instead of seeking causes, history will take the discovery of laws as
instead of that he only excited himself more and more.
instead to Mozhaysk along the devastated Smolensk road. Nothing more
instead.
instinct urged him on. Before the officer finished his sentence Prince
instinctively changed to a gallop, which grew faster and faster as they
instinctively that if the hussars struck at the French dragoons now, the
institutions in Moscow he mentally decided that he would shower favors
instructing in reading, writing, and religion. On all his estates Pierre
instruction Kutuzov gave of his own accord during that report referred
instructions his father had sent and taking the correspondence and his
instructions that he was retiring that night. We cannot fight in this
instructions to hand it to the Governor and to come back as quickly as
instructions to the steward who had been waiting for him, went to the
instructions, orders, and commissions to the baggage men who remained
instructions.
instructions. So it was decided to send a dispatch to the staff.
instructions. The German doctor went up to Lorrain.
instructions. Toll was beginning to say something but Kutuzov checked
instrument he could not begin to speak.
insufficient, and he kept expecting something more, more and yet more.
insult Alexander--just what he had least desired at the commencement of
insulted envoy--especially as he had witnessed his unseemly anger. But,
insulted, and as a man older than you, my advice is to let the matter
insulted. Barclay de Tolly tried to command the army in the best
insurmountably difficult. At the same time that he refused the colonel's
insurrection ever occur when the enemy entered a town. More than
intact between the Russian and French forces. In the refreshment room
intellectual a guest as she considered Prince Andrew to be, she felt
intellectual essence of Petersburg," as she herself put it. Besides
intellectual knowledge is divided. The highest wisdom is one. The
intellectual lights of Petersburg were gathered there and, like a child
intelligence in question, we see so large an element of necessity and so
intelligent men for his car and send a courier to General Kutuzov to let
intelligent woman, they talked with the same ecstasy in 1812 as in 1808
intelligent, and resolute young man.
intelligent, conscientious, and pedantic preceptor. The old prince
intelligible to us, and admitting the ultimate purpose to be beyond our
intended to change the existing order of government in Russia: legal,
intended to hunt seriously, he did not want to take Natasha and Petya.
intended to remain at Podolsk and had no thought of the Tarutino
intended to say something, but immediately, with affected indifference,
intended to show that, as a highly trained military man, he left it to
intended to take up our position and begin the action, but were on this
intended to visit all his estates and see for himself how far his orders
intended? The Fatherland, the destruction of Moscow! And tomorrow I
intending to rest if but for a moment, eat something, and try to sort
intends to expose his precious person to the chances of war. God grant
intense over the whole field, especially to the left where Bagration's
intensified his sense of the importance of the occasion.
intensified in the mass, urged them on. It was not that they knew that
intent on the colonel.
intent. In a third place a crowd of bees, crushing one another, attack
intention of contradicting it. Since the campaigns of Austerlitz and
intention of demonstrating the advantages of his position and showing
intention of killing your man as quickly and surely as possible, and
intention of making love to her. Anatole had no notion and was incapable
intention should he try to direct his whole force against our faithful
intention to part from her forever.
intention. She did not know what to say and turned away as if she had
intentions of the French!"
intently at him with her deep, radiant eyes. The weariness she
intently watching what was going on a few steps away. He was looking at
intercepting any retreat.
intercourse contrary to all laws of reason, the words themselves were
intercourse with young women.
interest him, that he knew all that would be said beforehand, and heard
interest in the whole affair. You know she is very gracious to Helene."
interest of that time and do not see all the personal human interests
interest to them. And all for me!"
interested him passionately and exclusively. This was a plan of campaign
interested him, and often when sitting alone in his study he got up,
interested in them and not wanted by anyone. Prince Andrew with a lady
interested to know how Prince Andrew had taken the news. Ten minutes
interested traveler asks about a new city he intends to visit, but as
interesting Helene was in doubt which of the two men she should marry.
interesting and entertaining. After the field marshal's departure it
interesting but hardly feasible."
interesting or cheerful subject."
interesting person to the visitors and that nowhere else was the state
interesting."
interests and his sincere contempt for all else, had acquired in his
interests and intrigues as usual. Only in the very highest circles were
interests entirely aloof from his own and just as legitimate as those
interests have vanished leaving no trace, and nothing remains of that
interests," said Bilibin.
intermittent whistle of a shell, flew over people's heads incessantly,
intermittently but so consistently that he never once deviated from it.
interplay of intrigues, aims, and wishes among those who took part in
interpretation of the seven pillars and steps of the Temple, the seven
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
interpreted. The life of old Prince Bolkonski, Prince Andrew, and
interrupted Adraksin.
interrupted by the enthusiastic shouts of the audience.
interrupted her.
interrupted him.
interrupted him.
interrupted him. He himself did not yet know what he would say, but he
interrupted his wife's remarks and touched on the question of the war
interrupted several times by applause. When the verses were finished
interrupting Bagration.
interval Pierre noticed that Prince Vasili left the chair on which he
interval--"boom--boom, boom!" came the fine, firm, precise sounds in
intervals of precisely two hours, neither more nor less.
intervals the bugle calls and the shouts of the enemy could be heard
intervene. Prince Andrew looked at Tushin from under his brows and his
intervention in human affairs, want to see the cause of events in
interview he had had with the old prince at the time of the enrollment,
interview with Anatole.
interview with Count Rostopchin, he could not for some time make out
interview with Kutuzov he went back to his regiment reassured as to
interview with his dying father which awaited him. He noticed that they
interview with the gentleman-ranker--"that Private Dolokhov, who was
intimate friends (and these were all Petersburg) that both the prince
intimate places of her heart, and, mistrustfully at first but afterwards
intimate with the princess as if they were relations.
intimate, came to him with the professions of friendship and intimacy
intimately. Prince Andrew spoke with some animation and interest only of
into Boris' eyes. After he had gone Pierre continued pacing up and down
into French which suited it better.
into Moscow before noon."
into Princess Mary's heart as the tone of his voice.
into a chair, gazing at those in the room as if asking, "Why do they
into a corner of the stage. The cymbals and horns in the orchestra
into a doze.
into a heap of meaningless rubbish. Though he did not acknowledge it to
into a reverie without finishing the story. He thought not of this
into a shed boarded up with planks!" He smiled, and went and lay down to
into a short canter, tugged at his traces. The shaft horse swayed from
into a tragic spectacle that remained in every memory, and on the
into an old man's simplehearted talk; but the hearty sincerity of that
into bad company, a drunkard's relapse into drunkenness, and so on are
into details concerning the estate management, asking for instructions.
into effect with the aid of his associates, Czartoryski, Novosiltsev,
into fashion, were danced. Iogel had taken a ballroom in Bezukhov's
into greater and greater disorder, and that it was time for him to come
into her arms, and through the gathering mists, foreseeing the brilliant
into her eyes. "Your offer..." (she grew confused) "is agreeable to us,
into her face and finding in his sister too something new, unusual, and
into her mother's room.
into her radiant smile.
into his caleche and drove back in silence.
into his slippers and his arms into the sleeves of his dressing gown, he
into line. The masters rode together. "Uncle," Rostov, and Ilagin kept
into one of the carts and knocked a hole in it with its pole. Several
into one of them helped by an orderly.
into several groups who all discussed the advantages and disadvantages
into small units, because their spirit had so risen that separate
into sobs.
into society and dancing the mazurka with her as his old father had
into that foggy distance: now something gleamed gray, now there was
into that state of fury in which he sometimes used to roll on the
into the Emperor's study that the latter at once asked:
into the anteroom, then hiding behind one another they pushed into
into the avenue. A large crowd of militiamen and domestics were moving
into the ballroom to await her father, and looking in the large mirror
into the birch forest where the gnarled old oak had made so strange and
into the bushes, removed his sodden hat by its floppy brim, and
into the carts, got their muskets ready, and formed rank. The officers
into the child--who was already afraid that Auntie might at any moment
into the commander's face, and his lips were smiling. Though the
into the conservatory, with its large bust and full length portrait of
into the corridor and met--coming out of the door of the Emperor's room
into the court of Count Bezukhov's house. As the wheels rolled softly
into the deliberations of the nobility. Pierre stepped forward and
into the distance, at the waters of the Danube, at the sky, and at the
into the drawing room. They can have all our half of the house."
into the drawing room. Two letters brought by a courier were handed to
into the forest. Then I see he's no good and think I'll go and fetch a
into the hall. The house stood cold and silent, as if quite regardless
into the hands of that idiot Anatole, pained Boris. He drove to the
into the heart of Russia late in the season without any preparation for
into the heart of the country, but from their first entry into Russia
into the house. Alpatych, having sent his family away, was alone at
into the redoubt before a thin, sallow-faced, perspiring man in a blue
into the river. He gave an angry thrust to his horse, which had grown
into the room. He opened the casement. The night was fresh, bright, and
into the shed.
into the side street to look at the fire. Soldiers were continually
into the sitting room, where there was a smell of vinegar and Hoffman's
into the sitting room, where they began talking. They hardly gave one
into the town, the cocks were already crowing. Pierre went on with the
into the valley. The fourth column, with which Kutuzov was, stood on the
into the vehicles.
into the village already... they will have their buckwheat cooked before
into the water. He tried to right himself but fell in up to his waist.
into the wing and put him in the room that had been Madame Schoss'.
into their conversation either a shade of pretense and falsehood or
into their faces with a suppressed smile and failing to recognize any of
into those southern provinces (for the Russian army did not bar his
into three armies. First, the army under Barclay de Tolly, secondly, the
into which Alexander the Great had marched--Napoleon unexpectedly, and
into which we have been drawn, God knows how or why. Not only where you
intonation, look, and expression, pricked up her ears from the beginning
intoxication. He felt as though he were the center of some important and
intrigue did not now occupy the old man's mind. One terrible question
intrigue going on in Petersburg. The old prince's voice and another now
intrigue, egotism, conflict of views and feelings, and the diversity
intrigue, the Astraea Lodge against the Manna Seekers, and fuss about an
intrigues (as in fact he said on the island of St. Helena). It naturally
intriguing; in the body of the army they did not ask themselves where
introduced him to the others.
introduced to them the pretty Polish girl he had saved. Rostov took the
intruder to go.
invalid chair, a wax taper in his left hand, was leaning his left arm on
invalid," said Anna Pavlovna, exchanging an alarmed glance with her aunt
invasion of the Russian provinces, and no one thought the war would
invented for them long ago because they have power! The success of a
invested with pomp and power and crowds of sychophants flatter power,
invisible cap--to see what went on in the world. She was experiencing
invisible power at any moment to take her and deliver her from herself,
invitation to Anna Pavlovna's reception and had sat listening to the
invitation. He asked her to waltz. That tremulous expression on
invitations he had received from N.N. and S.S.
invite me out and tell me all about myself."
invited here, but our allies don't like it at all."
invited me to her house and kept telling me what had happened, or ought
invited them. They came to disturb my life--and there is not much of it
inviting Prince Andrew to come too. He did so.
inviting further blows which would finish him. He seemed now frightened
involuntarily agreed with him about everything. If he replied and
involuntarily assumed an offhand air which alienated Princess Mary still
involuntarily began to compare these two men, so different, and yet so
involuntarily came closer to him.
involuntarily compared the two: the lack of spirituality in the one and
involuntarily describe it as resulting from an exercise of power--and
involuntarily do on entering a large company and was in no hurry to
involuntarily listening, with downcast eyes, to the sounds of firing.
involuntarily noticed that one of them was bleeding, and galloped on.
involuntarily noticed the carefully washed seams of the scar near his
involuntarily on this French column advancing against them and winding
involuntarily passed round in a curve and came upon the large house
involuntarily stopped.
involuntarily waded knee-deep in the bog.
involuntarily yielded to Nicholas' good humor. Toward the end of the
involuntarily yielded to them. She went through the accounts with
involuntarily, came up and sat down beside him.
involuntarily, so much so that the only thing left to do seemed to be
involuntarily: "he could not understand that there, for the first time,
involuntary shudder ran down his spine. In the corporal's changed face,
inward wrath. He could not comprehend how anyone could wish to alter his
ironic smile:
ironical voice.
ironical, he said:
ironically.
irony because he thought she was trying what she believed to be the last
irrepressible and streaming tears tickling her nose and cheeks.
irrepressible delight.) "It's in the Emperor's service... it can't be
irrepressible hatred.
irrepressible, kindly, elderly laughter.
irreproachable idleness.
irresistible human need for sleep. He really was asleep. Weyrother, with
irresistible inclination which tempts us to judge those nearest and
irresistible passion for sport which makes a man forget all his previous
irresistible persuasiveness.
irresistibly attractive to Pierre.
irresistibly. But latterly, when more and more disquieting reports came
irresolution communicated itself to the men.
irresolution, and alarm, yet at the same time joyfully expecting
irresponsibility for crimes and the extenuating circumstances admitted
irritability, which was always directed against her and had of late
irritability.
irritably and she went to the window and opened it. Through the open
irritably of feminine inconstancy, of how easily women can turn from
irritated at being continually disturbed.
irritated the wound, interrupting that necessary quiet in which
irritated.
irritation, though controlledly calm as a man is at the approach of a
is Sonya?"
is Spain, where there are also many churches and monasteries."
is a bit of Mack. We are Macked)," he concluded, feeling that he
is a dream," said Pierre. "Understand, my dear fellow, that outside this
is a mob of scoundrels and not an army," he was thinking as he went up
is a passage in them that just fits Sonya."
is a pearl among women, Princess," he added, turning to Princess Mary.
is a savage. You can tell a Parisian two leagues off. Paris is Talma, la
is a society of true conservatives--a society of gentlemen in the full
is a very shrewd and garrulous fellow."
is again, do you hear?" said he, pointing in the direction whence came
is alive.
is all I can say."
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
is an admirable book which calms and elevates the soul. Adieu! Give
is an alliance of virtue: it is love, mutual help... it is what Christ
is as right as other historians who look for the explanation of historic
is budding. But though I do not know what causes the cold winds to blow
is called weak character, do not seek a confidant in their troubles. He
is capable, evidently suffering himself, he shook his fists at her and
is conceivable.
is dangerous here... the enemy is near... because... I am giving you
is dishonorable? Don't you know that I love him?" screamed Natasha. "Go
is distinguished by reason from the other forces of nature only by the
is doing is very important (otherwise he will not have sufficient
is exquisite when he discusses politics--you should see his gravity!"
is fulfilled, that opinion gets connected with the event as a command
is grand. But Kutuzov--the man who from the beginning to the end of his
is happening to us--but it is very strange and pleasant whatever it is."
is harmed, and your teeth are set on edge. Like an experienced sportsman
is how I explain it to myself. It can't be helped!"
is imperceptibly shaping itself, and at every moment of this continuous,
is in her heart? All that is good. But how? What is her mind like? What
is incorrect and that the real course of the battle is better known to
is increased or diminished and the conception of compulsion is
is interrupted. He listened to what Langeron said, as if remarking, "So
is irrevocable, and its result coinciding in time with the actions of
is it for me, for me who desired his death, to condemn anyone?" she
is it meant to prove? What? I ask you."
is it that millions of men commit collective crimes--make war, commit
is it that no one realizes this?" thought Princess Mary. "No one except
is it that we in our irrecoverable youth did not know it? Yet it is so
is known to the historians: to one of them this goal is the greatness of
is like money in circulation--paper money and coin. The biographies and
is more dangerous to run away than to advance, but that Russian soldiers
is most strongly felt on a bright, hot day in town. All the Moscow
is much better than ours."
is my enemy. Brothers G. V. and O. visited me and we had a preliminary
is natural that these and a countless and infinite quantity of other
is no life or truth!"
is no more! He is not, but here where he was is something unfamiliar and
is not much delighted by your victory. Even I, a poor secretary of the
is not stupid, she is an excellent girl," he sometimes said to himself
is not the kind of girl who could please Prince Andrew. I do not think
is not yet restored and not a single merchant is carrying on trade in a
is nothing to mend! The principles laid down by me must be strictly
is one and Princess Bolkonskaya another."
is one of the most ancient in France."
is only by his efforts that the whole population under his rule is
is our duty to help our neighbor. Of course he is right there," said
is past midnight--cannot now be altered," said he. "You have heard them,
is possible constitutes the other side of the question.
is present in the heart of every Russian. And a consciousness of this,
is presented to him as his dominion, and guards are given to him and
is quite broken by his misfortune."
is quite equal to Marya Antonovna. See how the men, young and old, pay
is quite original, strange, new, and unknown. And she loves me. What
is quite possible. You know I have told him all about it. And he is so
is required and a quiet onlooker when not called on to assist. My tongue
is self-assured just because he knows nothing and does not want to know
is sensible, well educated, and good-natured, and the next he's a wild
is sent to an island two days' sail from France, which for some reason
is so I don't know..."
is so kindhearted that she can't look at blood, but enjoys eating the
is so much happiness; but here... groans, suffering, fear, and this
is so unreasonable, the count himself I mean. The Razumovskis wanted
is so young, and I thought that, as my son's friend, you would have
is some scent. Peronskaya must be tired of waiting."
is something nasty, something wrong, in the feeling she excites in me.
is standing before Brunn..."
is taught to be ashamed of--even that act finds justification in the
is terrible. He had learned that as there is no condition in which man
is that if your brother, Prince Andrew Nikolievich, were not living, it
is that we know nothing. And that's the height of human wisdom."
is that?" he asked, indicating a short old man in a clean blue peasant
is the Kremlin, yes--I will give them just laws; I will teach them the
is the battle of Pultusk, which is considered a great victory but in my
is the cause, or at least an essential indication, of an increase or
is the content. Inevitability is the form.
is the difficulty? Nonsense, childishness!"
is the effect of your visit--he is not often like that. If you could
is the lot of a whole class--the military. The chief attraction of
is the more free the more abstract its interests, and his elemental hive
is the name of the ruler of all. The third name is the name unutterable
is the one held by the majority of people, and is the invariable fruit
is the only difference between them." He said this smiling in a way more
is the only reality in the world, all else is folly. It is the one thing
is the only thing we need fear, or he is changing his position." (He
is the passion for destruction.
is the principal aim of these three? Certainly self-reformation and
is the problem of history.
is the use of that, when a third of their army has melted away on the
is this: my father's health is growing noticeably worse, he cannot stand
is this? They're like sheep! Just like sheep! Out of the way!... Let
is to be happy with another kind of happiness, the happiness of love
is to say, their commands are often not executed, and sometimes the very
is to take care of yourself. Leave it to those who are no longer fit for
is transferred to historic personages conditionally, but that the
is transferred to the rulers conditionally, under definite and known
is true, but by those who had abandoned it and not by those who remained
is true, it is dreadful. How little we dreamed of such a thing when we
is very delicate. Don't tell Natasha. And don't attach importance to her
is very fond of Pierre, looked after his education, and wrote to the
is very good to me. We shall have supper, Count. So you will do me the
is very unfortunate!" added Anna Pavlovna.
is what made me sorry to part with life, that is what remained for me
is why this movement took place and those are its laws.
is wondering to whom the count will leave his fortune, though he may
is worth thirty thousand, as at Schon Grabern, while at times fifty
is, and can be, no cause of an historical event except the one cause of
is, as he chose, it is evident that one single free act of that man's
is, by regarding it as an infinitely small quantity, can we convince
is, do you see him? I've seen him twice, as I see you now. The little
is, outside time, which is impossible.
is, power is power: in other words, power is a word the meaning of which
is, stormed and stormed and stormed! It was not a matter of life but
is, the position on which the battle took place), but never till the
is, what he was feeling) and those unfortunates who evidently did not
is."
is."
isn't he? I hear they will marry him to that rich girl. But your cousin,
isn't it logical?
isn't it, General?" he said, evidently not doubting that this remark
issue of any event that however it may end there will always be people
issued an indistinct, hoarse sound. Anna Mikhaylovna looked attentively
issued by the French authorities concerning the party of prisoners
it I let him know how much I disapproved of it and ordered him to remain
it Likhachev was sitting sharpening a saber for him, that the big dark
it a weaker phenomenon is taken as the cause of a stronger. The sum of
it all less than you do."
it all only because he had to, as one has to listen to the chanting of
it all very well for Prince Vasili told me himself. Besides, Cyril
it all was? There's Uncle Shinshin's brother has married his first
it all within him. Today he is cheerful and in good spirits, but that
it all, and felt that Dolokhov knew that he could save him from all this
it all, and should not marry if I had not thought it all out or if it
it all?" and again listened to Denisov.
it always seemed to him that the really heroic exploits were being
it and he needs it. But someone else needs it still more. Who needs it
it and it was not at all what he wanted. He turned away and went to the
it and saw Telyanin's horse at the porch.
it and the collective will of all the other animals is vested in that
it and wished to hear it again. In her voice there was a virginal
it as a force not subject to law, the existence of law becomes
it away with you.... What does it matter to you whether our homes are
it back in its place.
it before?"
it began equally to appear doubtful whether they should continue to
it begin? I traveled from Moscow with Prince Vasili. Then there was
it breaks off at me and does not go farther and farther? I feel that I
it communicated itself also to Pierre. The story was of an old merchant
it completely, so that Alpatych could not pass out and had to wait.
it could not be otherwise.
it dashed, some forward and some back, drowning one another.
it depended on him, verser (ou ne pas verser) le sang de ses peuples
it ended? I was against this marriage even then and foretold all that
it especially from the list of prisoners the French officer had read out
it for manners' sake, he drank it and wiped his mouth with a red silk
it had come of itself. Now he rode beside Ilyin under the birch trees,
it had not entered his head to regret that he was thus depriving himself
it had the commander in chief continued to look at him, and so Kutuzov,
it had to be acknowledged that the theorists are often one sided, and
it had to be done. Why did they go? It is impossible to suppose that
it had to happen, as there is between those who declared that the
it had to reform under grapeshot, of which Napoleon was unaware.
it has beaten them all, the thousand-ruble as well as the one-ruble
it has gone over. But this one has hit!" And again he started trying
it he begged Pierre to continue.
it immoral and humiliating could not resist the temptations of the
it in the present, on the boundary between the past and the future--that
it incredible that men should kill him, at any rate he took his stand at
it is a trial sent from above. What is the trial for, when he is not
it is all over, and forever."
it is and how dangerous. Too soon or too late... it is terrible!"
it is being punished.
it is due to the fact that when the event has taken place and out of
it is easy to see that there are other ways of diffusing civilization
it is merely a question of settling where the preliminaries of the new
it is only a momentary undefinable sensation of life.
it is still uncertain whether he is alive or not. I comfort myself and
it is the independence of personality--free will.
it is those who submit to the power. But as the moral activity is
it is useless to ask whether it is good or bad. It is good because it's
it is!" thought the officer, and he rode round the whole camp. One man
it is," she said to herself, and she began walking up and down the room,
it left. Yes, I told you--the whole quarter beyond the river, and so it
it may be reflected in them all, and they and I may live in harmony!"
it means... what does it mean?"
it meant. The same question was expressed in all the looks that met his.
it might happen," he added with an involuntary smile.
it might not occur to her to speak of his share in the affair of the
it might really have been so? Could one possibly make out amid all that
it myself. So he was brought, quite blind, straight to her, and he goes
it necessary to hold his head higher, to brace himself, and to question
it necessary to tell Natasha of Prince Andrew's wound and of his being
it never entered my head and I wouldn't do that for their good! That's
it noticeably neglected. In the entry there was a smell of fresh apples,
it occurred to her that her aunt and the governor's wife had intentions
it off, but let it drop again. The five minutes spent with his eyes
it off. Perhaps God will help me to find a way to prepare him!... Adieu,
it on his shoulder without looking at him. The aide-de-camp, an adept
it or not, and how they would cross it, agitated them all.
it over. Go! Yes or no, yes or no, yes or no!" he still shouted when the
it proper in his quality of doctor de forcer la consigne, * as he told
it proved that the force which decides the fate of peoples lies not in
it reached Vilna it numbered only fifty thousand, and at Kalisch less
it really happened, it would have been necessary to make an effort of
it really was. Rostov was a truthful young man and would on no
it remained an army only until its soldiers had dispersed into their
it rests and which no human power can destroy, is the preservation and
it right to refuse a duty to which he had been appointed by the Emperor
it right, I have drunk a good deal--but that is how I feel, and so do
it right; no, you don't understand," though he encouraged her by saying
it seemed as if nothing in that voice could be altered without spoiling
it seemed that if they admitted that truth it would destroy faith in
it seemed to Pierre, sunk in profound and calm meditation. His servant
it seemed to Princess Mary in an unpleasantly affected way. (This was
it seemed to her she was penetrating the mystery.... But at the instant
it seemed to him that either he had told the coachman this or that the
it seemed to him, caught at his feet. But before he reached the foot
it seems to me that animal happiness is the only happiness possible, and
it several times to his nose, and stopped in front of Balashev. He
it should be, to avoid or attack the enemy, but solely to avoid
it should be.
it slip it would not return. The bullets were whining and whistling so
it so.
it specially pathetic.
it succeeded, to claim the success as his own; or if battle were not
it suitable that Count Kutuzov, the oldest general in Russia, should
it that we are staying on?"
it that we women don't want anything of the kind, don't need it? Now
it the object of her life to poison his existence, and he drove her from
it there would have been nothing unintelligible in the history of that
it to its destination and make use of it.
it to the old prince), and he heard from him the story of Natasha's
it to the saddle. Their horses, bridled and with high saddles, stood
it to you. Do you remember?"
it torments him for nothing. He may already have found a suitable and
it under your head like a treasure," said Rostov. "I put it just here.
it up and went to her room to pack her own things. At first she found it
it was Natasha and he loved her.
it was Princess Mary who generally bore the brunt of his frequent fits
it was a letter from him--from the man she loved. Yes, she loved him, or
it was a shell) "either proving fatal at once or being very slight,"
it was a sweet, tender sadness.
it was a war of good sense, for real interests, for the tranquillity and
it was approved by the staff and accepted as a basis for action.
it was coming, he did not till the last moment wholeheartedly believe
it was evident that he performed his duty as a subordinate with even
it was evident that he was old and stupid and that they, though not in
it was far to the Kremlin. The porter, listening in perplexity to the
it was impossible to say when they began, he endured his position
it was impossible to stop them, spurred his horse and rode to the right.
it was impossible, and to her delight showed her a text in the Gospel
it was long before their conversation could settle on anything. They
it was not Prince Andrew who was moaning. She knew Prince Andrew was in
it was on this that the Cossacks all busied themselves.
it was only a personal struggle between "Granddad" and "Long-coat" as
it was possible to drive out.
it was right and proper to address her here in church, and told her he
it was rumored that freedom had been granted them but the landowners had
it was sealed up so it has remained, but Sophia Danilovna gave orders
it was so dark in the forest... and he had such kind... No, I can't
it was so pretentiously false and unnatural that she first felt ashamed
it was that the pain distracted him and prevented his seeing what he had
it was the attack in which he was said to have thrown some St. George's
it was useless to talk to the old man; that he would never grasp the
it was, the disorder was readily and naturally attributed to the stupid
it were a flail.
it were breathing heavily and jolting. This happened to him almost every
it were falling and he dozed off. Dinner was brought him.
it were lightheartedly.
it were seven hundred miles of hunger-stricken, hostile country; ahead
it were, considered his life afresh and arrived at his old conclusion,
it were, saw a new meaning in all he had gone through. Now that he was
it with a cloth.
it without undressing and immediately fell asleep.
it worth while noticing trifles?" He reined in his horse with the case
it would be injudicious to use them at a moment when a last attempt at
it would be very easy to do so if you haven't sufficient self-respect,
it would soon no longer be seen or noticed. The wound had begun to heal
it you are on foot? And where are you going, please?"
it you?' And the point is that we knew whom he had it from. He could
it! I cannot endure any more," he said, and left the room. Then, as if
it! Well, what have you proved? What does this duel prove? That you're
it!"
it!" shouted Berg, who was now assistant to the chief of staff of the
it'!... And I ask you!"
it's all true. When mischief-makers don't meddle even a German beats
it's nasty work! An attack's pleasant work! Hacking away at the dogs!
it's not false. Bennigsen seems to have obtained a complete victory
it, and again the women and men of weaker mold, Petya among them, wept
it, and laughed at Dessalles when he mentioned it at dinner.
it, and they all felt awkward.
it, as the first movement had done, the nations of middle Europe. The
it, astonished him each time as if it were something new. "I understand
it, at the other was something resembling an altar on which lay a
it, but if he stays out till morning it means he's lost and will come
it, but when spoken and not sung, no meaning could be got out of it. He
it, come on! Nothing will remain. Then why harm anyone?"
it, covering his face with his hands.
it, easily find a way to prepare for the enemy the fate he deserves.
it, on the crest of the opposite hill, the village of Schon Grabern
it, or why it had to be told in Russian, still Anna Pavlovna and the
it, that Kutuzov and others were there for that purpose, but that he had
it, young man, I'm going."
it," said she, dropping her eyes shamefacedly.
it," says history.
it.
it.
it.
it.
it.
it.
it.
it.
it.
it. "Dear Princess," she wrote in French quickly and mechanically, and
it. And now it will never, never be possible to put it right." And
it. As if aware of her danger, the wolf turned her eyes on Karay, tucked
it. But on the eighth of August a committee, consisting of Field Marshal
it. Fighting again... A woman with a baby, and not bad-looking either!
it. Fr... fr... fr! And don't I see that that idiot had eyes only for
it. He gave orders to investigate the matter. Gabriel Ivanovich
it. I beg you to leave the town and break off all communication
it. If you refuse him on my account, I must tell you the whole truth. I
it. Loud, coarse laughter and joyous shouts ensued.
it. Princess Mary had sought the meaning of his words in the mood in
it. So it appears that it must be so! But I--what is to become of
it. Telyanin took the purse and began carelessly slipping it into the
it. The Cossacks were untying their horses and tightening their saddle
it. The chief reason for devoting no time either to singing, to dress,
it. The hatred and contempt of the crowd punish such men for discerning
it. Were it not free it could not be limited. A man's will seems to him
it. Your fellow countrymen are emerging boldly from their hiding places
it."
it."
it."
it.' 'I have seen no papers, I made it up myself.' And that was the end
it; they spoke of their last meeting--Nicholas trying to change
it? But above all, she is a handsome, estimable girl, and she loves
it? So much the better!"
it?" said the man--a singer and a wag--whom Morel was embracing.
it?"--"Because you married her," answered an inner voice.
its beard growing in uneven tufts. His black, agate pupils with
its breast against the hindquarters of the officer's horse, almost
its broad temples and close-cropped hair, and looked at Bezukhov. The
its celebrated bridgehead and Prince Auersperg? We heard reports that
its chief promoter, began to interest him so keenly that the question
its definite place as a result of what has gone before and as a cause of
its ears as the bayonets touched it, and snorted, spurting white foam
its embarrassments and affairs to be straightened out, its accounts with
its examination is great, and where the causes of the action are most
its gigantic mirrors, pre-Revolution furniture, powdered footmen, and
its habitual calm and firm appearance.
its handsome, sensual mouth, and its cold, majestic expression, was
its inhabitants have left it and it is occupied by soldiers who smoke
its native fields."
its pages I saw a beautiful representation of a maiden in transparent
its problem.
its rights, and the rights and the strength of France increase. The
its singers. Coming up toward him was a train of carts carrying men who
its small circlet saw smoke and men, sometimes his own and sometimes
its substance is forcible?"
its swollen lips, was more than plain--it was dreadful. But Prince
its teeth, with equal ease picking fleas out of its fur or crunching
its thunder joining the roar of the whole line along which he had
its upper lip covered with tiny black hair.
its use, he does not believe in the master who made it. To know Him is
its usual semblance of a smile.
itself and the moon, and.... all this rushed suddenly to his mind.
itself exposed. It was impossible to take bread and clothes from our
itself in the expression of Denisov's face and the intonations of his
itself in two places, how the ropes slackened under the weight of the
itself not by phrases or by giving one's children to save the fatherland
itself out, and 'piti-piti-piti' and 'ti-ti' and 'piti-piti-piti'...?
itself to him. He was already enjoying that happiness when that
itself, a petty German town, Rostov saw the Emperor again. In the
itself, and that apart from the words there is no tune, which exists
itself, rejoicing at the Emperors' approach, had naturally burst into
itself.
itself. But the idea that he, L'russe Besuhof, was destined to set a
itself. That terrible question "Why?" "Wherefore?" which had come to him
jabbering! Fine, isn't it? It's all the Frenchy can do to keep up with
jacket and her nurse had told her that she, too, would be sewn up with
jacket thrown over her slender shoulders. Sonya stood ready dressed in
jacket, she attended to her household affairs, and then she drove out:
jaw quivering. "He's been dead since morning. After all we're men, not
jaw trembling and was hardly able to mutter: "I don't know... your
je n'ai pas voulu l'offenser. * I did not mean anything, I was only
je professe pour the Orthodox Russian army, j'avoue que votre victoire
jealous about game and dogs. For myself, I can tell you, Count, I enjoy
jealous of Sonya, of the governess, and of every woman, pretty or
jerking the rings of the leashes and pricking their ears. Karay finished
jest.
jesting remarks he rose, taking Pierre by the arm, and drew him aside.
jests and gossip.
jests and to come to business. He involuntarily looked round at the
jingling and his handsome perfumed head held high. Having looked at
jingling sound it presented arms. Then amidst a dead silence the feeble
jocular face of the general, he took him aside and in an excited voice
join his army, and at every station gave fresh orders to accelerate the
join up, and the fight was at an end. The regimental commander and Major
joined in. Everyone laughed, not at Marya Dmitrievna's answer but at the
joining in it.
joke as an insult, flared up, and said such unpleasant things to the
jokes with Petya, talks with Sonya, duets with Natasha, piquet with his
joking," he said, smiling shyly and trying to efface his offense. "It
jolted over the stony road. Some of them were talking (he heard Russian
jolting the stretcher.
jostle, overtake one another, and fight, and it would be equally
jostled one another. Someone snored.
journey he found himself in the open world and saw hundreds of new
journey itself, forgetting its object. But as she approached Yaroslavl
journey too hard and too dangerous for her and his son.
journey, this feeling that Providence was intervening in her personal
journey, which she took so actively in hand, saved her for a while from
jovial old gentleman, who standing beside his tall and stout partner,
joy and happiness. On receiving the order he gave his horse the rein and
joy at the approach of the Emperors. One voice was heard shouting: "Eyes
joyful and agitating thoughts began to occupy his mind. Recalling the
joyful and mysterious taking place within her.
joyful and solemn was aroused among the soldiers of the convoy and the
joyful face show a yellow instead of a green stain on baby's napkin, and
joyful feeling he had not experienced before. It was a feeling akin to
joyful it seemed, that her son, the scarcely perceptible motion of whose
joyful sensations, and chiefly of the complete peace of mind and inner
joyful, and amused smile now habitual to him, was interested in this
joyful, but an animal, squirrel-like expression. She paused as if she
joyfully that the men themselves were awed by their multitude and the
joyfully up to Pierre. His face was so unusually triumphant that Pierre
joyfully when listening to such stories, now and then putting in a word
joyfully, his eyes moist with tears, at this bright comet which, having
joyous laugh, having finished the dance. "Well done, niece! Now a fine
joyous sensation.
joyously festive mood reigned in the city. Everyone believed the victory
joyously, ecstatically, and so piercingly that it set everyone's ear
joys and sorrows of this world--overflowed the great grief within her.
judge not by their conversation or expressions of feeling but by their
judge of his every word and action whose judgment mattered more to
judge of it?" he added, addressing Nicholas, who when he heard that the
judges," he replied, thinking that he was repeating what he had said
judging and arguing about everything, nothing sacred will be left! That
judging by his wife, thought all women weak and foolish. Vera, judging
judgment, the more doubtful becomes my belief in the freedom of my
jump, Tushin not taking his pipe from his mouth ran from gun to gun, now
jumped awkwardly back into the room, tripping over his spurs.
jumped down. He smelt strongly of rum.
jumped onto the bed the countess had feared might become her grave. This
jumped out quickly. The count got out helped by the footmen, and,
jumped up and with a gesture of desperation slammed the door with all
jumping up, dashed so impetuously forward that it seemed as if he would
junction advisable, meant, among other arguments in support of his view,
junction with the first one from which it was said to be cut off by
junction--though that was the chief aim of all at headquarters--because,
juniper, a printed band was tucked in under his shriveled head, and in a
juridical science gives us, humanity would conclude that power is merely
jurisprudence.
just and that really no answer could be made to it. But at that moment
just arrived, sat down on this bench. In the foremost place, immediately
just as Alpatych entered.
just as Nicholas turned to her she raised her head and met his look with
just as Pierre did, but there was a set look on all their faces.
just as he looked round the first man changed his run to a walk and,
just as some centuries previously hordes of men had come from the east
just as the architect, gardener, or Princess Mary did, till the prince
just as the discovery of the laws of the motion of the planets was
just as we cannot renew an illusion we have once seen through.
just because it was so powerfully seductive. She took no pains with
just because of its incongruities, was exactly what was wanted at that
just came and then left off, left off..."
just celebrated his promotion to a cornetcy and bought Denisov's horse,
just entering. The newcomer wore a blue swallow-tail coat with a cross
just going to the left flank. Then when we get back, do spend the night
just inside the door, trying to speak softly and not move, for fear of
just like a man--selfish and cruel! I expected nothing else. A woman
just made for a baby's seat. Just look!"
just perceptibly, but rapidly. Natasha knows that he is struggling with
just returned from abroad where he had been educated, and this was his
just saying so myself," though a moment before he had said quite the
just struck a chord.
just such a story--they would either not have believed him or, still
just that inner, spiritual force, that sincerity, that frankness of
just the same position in which Marya Dmitrievna had left her.
just to punish him--Rostov. Then he imagined how, after the attack,
just under the icons; his large thick hands outside the quilt. Into the
just visible above the bush on his right.
just visible behind a screen. A small dog began to bark.
just waked up in a cold perspiration, sat up in bed and gazed before him
just what the universal historians do, and consequently they not only
justice lies. He understands everything, knows everything. Who can be
justification in the belief that among the hundreds of thousands who
justifications have a very necessary significance in their own day.
justifications of the collective action that is performed, the less is
justify herself. "You have not understood me, Nikolenka. It is your
justify the mistakes of a commander in chief who had to be represented
justifying himself, and unable to understand Rostov's outburst, except
justifying himself. "There are your thousand-ruble ones.... That's it,
keener.
keep all that was found there. They abused the police and bribed them,
keep asking me, and I'm glad of it, I'm happy and I love everybody, and
keep dwagging the wegiment to and fwo all day. If they mean to fight,
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.
keeper, Vereshchagin. Perhaps you have heard of that affair with the
keeper, fell face downward on the pavement.
keeping Pierre close beside her, entered the room even more boldly than
keeping one's head means. That's the way, Count," said Berg, lighting
keeping the bank. Rostov had not seen him since his proposal and Sonya's
keeping the brood warm, he sees the skillful complex structures of the
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
keeping till I should be in bed. The bolts? No, I told him about them.
keeping--Your friend Helene.
ken, may we discern the sequence of experiences in the lives of
kept coming into her eyes. Anna Mikhaylovna, with the letter, came on
kept going, and in this consciousness of being indispensable every
kept her waiting some minutes. "Don't you wish to serve me? Then I'll
kept peering by that fantastic all-transforming light into Sonya's face
kept them for some weeks while the old man was recovering. One of his
kerchief, and the loose skin that hung under her chin.
kidnap.... Don't you understand that it is as mean as beating an old man
killed a Frenchman at close quarters and was the first to seize the
killed and maimed (by his will as he believed), did he reckon as he
killed and wounded, thereby, he considered, testing his strength of
killed five Frenchmen, a third had loaded five cannon singlehanded. Berg
killed my wife's lover. Yes, that was it! And why? How did I come to do
killed one hare and wounded another. Following the wounded hare he made
killed the other merchant. 'Where did it happen, Daddy?' he said. 'When,
killed them so well and was so cunning and wise that when he returned to
killed tomorrow... That I should not exist... That all this should still
killed two birds with one stone: to appease the mob I gave them a victim
killed, and before the men had had food and sleep. And meanwhile, the
killed, but all that is being done at present is only play. The fact is
killed, drops from above slowly and lightly as a feather, among the heap
killed, wounded, sick, and stragglers; though a number of sick and
killed, you are a fool and are lost for certain. But go with the firm
killed... She won't get over it! She won't survive...."
killed?... You may go and kill whom you please, but I don't want to do
killing a man as the result of recognizing his rights, and the killing
killing my children and yours, and Arakcheev from sending me off to some
kind of civility that this device of placing a channel was employed. He
kind of talk, and at last all stopped. As often happens, the horses of
kind sprang from a second door and a third; more hugging, more kissing,
kind, and though in his lucid moments he knew it was untrue, he was
kind, noble, and splendid, and I could not help loving him. What am I
kind, pleasant face and how he smiles as he looks at me."
kind, sorrowful face, she suddenly understood the cause of his coldness.
kind. Is that true?"
kindhearted countess was the more vexed with Sonya because that poor,
kindhearted, and because they--friends from childhood--had to think
kindle fires and make a noise to deceive us."
kindliness.
kindly and bantering sympathy, such as soldiers feel for their dogs,
kindly they did not look at Pierre and did not know him. Wishing to
kindly, and round. When Pierre saw his neighbor next morning at dawn
kindness!" He turned to go.
kindness," or, "With your excellent heart," "You are yourself so
kinds overtaking one another and blocking the muddy road, three and
kinds, from monarchs to journalists, who lead the masses. Instead of the
king waved his right arm and, evidently nervous, sang something badly
kingdoms and displacement of peoples was in course of preparation.
kings, and knights incited the peoples to free the Holy Land; but the
kinsman."
kiss them, but clung to that which reminded her most nearly of him--his
kissed Princess Mary's hand. She did not know how she found the courage,
kissed her hand and went out.
kissed her hand, presenting to her his bald, scented, and shining head,
kissed her head. She looked up. It was Mademoiselle Bourienne in a black
kissed her warmly. Anatole went up to kiss the little princess' hand.
kissed her.
kissed her.
kissed him at the same time. Only his mother was not there, he noticed
kissed him full on the lips, and disengaging her little hands pressed
kissed him three times.
kissed his hand.
kissed. Her father in jest tried to rouse her jealousy, and she replied
kissing her, and then he left the room with rapid steps.
kissing his finger tips.
kissing it, just touching it lightly with her lips.
kitchen would have cared to eat, so Anna Pavlovna served up to her
knapsack a scrap of blue French cloth, and wrapped it round his foot.
knapsacks conveyed on carts, and the Austrian authorities had provided
knapsacks with flour and sunflower seeds. Just then Ferapontov returned
knapsacks, bayonets, long muskets, and, under the shakos, faces with
knee. A bullet, no doubt. I congratulate you, Count, on your baptism of
kneeling beside it stirring its contents with a ramrod.
knees after her young lady.
knees and, taking his hand carefully, bent her face over it and began
knees, and then controlling herself with an evident effort lifted her
knees, some squatting Turkish fashion on the wet grass.
knelt on when praying on Trinity Sunday, and placed it before the doors
knew about her disappointment and was laughing at her and pitying her.
knew and who had a strap round the calf of one leg, crossed himself,
knew better than I did, and now you come to me! How mend matters? There
knew by experience that if his patient did not die now, he would do so
knew by the sound of his voice.
knew everything, could do anything, and was known to all Moscow--that
knew he must not do so. Having advanced six paces and strayed off
knew he was in these men's power, that only by force had they brought
knew his place and his duty, had every button and every strap in place,
knew how to listen so that people readily told him their most intimate
knew it only with his intellect, he did not believe it in his heart and
knew might interest the old lady and that she could understand. He
knew of Prince Andrew, who also was evidently no favorite of hers, the
knew of its protective qualities.)
knew that Dron, who had acquired property and was hated by the commune,
knew that Sonya was the chief obstacle to this happening, and Sonya's
knew that after his promise to Sonya it would be what he deemed base to
knew that an apple should not be plucked while it is green. It will fall
knew that being thrown together again under such terrible circumstances
knew that it sprang from Pierre's whole soul), but it was his animated
knew that provisions were scarce there), but because this alone could
knew that the result of a battle is decided not by the orders of a
knew that when it appeared on her face, she became mute and was not to
knew this outburst was unseemly and would blow over in a minute or two;
knew till after eight o'clock.
knew to be in power and whose aid he might need. In Petersburg he now
knew what had happened to him as he knew it himself.
knew, had moved with her cubs to the Otradnoe copse, a small place a
knew, sat and turned to look first at one and then at another, and their
knitting a stocking. She had learned to knit stockings since Prince
knitting a striped scarf for him.
knitting, went to the window and leaning out tried to catch the open
knocked three of them over.
knocking it over, and at the same instant Rostov, without knowing why,
knocking over two horses and another tearing off a munition-wagon
knoll, and their guns boomed incessantly along their line and sent
know Him, but He is here, He is in me, He is in my words, He is in thee,
know Him. You do not know Him and that is why you are unhappy."
know I am good," she thought, "but yet my best years are slipping by
know for certain how much Vera would have and did not receive at least
know for certain in how far his genius was genuine in Egypt--where forty
know his age and was quite unable to determine it. But his brilliantly
know how to deal with them."
know how to express it... not by a balance of political power...."
know in what capacity he was questioned by Bennigsen, the Grand Duke,
know it's impossible to speak of it now. But I want to be a brother to
know myself again."
know nothing about it. Tell General Barclay from me that his information
know something about that. Don't I? And you are still so young. You need
know that old Prince Nicholas much dislikes his son's marrying. The old
know that there is going to be a battle tomorrow?"
know the condition I am in? I must talk about it to someone."
know the count," said the adjutant cheerfully, with a smile of pride,
know the laws of inevitability to which it is subject (from the first
know the number of our troops and the position in which our army and our
know the number of your battalions as exactly as I know my own. You have
know those 'receipts' of yours? You send a hundred men away, and thirty
know what Vera's dowry would be. The count was so disconcerted by this
know what love is...."
know what you men are like. Are you the same as we? No?"
know where we are. And what do you think of the Boulogne expedition?
know whether Count Bezukhov had left or was leaving the town.
know who Napoleon was, added:
know why she had to, she knew the meeting would be painful, but felt the
know you can't marry him."
know! When she comes spluttering down, out go your innards. One can't
know!" and the Frenchman with the spot on his cheek ran back to his
know, I am very far from having military tastes, but in these times no
know, Prince Andrew's letter! Princess Mary read it. Dessalles said
know, and danced with the children. Be sure to invite him, my dear.
know, and this alarmed and tormented her.
know, but he felt sure it would do so. The locality and the position of
know, mon cher, your father and I had some accounts to settle, so I have
know. That is all one can say about her."
know. There was no one near.
know. There will be time enough to think about love when I want to, but
know."
know?" she asked sternly.
knowing Bolkonski to be a favorite and trusted adjutant, received him
knowing how she did it, she contrived to utter a few polite phrases in
knowing how this aimless lie had escaped him, he went along with
knowing the causes of the act and the simplicity of the character and
knowing what he was doing or why he came, or how it would all end. He
knowing what to do with one another, screamed, and ran back again.
knowing what to say and he repeated it till Helene came up to them.
knowing whether it would be proper to call the dying man "the count,"
knowing whom Natasha meant by him, Nicholas or Prince Andrew.
knowing why, she felt it very difficult to speak of the marriage. When
knowing why. "I really don't know what sort of girl she is; I can't
knowledge and in that respect Pfuel was a genius, but at the same time
knowledge of absolute truth. A Frenchman is self-assured because he
knowledge of the right time to sow the oats, and the fact that he had
knowledge that all bodies have weight, up to Newton's law), so too the
knowledge that does not come from Him; and the less we seek to fathom
knowledge--thanks to that most powerful engine of ignorance, the
knowledge.
known only to his most intimate friends. At that time while with his
known participants, but with a more remote event we already see its
known that it was costing him a thousand rubles, and that he would not
known them a long time," said Princess Mary. "Tell me honestly the whole
known). Drawing nearer, he recognized in the Rhetor a man he knew,
known, for every living person has his own peculiarities and always
knows his job does when turning up his sleeves and putting on his apron
knows what a fright might do."
knows--and look up the gypsy Ilyushka, the one who danced at Count
knows?"
knuckles, then the next knuckle, whispering, "January, February, March,
l'Empereur!" came the voices of men, old and young, of most diverse
l'armee d'Ulm)." * He remembered these words in Bonaparte's address
l'armee de nos allies detruite, et vous trouvez la le mot pour rire," *
l'ennemi!" *(2) In spite of the animation of his speech, Bilibin did not
labor was thus increased, though lessened on paper. He did not know that
laboriously pursing his lips, "le-trip-ta-la-de-bu-de-ba, e
labors, hoping to drive away the evil spirit that threatened him. Toward
lack of comprehension. "Why, you have read his letter and you have seen
lack of news, the loss of Kutuzov, and the death of Helene.
lack of understanding had formerly turned away from that life of
lackey, but I who have nothing but my brains have to make a career
lad hung his head gloomily. It was evident that no one had understood
lad with a broad rosy face and keen merry eyes, galloped up to Denisov
lad--especially dreadful because of its simplicity--and the faces of the
ladies and all these civilities!" said he aloud in Sonya's presence,
ladies and tradesmen's wives were leaving the city. "There will be less
ladies and, leaning on his saber and beating time with his foot, told
ladies for the figure.
ladies' end an even chatter of voices was heard all the time, at the
ladies, addressing Prince Vasili and pointing to an inlaid portfolio she
ladies-" He turned with the same request to Denisov who was also a
ladies. "I can just imagine what a funny figure that policeman cut!"
ladies. Natasha came into the room, went up to Sonya, glanced at
lads, that this man,' he says, 'is being tortured innocently and for
lady.
lady. Having finished speaking to her, the Emperor looked inquiringly
lagging behind it.
laid back (Karay was pinning her by the throat), was the happiest moment
laid the table for two, all properly, and sat down. After sitting a
lain motionless, growing cold before them. Natasha went up, looked at
lair and its food. One part of it dispersed and waded knee-deep
lamp, she stood before it with folded hands for a few moments. A painful
lances and the unfolded standards fluttered against their staffs. It
land if they are set free? It is easy to write laws, but difficult to
land to have the strength to move.
land, his air, his peasants. But Napoleon came and swept him aside,
landing reflected ladies in white, pale-blue, and pink dresses, with
landing. "I'd better go to my own room."
landlord.
landowner in the Vilna province, offered his country house for the fete,
landowner's house.
landowner's house. Having ridden in, he dismounted and approached a
landowner's snuggery, maidservants had been flattered by his notice, and
landowner, fourteen miles away, who had the stud. Everything seemed to
landowners lodged petitions for compensation.
landowners that remained unknown. A sacristan commanded one party which
lap, turned her sparkling eyes swiftly from her husband to the things he
large French forces. Everyone was dissatisfied with the general course
large and handsome eyes. He regarded his whole life as a continual round
large continent.
large dark ballroom. All was the same: there were the same old card
large divisions with staffs also knew of this convoy and, as Denisov
large estate, Bogucharovo, about twenty-five miles from Bald Hills.
large guerrilla detachment. From the time he received his commission,
large leather sofa from Prince Andrew's study into the bedroom. On their
large loaded tray. With hospitable dignity and cordiality in her glance
large pearls, entered the adjoining box rustling her heavy silk dress
large, gentle brown eyes were also round.
larger circle.
larger room. Malasha looked down from the oven with shy delight at the
larger than ever.
largest landowner of the province. Temptations to Pierre's greatest
last Anna Mikhaylovna, still with the same expression, pale but resolute
last dim, indistinctly outlined square. But ready as she was to take the
last dryly spoken words: "I will detain you no longer, General; you
last extremity and to defend it, leaving to the commander in chief's
last farewell to the celebrated grandee of Catherine's court, Count
last few days. The antagonists stood forty paces apart at the farther
last interview with Napoleon in Danzig, when his august brother-in-law
last irresistible wave burst from the rear and reached the front ranks,
last medicine has done her a very great deal of good. She has freshened
last meeting between father and son, it was so touching that she could
last moments by not letting him commit this injustice, and not to let
last of the inhabitants who were leaving.
last only his white plumes were visible to Rostov from amid the suites
last period of the war of 1812 an aim that never existed, namely that of
last post station but one before Moscow, Denisov had drunk three bottles
last potatoes received had sprouted and frozen.
last remaining strength, took hold of his left hand with his right, and
last summer, is so noble-minded and full of that real youthfulness which
last syllable of the general's name like a Frenchman, "has been pleased
last time, but only on condition that he went to Moscow as adjutant
last, and, having assured himself that they had not, he turned to his
last, smartly whirling his partner round in front of her chair, he drew
last," she went on, turning her eyes from Pierre to her companion with a
last."
lasted a moment. She at once set to work afresh and they now trusted her
late Emperor, and was nicknamed 'the King of Prussia.' He is very clever
late at night, except when he eats his very plain food, he is working
late become a frequent visitor of hers, and many brilliant ladies and
late count--the kingdom of heaven be his!--and we have lived under you
late in starting her practice on the clavichord, went into the sitting
later Sonya came to Marya Dmitrievna.
later he heard footsteps and Princess Mary entered with Natasha. Natasha
later these same men left Moscow, they no longer formed an army. They
later, when reports on the battle of Borodino were written at leisure,
later," he added, and summoned de Beausset, who by that time had
later.
later." And she went in, closing the door behind her.
latest cut, such as no one else yet had in Moscow, and boots of the
latest fashion, with extremely pointed toes and small silver spurs,
latest war news, and when the ten minutes required by propriety had
lathe and, as usual, did not look round at her.
lathe?" asked Prince Andrew with a scarcely perceptible smile which
latter and no one else, while showing servile respect to Kutuzov, could
latter came in late that night. "I did not expect this! I did not think
latter could not withstand them, but if a charge was to be made it must
latter looked in after supper, he pretended to be asleep, and early next
latter threw up his arms in surprise saying it was nowhere to be found
latter's good-natured naivete was so boundless that sometimes even he
latter.
latter.
latter. Many other orators spoke after the excited nobleman, and all in
latterly spent whole days at home, that is, in Prince Vasili's house
latterly," she said to her son. "But who could help loving her? She is
laugh at me!"
laugh still more so, he quitted the table.
laugh--a laugh such as one hears on the stage. Someone--it sounded like
laugh.
laugh.
laugh. Prince Andrew shrugged his shoulders and frowned, as lovers
laughed Prince Bolkonski, and Anatole laughed still louder. Suddenly
laughed at every word he said or that she said herself, not because what
laughed blandly at her naive diplomacy but listened to what she had
laughed loudly at it.
laughed spasmodically as he stood in the porch waiting for the vicomte
laughed whenever he looked at her.
laughed with quiet enjoyment.
laughed--as he often did--were all sound and good, there was not a gray
laughed.
laughed.
laughing as they threw their missiles which buried themselves in the
laughing at his way of life) he himself joined in the merriment.
laughing at something, mingled in a merry sound, like the chirping of
laughing eyes. "These Germans are first-rate fools, don't you think so,
laughing joyfully and shouting "Hurrah!"
laughing loudly. In the middle of the room a short handsome general with
laughing voices.
laughing with an officer who had sat down beside him. A third was
laughing, "'Sergey Kuzmich... From all sides... From all sides... Sergey
laughing.
laughing.
laughing. "Dear, dear!..."
laughing. He turned his eyes rapidly from Tikhon's face to the esaul's
laughter from a statesman made a strange impression on him.
laughter led by Natasha. Both partners stood still, breathing heavily
laughter provoked by a swarthy hussar officer who walked beside him.
laughter that convulsed his usually impassive features.
laughter, the shouting of familiar voices, the growling of a bear, and
laughter. The small, muddy, green pond had risen visibly more than a
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
lawful manner. The sutlers alone venture to trade, and they sell stolen
laws defined by a pseudo-theory of war, and they saw only barbarism,
laws for Austria at Schonbrunn, il faut lui faire grace de l'u! * I
laws of its divine Saviour, Who preached love and forgiveness of
laws of reason.
laws of statistics, geography, political economy, comparative philology,
laws of the Order. The candles were then extinguished and some spirit
laws of war is the action of scattered groups against men pressed
laws. History stands on the same path. And if history has for its object
lay a long time in her mother's bed gazing straight before her. She told
lay by the riverside. They rode across that bridge into the village of
lay down all this heavy responsibility. But circumstances are sometimes
lay down on his bed groaning and loudly exclaimed, 'My God!' Why didn't
lay down on the sofa.
lay in abandoning the immediate sensation of the earth's fixity and of
lay in the general progress of the war. When he saw Mack and heard the
lay more than on all the others who took part in it. Never to the end
lay on the sofa with her face to the wall, fingering the buttons of the
lay with eyes open in the darkness, listening to the regular snoring
lazily and advanced and again halted, receiving no timely orders from
lead him into the path of truth, but evil thoughts of him did not leave
leader was necessary, having qualities and views differing from
leader, called les notres. * This set, consisting almost exclusively of
leader." This is what historians of the first class say--those who
leaders serves as an expression of the people's will or only some part
leaders, with a crowd of vagrants, and with Peter the Hermit, remains
leaders. The Moscovites felt that something was wrong and that to
leading downstairs), "only it won't be accepted."
leading figures in history are heroes, that is, men gifted with a
leading to the stalls on the side nearest the Rostovs' box creaked, and
leaned his arms on the back of the sofa and closed his eyes. Pierre
leaned his whole massive body across the table.
leaned over, and looked down.
leaning with his arms on the back of the sofa, sat in his former
learn from Suvorov even so simple a thing as the art of crowing like a
learned historian, who does not throw his little stone at Alexander for
learned still another new, consolatory truth--that nothing in this world
learned that Dolokhov the brawler, Dolokhov the bully, lived in Moscow
learned that another letter had been delivered.
learned to know him, and he will not deceive me any more...."
learning and even the patriotic feeling shown by Denisov, but despised
learning that he was a special messenger led him to another entrance.
least a marshal or a hero of some sort, and reproached one another and
least abashed.
least disconcerted by this reception. He had just entered, wearing an
least have some for my sake! She must be shown that the blockhead thinks
least obstruction to that action either from things around me or from
least. Its furry tail stood up firm and round as a plume, its bandy legs
leather breeches tightly fitting the fat thighs of his short legs, and
leather cushion and seeing nothing but that cushion, and her confused
leave Moscow and not dare to let her set eyes on him again. Pierre--only
leave Moscow without having accomplished his aim, and have vainly wasted
leave him alone and for the first time in her life ventured to disobey
leave his room and admitted no one but Mademoiselle Bourienne and
leave of her and of Lise, his look tender yet proud. She saw him tender
leave the army.
leave the battery. He decided to have the guns removed from their
leave you cold a thousand times and the thousand and first time thrill
leaves and stems here and there. Farther back beyond the dark trees a
leaves had sprouted such as one could hardly believe the old veteran
leaves were motionless, and lilac-colored flowers and the first blades
leaving Orel, to induce the Italian officer to accept some money of
leaving a passage in the middle. Most of them were unconscious and
leaving those who could not to surrender or die.
lecture me: 'It's wobbewy!'--'Wobbewy,' I say, 'is not done by man who
lectures and with taking notes from them.
led him into the room where the supper table was laid and introduced
led him to the house, offered him lunch, and sat down with him. Then,
led on by his example, began to do the same, she knew that they were on
ledge. As he began slipping down, his head and arm wavered still more
left Prince Vasili's and felt with terror that in people's eyes he was
left alone.
left and feeling very anxious about his wound and the progress of his
left and then to the right and listening to the slightest variation of
left another wife in Paris--left her grieved by the parting which
left bank of the Danube and took up a position for the first time
left behind and only the flower of the army--physically and
left during the battle. So it happened that throughout the whole battle
left flank is in," said Boris confidentially lowering his voice. "It is
left for our guidance here below. Let us try to conform to them and
left her kindly and tear-worn face and it now expressed only anxiety and
left him; but whether he was still alive, whether he was strong and
left off loving Prince Andrew? And how could she let Kuragin go to
left off visiting Helene and received reproachful notes from her every
left the hut.
left the place where the balls and bullets were flying about, their
left the room.
left the room.
left their game and came over to the samovar, yielding to the general
left to be victimized by an old man who has outlived his wits. The old
left to do as a Russian. Nothing remained for the representative of the
left wing, Napoleon said it should not be done, without explaining
left! Wait a bit." But the soldiers, crowded together shoulder to
left, was listening with a dissatisfied air. The Emperor moved forward
left. All this was vivid, majestic, and unexpected; but what impressed
left. Now what are you dawdling for?" she cried to the maids. "Get the
left."
left.... It is true that it was hot there," he added, modestly.
left?" thought Nicholas. "Are we getting to the Melyukovs'? Is this
leg.
legal heir to everything and you won't get anything. You must know, my
legends of Alesha the Sly, or the priest's laborer Mikolka.
legitimation? Do you understand that in consideration of the count's
legs came in from both sides and began dancing all together. Then the
legs grew cold and bare.
legs in their tight riding breeches, diffusing an odor of perfume, and
legs jerked rapidly though his head was quite motionless. A bullet had
legs that were already spreading apart. Then they dressed him in uniform
legs, and that is the door, but why is it always stretching and drawing
legs, looked directly at Prince Vasili with no sign of emotion in her
legs. Pressing against both sides of the window, he adjusted himself on
leisure to an account of the great deeds he had done, he wrote:
leisurely visiting, with our own horses and like a true country couple,
length of the table.
leonine head. This head, with its remarkably broad brow and cheekbones,
less a man than the great Napoleon--demands the acceptance of that
less sincerely than the twenty-year-old Rostov.
less than a hundred prisoners, the Russian army which left that place a
less than a mile from Shamshevo, to surprise the French at dawn, falling
less than ever. By the Emperor's orders Bagration reported direct to
less than four miles from Moscow, no such question existed. When had
less than the others forced his way in to see him and, turning the
less unity resulted. Preparations were made to fight the French before
less, ate less, slept less, and became weaker every day. Princess Mary
lessons, was always breaking things in the house and making himself a
let Karay spring at it--in sight of 'Uncle' who is watching from over
let Princess Mary pass into the room before her, the princess felt the
let Tikhon undress him.
let go! Please, sir..." pleaded Gerasim, trying carefully to steer Makar
let her marry him. But he failed to do so and felt awkward about
let him go.
let his head sink still lower.
let me win this ten, or beat it."
let the French have it.
let you know of it. He is said to be very handsome and a terrible
let's fight. But the devil knows what this is."
let's!' say the others. And off they go and take the bridge, cross it,
letter away, and leaning his elbows on the table he drew toward him the
letter to her father. The next day the old prince said to her quietly:
letter was written, though it was not sent, and the Emperor knew of it.
letter will be delivered to the Emperor, and the petition will certainly
letter, but comforted him with hopes of reconciling their father to the
letter, but had specially inserted in the rescript to Saltykov and had
letter, he now was.
letter.
letter.
letter.
letter. "Can it be that it is all over?" she thought. "Can it be
letter:
letters sent through the embassy and all the searches made, his body had
letters to Nicholas from all the household were written and copied out,
letters to Princess Mary's apartments, but did not find him there. He
letters. Bilibin saved up his epigrams to produce them in Countess
letting it be understood how delightful was the present; and every day
letting the force of her anger run to waste, she turned and rushed
letting the wounded have another and yet another cart.
letting yourself be tricked by an aide-de-camp of the Emperor.
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
liar, frightened of the name of Napoleon, and that by his blunders at
liberating his serfs he had obtained the reputation of being a liberal.
liberation of their country.
liberty and equality? Even our Saviour preached liberty and equality.
liberty nor his resolution to punish his wife.
liberty not to believe me and I don't even care whether you do or not,
liberty, and for equality. People ceased to kill one another, and
liberty. He was alone in a strange town, without acquaintances. No one
library cupboards. "Don't catch up against it! It's heavy, lads--solid
library, and he made it a rule to read through all the books he bought.
lid, and made desperate efforts herself.
lid, drew out a drawer, and took out an exercise book filled with his
lied to Prince Andrew about my relations with that Frenchwoman and made
lied, and I told him he lied. And there it rests. He may keep me on
lies in intellectual activity, only by a great stretch can one admit
lies in renouncing the direct feeling of the independence of one's own
lies in the activity of the general mass of men who take part in it--to
lies in the family.
life and place of residence, their acquaintances and ties, Natasha's
life and thought of a writer or a reformer. We learn that Luther had
life continually occurred in the captain's stories) and the Pole had
life in it. The bees do not fly in the same way, the smell and the sound
life in the countess' house had grown harder and harder, especially
life in which he inevitably obeys laws laid down for him.
life is destroyed.
life is very bad for him. Others don't notice it, but I see it."
life itself--is rubbish it is pleasant to throw away, compared with
life of his son Anatole, the son whom they were planning to reform by
life of the peoples.
life one may discriminate between those in which substance prevails
life or death of their fatherland, and it happened in the greatest of
life or introduce anything new into it, when his own life was already
life reasonably, considered important only what was rational, and was
life suddenly came to Princess Mary with such force that she resolved to
life suddenly seemed to Pierre unexpectedly loathsome. He ceased keeping
life that Pierre had not the heart to refuse, and sat down with him in
life that had restrained it, he no longer feared death and ceased to
life to the laws of reason.
life was very hard, but he also knew that he could not help tormenting
life would it be for Sonya--if she's a girl with a heart? Your mother
life's turmoil, for in his mind the memory of Joseph Alexeevich was
life, Rostov felt the joy and relief a tired man feels on lying down to
life, a thing he rarely did.
life, and I see that however much and however carefully I observe the
life, and it was difficult for him to regard them merely as Brothers in
life, and that of the seven virtues he lacked two--morality and the love
life, but he knew that this feeling which he did not know how to develop
life, he felt an unaccountable tenderness for this young man and made up
life, he went with him into the room.
life, his absent-mindedness and simplicity--here among these people
life, that now I am grown up, that on me now lies a responsibility for
life, throws down his rapier, and seizing the first cudgel that comes to
life, where everything was either emptiness and desolation or suffering
life, which seemed to him so beautiful now that he had today learned to
life," he thought, "must be risked?"
life--love--was still active within her. Love awoke and so did life.
life.
life. "What is she so glad about? What is she thinking of? Not of
life. The Trinity--the three elements of matter--are sulphur, mercury,
life."
life: belief in life and its enjoyment.
life; and so despite his reluctance to remain in Moscow among people who
life; and we ought to understand that and not play at war. We ought to
lifeless attitude--very familiar to him--in which Petya's body was
lifeless but still existed. There were bazaars, shops, warehouses,
lifted her beautiful head and, half turning to him, said firmly: "That's
lifted her high, placed her on his shoulder, held her by the legs, and
lifted his eyes to him, handed him the report and began speaking in his
lifted his head from under his cloak. All was tranquil in the yard. Only
lifted his head high and gazed at Denisov as if repressing a laugh.
lifted in childlike happiness.
lifted is no longer the same as the arm I now refrain from lifting,
lifted the dying man and were moving him.
lifting her head triumphantly; sometimes she paused and uttered hoarse
lifting his eyebrows, looked at Denisov in affright, but in spite of
lifting his head and proudly thrusting his hand into the bosom of his
lifting one hind leg and hopping along on three, and then again going on
light and long dark shadows. The forest at the farthest extremity of
light and the blue tunics advancing from the other side with their
light blue Viennese caleche, slightly creaking on its springs and drawn
light must I appear to them!" thought he, thinking of his troops.
light of the illuminations and to the sound of music talked to her for a
light over the field. Denisov talked in whispers with the esaul and
light, and its long uplifted tail, shone the enormous and brilliant
light, impetuous, and seemingly buoyant steps were heard at the
light-brown hair smelling of pomade. When she looked up at him she was
light."
lighted by two candles. On one small table tea things and supper dishes
lighted, as Pierre knew by the smell, and he was told that he would now
lighting a fire.
lightly and even cheerfully, now grew more agitated and impatient every
lightly touched his daughter's hair and sat down again.
lightly with some vaguely affectionate and comforting words. The
lightly, more lightly, and yet more lightly whirled the count, flying
lightness he experienced, almost comprehensible and palpable...
lights of shops, houses, and street lamps, fine carriages, and all that
like I will tell you that whatever happens and whatever muddles those at
like Prince Andrew) and he referred to it contemptuously as philosophy
like a horse running downhill harnessed to a heavy cart. Whether he was
like a long-expected guest whose place was always ready awaiting him.
like a man plunged into water he lost consciousness. When he came to
like a man suffering from the quinsy, and, still slightly swaying
like a mushroom.
like a physical wound is sometimes fatal and sometimes heals, but always
like a portable house.... That fellow's dropped his sack and doesn't see
like a schoolboy in a hurry to run out to play, blundered in his talk
like a skin, and he spoke with a particularly refined compression of his
like a trained singer who knows he is listened to, but like the birds,
like a wail, first one hound, then another, and then another, sprang
like all those Polish names."
like an avalanche on their heads from two sides, and rout and capture
like an eagle, three steps at a time. Having received this information,
like an old friend. They were all fond of him already. Not only Princess
like children from whom one can't get any sensible account of what has
like cords. "You are mad, I tell you. I won't allow it. The purse is
like diamonds and dappled with bluish shadows. Bang, bang! went the
like her!" said he, offering Nicholas a pipe with a long stem and, with
like his own, at the firing, and went back at a footpace. "Well, some
like it. She believed it could be, but did not understand it.
like it. You shall be satisfied...."
like labels they have but the smallest connection with the event itself.
like letting you go, it is the best way. So go, with God's blessing!"
like my wife--with them you are within your rights, for they know what
like people who, recognizing the defects of paper money, decide to
like qualms of conscience. She had reminded him of what was quite true;
like seeing a horse or a bear on the floor among the furniture and
like that six months ago?"
like that, and Pierre was released. Natasha on one side was talking with
like that, and do you know what saved me? Freemasonry! No, don't smile.
like that, to be so sure he admired her, and not to be acquainted with
like the moon and its light and the shadows. Prince Andrew, too, dared
like the power of Hercules; nor can it be based on the effect of moral
like the sound of boiling water, but diverse discordant sounds of
like this when he entered the day before he could not for a moment have
like this. Every moment is precious. I can't think why his nieces put
like to combine frivolity with the serious business of hunting.
like to look round my place?"
like to pay him out, you are afraid--but here am I! And I am he..." and
like to serve, and Prince Andrew lost his standing in court circles
like us women who, when we suffer, can weep away our sorrows. He keeps
like! She really reminds me of somebody. But Herr Dimmler--isn't
like!" And flourishing his arm energetically he turned sideways to the
like? How did he impress you?"
liked her singing as he liked everything she did.
liked her voice. She asked this and then became confused, feeling that
liked him, had also a board in the roof at the farther end, with a piece
liked me, and I am so willing to do anything they wish, so ready to
liked to repeat to herself. It was the story of a girl who had been
liked to test her power over him. He distrusted the order and asked
liked, now in Petersburg I hear he has been doing such terrible things
likelier one."
likely be getting a letter from him that day. Each time that these hints
lilac shawl on her head, suggested a delicate exotic plant thrown out
limit beyond which censure was impossible.
limit of time in less than which no amount of heat can melt the snow. On
limit to the power of the Beast was as yet only one of the fancies that
limitations and alterations he could not agree to, as what he always
limited for time, and with this difference too, that a knight is always
limits of privation a man can endure; but thanks to his physical
limp like a rag, and the horror of unavoidable destruction seizes him in
limping, to the door at which Pierre was standing. Pierre wished to go
line (the Guards) was already in action.
line and that of the enemy were far apart on the right and left flanks,
line at night.... He's a brave fellow."
line followed them across and the last Cossacks quitted the farther side
line of action--the one Kutuzov and the general mass of the army
line of the advancing Russian columns. Evidently the person they were
line regiments, Russian and Austrian. Among them were grooms leading the
line that had so sharply divided the two armies?" he asked himself and
line with the rest of the forces.
line, and (on the Russian side) as to luring the enemy into the depths
line--the officers had been unable to keep sight-seers away. The
lined with fox fur, that had once been smart, and dirty hempen convict
lines of artillery with green caissons.
lines of communication. The battle was fought and thousands were killed
lingered for a moment.
lining. Pierre was about to begin reading.
link which other people recognized had grown up between himself and
lint each month or we should be lost!" he laughed. "Four hundred, sir,
lions. And there will be two hundred thousand of them."
lip that lifted over her white teeth. She met Prince Vasili with that
lips about the amusements of the highest Petersburg society, recalling
lips and eyes into a cluster of wrinkles. He ceased speaking and bowed
lips and made a hoarse sound. It was impossible to make out what he
lips and met them with her own. Her face struck Pierre, by its altered,
lips as if to feel whether she was feverish, and finally kissed her.
lips compressed and gave her husband no reply.
lips could not grasp its rim. Anatole was sobbing painfully. "Yes, it is
lips indicating very little hope for the patient.
lips to the large boned, fleshy hand. Neither the hand nor a
lips, and hurried away.
lips, had shed gentle, happy tears, love for a particular woman again
lips, having now prepared a well-phrased reply, "sire, I left the
lips.
lips.
lips. Then he took his place in the first row of the stalls and sat down
listen to his tale.
listen to or look at Vera, who was telling her something about her own
listen, while waiting till it would be time to leave. Her task was
listen," she said to the count. "What do you want tomorrow? Whom will
listened at the door, and it seemed to her that his mutterings were
listened attentively to the pilgrim.
listened to excuses and self-justifications (Ermolov did not come to see
listened to her timid story.
listened to her voice, for some reason expecting yet fearing that she
listened to him, admired, and imitated him, and with them Prince
listened to his regular breathing. The dark shadow was Princess Mary,
listened to orders. Fifteen hundred prisoners and thirty-eight guns were
listened to the Rhetor in silence, feeling from all he said that his
listened to the light click of the steel needles. "Can fate have brought
listened to their talk with a serious and thoughtful air, and then got
listened to these sounds, and as he was passing a tall guardsman in
listened with a kindly smile and nods of approval, as he always did,
listened with quiet irony to Bitski's enthusiastic account of it. A very
listened, refraining from a reply, and involuntarily wondered how this
listened, thought of the immense difference there was between herself
listened. "I don't know. A storm?" she ventured timidly, afraid of being
listeners, but quite relevantly to the course of his own thoughts.
listening naively to his words.
listening to an approaching whistle in the hidden region of smoke. "One,
listening to herself with pleasure, and speaking with exaggerated
listening to the sound of her voice.
listening to the sounds and looking in silence at the people.
listening to these love stories his own love for Natasha unexpectedly
listening, slightly smiling, with his head on one side. The air was
lit wisps of straw and ran after him, shouting, "Vive l'Empereur!"
lit, struck Toll by its cold severity.
little Frenchy, successful only because there were no longer any
little Iogel coming up to Nicholas. "Look how many charming young
little Napoleon had suddenly appeared with his unsympathizing look of
little Natasha. "You reproach us women with being illogical. Here is our
little Nicholas and his tutor, her old nurse, three maids, Tikhon, and a
little Nicholas did love his uncle, but loved him with just a shade of
little Rostova is very charming. There's something fresh, original,
little angel a stepmother. Secondly because, as far as I know, that girl
little chair while, frowning and with trembling hands, he poured drops
little children failed to understand this and avoided her.
little companion! I hope she will bring her along with her when we're
little countess!"
little creature, but dared not do so. He stood over him, gazing at his
little different, more pungent, and one felt that this was where it
little does this view explain why for several centuries the collective
little drummer boy had been taken alive, and as he was a straggler he
little effort."
little eyes, and a small beard. He wore a fine, dark-blue, silk-lined
little fingers. "All right! Then it's settled?"
little fool, Princess Mary," he shouted after Pierre, through the door.
little free will that as soon as we know the cause prompting the action
little girl he had saved.
little girl with his white hand and kissed her. And that gesture, too,
little girl, was afraid of looking at her, and yet felt an irresistible
little girl.
little gold icon Princess Mary had hung round her brother's neck, but
little hand.
little horse.
little icon with its thin gold chain suddenly appeared upon his chest
little man with a condescending and good-natured smile. "Les francais
little man with one arm, who was walking about the first room in a
little matters which could not interest anyone but themselves. Natasha
little mental workshop--but the pleasure given by real women gifted with
little mustache, evidently rested and made sleeker by his easy life in
little nephew as best she could. Mademoiselle Bourienne, too, seemed
little ones, Mamma and Papa, their relations to her, and so on--and
little princess also drew Anatole, whom she hardly knew, into these
little princess walked twice round her, now adjusting a fold of the
little princess' face, an expression of childish fear of inevitable pain
little princess, and having asked for a needle began tracing the Conde
little princess, shrugging her shoulders.
little respite. After turning his head from right to left for some time,
little table, and Anna Mikhaylovna noticed that something was agitating
little three-month-old creature when he lay at her breast and she was
little towns there's nowhere to spend it," said he. "Well, let me have
little tufts. He entered the room, looking restlessly and angrily
little voices and holding up their skirts, their bare little sunburned
little volcano!"
little waves of the Enns, which rippling and eddying round the piles of
little way. "What's the matter?" he asked.
little while, felt as if they too were becoming, like her, full of life
little, coughed, and was always low-spirited. The doctors said that
little--though I did very little and did it very badly? What evil can
live and cook their porridge. Moscow was burned by its inhabitants, it
live at all--everything seems hateful to me... myself most of all. Then
live for an age!' that's how it is, my dear fellow. And here we live,
live for myself avoiding those two evils is my whole philosophy now."
live in society.
live with him too?" he added, turning to Princess Mary. "Go in heavens
lived appeared on the surface. All her inward labor, her dissatisfaction
lived for myself alone while others live so apart from it, but so that
liveliness he began chaffing Pierre about the need to be very careful
lively, and she did not talk to her husband. When they left the table
lives was to cure, and they received money for it and had spent the best
lives! He cannot... because... because... of" and Natasha burst into
livid face stained with blood and dust.
living charm of her neck and shoulders, so near to his lips that he need
living in close touch with these people it was apparent that these
living in the neighborhood of Moscow may without any danger bring their
living on his estate at Elets and hearing of his rescue and illness had
living people. "If you liked him too, it would be a good thing for you
living with his mother, who, if she saw him dying, would not survive it.
living with the Rostovs.
living?" he asked.
loaded wagons, biscuits, and oxen he had seen when he had gone out for
loading.
loan of a petticoat to be used as a curtain, and behind that screen
locality and surroundings--fruit gardens, stone fences, tiled roofs, and
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
lock hung down in the middle of his broad forehead. His plump white neck
locks of gray hair.
lodge meetings, enrolled new members, and busied himself uniting various
lodge, was calmed by the thought that now their affairs would certainly
lodge.
lodge. No one at the stone entrance gates of the drive and the door
lodged.
lodges and acquiring authentic charters. He gave money for the erection
lodges over the road purposely laden with snow.
lodging. You've burned to death, our treasure, Katie, my precious little
lofty sky, not clear yet still immeasurably lofty, with gray clouds
logic. I say: 'Papa wants to sleep!' but she says, 'No, he's laughing.'
logical turn of mind inspired him with respect all the more because he
logical, or suddenly rise to the realm of metaphysics. (This last
long account of Father Amphilochus, who led so holy a life that his
long ago to have been made an officer, that he was braver than any of
long and diligent self-purification, not everyone can hope to attain it
long and warmly to the Emperor and how the Emperor, evidently weeping,
long as I live."
long as an adjutant: a bad position! Tell him I remember and like him.
long been watching all that was going on, carefully covering his bare
long been wishing but had been unable to divert the conversation to
long before and had already observed the French closely considered
long bent whip in his hand, and that look of independence and scorn of
long coat, who from his manner of walking and moving was evidently
long noticed what was going on between them and was expecting this
long she had been there when she was aroused by the sound of a woman's
long since and often occurred to him during his military activities--the
long time of the love of God, of Christ, of the Sacred Heart, and of the
long time past. She felt that something had happened to him, but he said
long time talking of their happiness. They talked of how they would live
long wished for such a box, but as she did not want to cry just then she
long, lank, round-shouldered, fair-haired man, slow in his movements
long, long ago, when we were quite little, Uncle called us into the
long--I shall soon set him free."
long-awaited moment. He was firmly convinced that this was the day of
long-drawn shout and rapid musketry firing could still be heard. A few
long-drawn sigh she seemed to be prepared for a lengthy talk.
long-drawn, measured death rattle did the crowd around his prostrate,
long-foreseen inquiry that without consideration he gave the first reply
long-sustained shouts. Afterwards when one of the generals addressed
long. Say 'perhaps.'"
longed to kiss his father's hands and kneel to beg his forgiveness, but
longed to love with this new pure divine love that had been revealed to
longed to snatch up, to squeeze, to hold to his heart, this helpless
longed. Sonya now was sixteen and she was very pretty, especially at
longer and was no longer alien to him, but he himself having entered it
longer he stayed now the more embittered their differences would become.
longer he thought the more contingencies presented themselves. He
longer his nor did he wish for it. He felt that his way of life had now
longer possible to take the whole of it away.
longer remain in Moscow and would leave for the army that very day that
longer seemed to be in the future but in the past. All the advantages
longer there, and Pierre with a feeling of pity and disgust pressed the
longer there, since she was no more.
longer to hinder them but because the guns were trained and there was
longer took notice of Pierre. Once or twice he was shouted at for being
longest sentences, he stopped the rotary motion of the snuffbox, raised
longtemps." *
look and smile which more palpably than anything else showed Pierre her
look at Pierre.
look at me?" Then he lifted his head, stretched his neck as if he
look at our ladies! The French are our Gods: Paris is our Kingdom of
look at that oak, as if expecting something from it. Under the oak,
look at them--his whole attention was absorbed in watching the serious
look at you, your excellency."
look clouded her once handsome face, but only for a moment; then she
look for her.
look for husbands for them whether you like it or not...."
look for in me? He is trying to discover something by looking at me!
look forward very much to your return....' Yes, yes, how did she say it?
look in his shining eyes, he told the whole story of his life: his
look into hers rather than this. But looking into his eyes she was
look into the matter can easily convince himself.
look of fearful joy and hope that was also new to the princess.
look of tender solicitude. She, having raised her head, was looking up
look or bad opinion from him," Rostov decided; and sorrowfully and with
look seemed to say: "Well, it is your own fault."
look she felt upon her made that world still more poetic. But Anatole's
look that showed she did not want to speak of it in her presence. "Now
look the significance of which could not be understood by mortal man.
look with a smile. "'Russia is not in Moscow, she lives in the hearts of
look, said something to his coachman, and his horses increased their
look. "A misfortune... about Peter Ilynich... a letter," she finished
looked and recognizing in her both the old and the new Sonya, and
looked as clean and well washed as the tips of one's fingers after a
looked as if by that slight motion the army itself was expressing its
looked at Natasha with sorrow and surprise as at a bad likeness of a
looked at Natasha, "say what you like, it's still too long."
looked at Pierre with the unconscious coquetry that had returned to her
looked at Rostov, bowed slightly and wearily, and sat down languidly
looked at Telyanin. The lieutenant was looking about in his usual way
looked at her. "You're here?" he seemed to be saying, and again lazily
looked at him--evidently wishing to get some more amusement out of him.
looked at me with vexation and jumped up, breaking off his remarks. I
looked at that aged, stern, motionless, almost lifeless face and moved
looked at the Rostovs from under his brows and said something, smiling,
looked at them how many Russians there were for each Frenchman and,
looked attentively at the carts in the yard and while going up to the
looked eagerly toward his eyes, waiting for the look for which she
looked excited and worried.
looked frightened.
looked inquiringly at Pierre and, as if Pierre's look had told him
looked like a man ashamed of what he was hearing, though with no
looked round and, meeting the count's eyes, nodded to him and smiled.
looked round at the Emperor Alexander to imply that what he was now
looked round to see where the smell came from. Next he thought of that
looked sad, and he had grown still stouter since Natasha last saw him.
looked smilingly down the room. A minute passed but no one had yet begun
looked straight before her. All that night she did not sleep or weep and
looked thin and her bosom undeveloped. But Helene seemed, as it were,
looked through a spyglass at the streams of his troops pouring out of
looked very thoughtful and tender. With his hands behind him he paced
looked with a scarcely perceptible and seemingly ironic smile at what
looked with vague horror and curiosity at these released lunatics and
looked worn--he too had evidently not slept all night. He glanced at
looked. Her eyes were dry and glistening, her lips compressed, her
looking about him uneasily, and an awkward pause followed.
looking and held out his hand to her. She pressed it.
looking at Pierre. "At the present time it is difficult to know the real
looking at Sonya, who also came in quite ready, with a fan in her hand.
looking at her and waiting. Nicholas saw that Denisov was refusing
looking at her!' No, it's impossible," she thought. "They must know
looking at his watch.
looking at something concealed under a cloth.
looking at something over the heads of the ladies. "He's handsome,
looking at the faces, some strange and some familiar, in the stalls. In
looking at the ground, he came on some sticky, trodden mud, stumbled,
looking at the prisoners who thronged past him.
looking at the puff from the gun that had sent the ball. His eyes
looking at the young couple, and heedless and unobservant as they seemed
looking at them, turned to an adjutant to ask him for a field glass.
looking at those driving past as if he pitied all who were not at that
looking carelessly about him.
looking deeper and deeper into Pierre's eyes. "And in their name and my
looking excited and nervous, her face flushed in patches, ran in to meet
looking for someone.
looking for. After all, one must be human, you know...."
looking glass, draping the folds of her velvet dress picturesquely. She
looking glass.
looking inquiringly at him and watching to see how he would behave with
looking like something between a cart, a cabriolet, and a caleche. A
looking not at Pierre but straight before him, and turning the leaves
looking now at the cavalry regiment that had met the convoy of wounded,
looking round at his audience as if to inquire whether anyone had
looking up pensively.
looking with a scared face at his comrade for help. The door, having let
looking with tender affection and pity at Mademoiselle Bourienne's
looking.
lookout for him, and when they caught sight of a figure in an overcoat
lookout with both'?" asked Pierre.
looks at a wall. Boris passed them twice and each time turned away. Berg
looks at the approaching dogs and sportsmen.
looks for a head. But we are always judging, 'that's not well--that's
looks so much older! It cannot be she. It merely reminds me of her."
looks which had followed him out from both sides, and the face of that
looks) and she had put on a maroon dress with a pale-blue scarf, the
looted.
looting and re-establish discipline.
lope farther to the left to the very place where they were standing.
lose anything..." Dolokhov was saying.
lose consciousness. When he came to himself the splintered portions of
loses.
losing confidence in its allies, suffering from shortness of supplies,
losing more than five thousand killed and wounded after Tarutino and
losing our own men and inhumanly slaughtering unfortunate wretches? What
losing strength every day and thought that a change of scene and the
loss merely to get rid of her. Marya Dmitrievna ordered almost the
loss of sixteen hundred rubles, but the necessity of going back on his
loss to Dolokhov. Here, in the regiment, all was clear and simple.
losses but kindling hatred of the foe. Napoleon advanced farther and we
losses. The general whose regiment had been inspected at Braunau was
lost and despite the fact that for an army to have to retire after
lost another third of its men. From in front and especially from the
lost fifty thousand sick or stragglers, that is a number equal to the
lost his head, and that it was probable that he had an understanding
lost nearly half its men from hunger and sickness. In the hospitals,
lost only a quarter of their men and still had their Guards intact,
lost sight of her, took the seat himself. Anatole sat down behind her.
lost. Dolokhov "killed," that is, beat, ten cards of Rostov's running.
lost...." And Prince Hippolyte began to tell his story in such Russian
lots to settle who should make up her set. At Rostov's suggestion it
loud rattle of the door handle struck painfully on her ears. Dunyasha,
louder than usual and that they turned him over oftener. She could not
louder voice.
louder.
loudest.
loudly, and bluntly as ever, and her whole bearing seemed a reproach
loudly, handing Kutuzov an envelope.
love again, though for no one have I such a feeling of friendship,
love and his promise to her. It was all dreadfully difficult and
love and pain, and he suddenly realized that she was right and that he
love as Sonya was speaking of. But Natasha had not yet felt anything
love for His creatures. Perhaps, I often think, she was too angelically
love for a woman, his father's death, and the French invasion which had
love has no aim but the happiness of those I love; so, Nicholas, I
love him all the more, but Nicholas now considered himself unworthy of
love him alone, him, him, with that face and those eyes, with his smile,
love much in vogue at that time).
love of one's neighbor and Christianity--and all this in the presence of
love people so much for the good they have done us, as for the good we
love someone dear to you with human love, but an enemy can only be loved
love such as filled her heart. While she sat in the carriage beside her
love with Nicholas, that there were no grounds for finding fault with
love with a man who would perhaps never love her, she comforted herself
love with."
love you, and I think I love you more than anyone else...."
love, and that she did.
love, love of one's neighbor, love of one's enemy, is worthier, sweeter,
love, or any of the joys of life, and expected peace only "yonder." She
love, such rapture, and such self-sacrifice, what do any of our quarrels
love, though less ecstatically, with their Tsar and the glory of the
love--stands between life and death. When during those first days he
love.
love. She was silent and sad and did not reply. Nicholas felt the
loved Natasha and when dying had left her to his friend. But the father
loved and thought of just the same as ever." When she heard this Sonya
loved face, a new life force took possession of her and compelled her to
loved for the first and only time in her life and felt that she was
loved for their beauty. But do I love my wife? I don't love her, but...
loved her only, and was to come one of these days and take her. She
loved him and respected him, and sympathize with you with all my heart."
loved more than himself. He kept telling himself that he would consider
loved no one but Prince Andrew and had never ceased to love him. She
loved that man. What has become of him? Is he alive?...
loved to hear and see how Prince Andrew laughed. He seldom laughed, but
lovely boy!"
lovers--began smiling, spreading out their arms, and bowing.
loving despot--the more cruel because he loved her and for that reason
loving one another; none of them capable of injuring another--and so
loving people without cause he discovered indubitable causes for loving
loving the countess and the whole Rostov family, but neither could she
loving--not only remained unchanged, but it sometimes seemed to Princess
lovingly suffered for mankind though He Himself was God. What had she to
low tones.
low voice and, as it seemed to Prince Andrew, with some embarrassment,
lower floor.
lower jaw.
lower one, and something like two distinct smiles played continually
lower part of it something quivered.
lowered the French eagle he was holding before the Preobrazhensk
luck!... Did you see the Emperor? Vive l'Empereur!... preur!--If
luck, one should make certain,' and I want to try."
luck. As soon as you left, it began and went on. Hullo there! Tea!"
luck."
lucrative posts in Petersburg.
lui, parce qu'il m'a manque parole." *
luminous eyes fixed on her nurse's wrinkled face (every line of which
luminous eyes gazing fixedly before her, not noticing that he had risen.
luminous eyes shone more brightly than usual from the tears of joy that
luminous tail aroused no feeling of fear. On the contrary he gazed
lump of flesh. Come along, Pierre!"
lunatic asylum or the gallows!"
lunatic asylum..." All night long such announcements were continually
lunch as he had promised. He was in very good spirits; the affair with
lunching with him and Boris.
lured one to itself. Pierre glanced up at the sky and the twinkling
luxurious drawing room, went to the balcony door, took hold of the
luxurious life of Petersburg, concerned only about phantoms and
luxurious study and sat down to the dinner prepared for him. Bilibin
luxury, and governmental and religious institutions. These forms were
luxury, the kind of life that can be changed at any moment, was no
lying alone in the hayfield. Now, seated on the slope of the trench, he
lying and replied through the closed door that she did not mean to go
lying beyond material forces, outside the material influences that act
lying down in the new sitting room with a vinegar compress on her head.
lying down.
lying in a corner on the benches beneath the icons, and two others--the
lying on his back propped up high, and his small bony hands with
lying on piles at the end opposite the entrance, to serve as a table. On
lying on the ground; they also met a crowd of soldiers some of whom were
lying on the wolf's back among the dogs, trying to seize her by the
lying, and obstinacy!"
lying--he alone could justify what had to be done.
lying.
m'etre reconnaissante de ce que j'explique a Pierre votre intimite avec
ma parole d'honneur!" *
machine or set it in proper motion, so Anna Pavlovna moved about her
machine to imagine that a shaving that has fallen into it by chance
machine, an impulse once given leads to the final result; and just as
madam!"
madam. God is my witness, I did not know you had honored us with a
maddened--even at those fleches themselves it was impossible to make out
made Pierre in his eyes a hero and a saint.
made a grimace, as if expecting something unpleasant.
made a half turn and went past it at a measured pace. The twenty-four
made a rush for the doors, and several persons with excited faces
made and exchanging remarks. The old count rose once more, glanced at a
made application for you to be received into our Order before the usual
made by Napoleon during the battle. But this was not and could not be
made by generals--as any one of us sitting over a map in his study may
made by the young lad.
made for crossing as by what took place at the bridges. When the bridges
made for him from some leather a French soldier had torn off a tea chest
made her a low bow when she met him in the corridor carrying hot water.
made him drink and dance at the gypsies', and more than one thousand
made him still angrier, for he was fully convinced, not by reasoning
made no kind of deduction from or application of them. He replied to
made out estimates at ten times their value for government stores that
made peace with Turkey and should not have been through with that war.
made preparations for the journey to Moscow.
made the sign of the cross, "I love her so much, and all of you, only
made use of every kind of mental device, except analogy, and passed too
made use of it.... "What have I done?" thought he. And he turned round
made with honey, and preserves made with sugar.
made, and Boris transferred into the regiment of Semenov Guards with the
made. Prince Andrew several times prompted Pierre's story of what he had
madman who did not know what he was doing."
magical, isn't it?"
magnanimity Bonaparte subsequently repaid by death.
magnanimity and justice, both to Tutolmin and to Yakovlev (whose chief
magnanimity of Prince Andrew who when he went abroad had given her her
magnanimous. She felt convinced of that. Thousands of dreams of a future
magnate was at first as much taken aback by this suggestion of marriage
magnificence of the spectacle. It was Boris Drubetskoy who was admitted.
maid of honor's hand to his lips, kissed it, and swung it to and fro as
maid of honor, Pierre Bezukhov, and the son of their district postmaster
maid's voice at the door.
maid, "bring the princess her gray dress, and you'll see, Mademoiselle
maid, was advancing to the spot where the general stood, but the French
maids could not say in how far Mademoiselle Bourienne's statement was
maids were holding her arms.
maids were turning up the hem and hurriedly biting off the ends of
maids, had given orders to harness and intended to start, but when the
maids.
maids.
maidservant ran into the hall and hurriedly said something, mentioning
main army was on the other side of Moscow or beyond it.
mainly because Denisov so delighted in her singing. She no longer sang
maintain his powerful position with Alexander, whose own character was
maintain the French troupe was costing the government as much as a whole
maintained the life of this original, peculiar, and unique people.
maintained, when men were taken into that region of death where
maintenance of the balance of power of Europe, and it would save the
majestic figure of his father, Count Bezukhov, with that gray mane of
majestic voice that was yet so simple! And as if in accord with
majestically entered the room. He was wearing his long coat with three
majesty and sacredness of the mystery that had been accomplished before
major skirted a bush, puffing and falling out of step; a soldier who had
major, and galloped aside. The horse's terror infected the men.
major-domo made a significant and stern gesture to them both to go away.
major.
majority of men regard as the greatest good in the world. Pierre had
make a remark, for the conversation interested him, but Anna Pavlovna,
make all the mess they can, because they have nothing in their German
make as successful a career of it as possible."
make happy plans for the future. She spoke little of Pierre, but when
make him laugh as he used to laugh. And his eyes--how I see those eyes!"
make his bow and leave, and only listened because he could not help
make me happy in a year, but you are free: our engagement shall remain a
make out distinctly what was in that tent. The pitiful groans from all
make out something of what he is saying. His head is clearer. Come in,
make them eat horseflesh!" And tears again dimmed his eyes.
make things easy for or reward anyone, merely because he felt inclined
make way!"
make your acquaintance, General!" he added, with a gesture of kingly
makes us see beauty. It is only Malvinas and women of that kind who are
making an effort to listen, but could not do so.
making demands on her, tearfully implored her to sacrifice herself
making his way out of the house through the brilliant suite when a
making humiliating or cruel allusions to Sonya.
making the Cossack a present, had him set free like a bird restored to
making their way from all sides out of Moscow, and balancing his bulky
malady it had been so agreeable to mention. Officially, at large
malevolence in their hearts.
malignantly at Marya Dmitrievna.
mallet in his hand. Let into the wall was a star-shaped light. At one
mallets, the doors opened before them. A bass voice (Pierre was still
malodorous mouth. Tears actually moistened his cheeks.
man and Natasha the thought occurred that should he recover their former
man and help him to worldly success. Under cover of obtaining help
man and woman.
man as if about to say something in reply, but changed his mind,
man at once began pulling off his boots. The other in the frieze gown
man back in his place and bring him water.
man be fully imbued with the thought that we must defeat these hirelings
man can understand it, but to conceive it and enjoin it was possible
man convinced of the futility of being cunning with so keen-sighted
man could embrace, and evidently long ago some of its branches had been
man feels he is guilty, but cannot change himself. My boy is growing up
man had been laid in a stately pose in keeping with the ceremony just
man had left the room. "We have heard of your prowess. But that's not
man he met.
man in a frieze coat dragging burning beams into another yard across the
man in a white hat were seen coming toward the officers.
man in the fur-lined coat and pointing to the bottom step of the porch.
man is powerless--to the condition I am in," said he to himself in
man less and go on exchanging, I shall certainly lose, and therefore
man never submits to the deductions of these experiments and arguments.
man nodded to Dolgorukov as to an intimate friend and stared at Prince
man nor a father! You, honored sir, are a noble man," she went on,
man of clerical appearance with a tuft of gray hair at the back of his
man of her own class, she glanced at him with her deep radiant look and
man of middle height, and in a white uniform, who stood by a window
man of the ages past or future."
man once for all and remain true to him forever? That is what I consider
man oppressed by business, weary and suffering, who yet would not, for
man ought to have known it for himself.
man rose, frowned, shrugged his shoulders, and evidently trying to
man she wished to attract.
man stopped and began smiling and bowing to all sides. Then other men
man to consider the nature of the danger and the means of escaping it;
man to him. He wished to talk to him himself. Several adjutants galloped
man was more to her than Nastasya Ivanovna, the buffoon. Something stood
man who had succeeded to the post when Dron died and who was accused of
man who has at length begun to attain a long-desired happiness. As soon
man who has been suffering innocently and in vain? A paper has come from
man who was making him angry. But he did forget himself once or twice
man whose authority would be willingly recognized, and Bennigsen is the
man with a broad, light-brown beard and black eyes. The fifth was a
man with a plump, clean-shaven chin, a pleasant firm mouth, and white
man with hair cut straight over his forehead, Ukrainian fashion, a
man's consciousness of freedom is to be reconciled with the law of
man's freedom? That is a question for theology.
man's freewill, a scientific enunciation of those laws is impossible,
man's high, stout, uncovered chest and powerful shoulders, raised by
man's life in which the union of these two contradictions has already
man's simple-minded eagerness, was explaining his pet theory. Both were
man's strength was failing him. Several times his head dropped low as if
man, "say so, my dear sir." And he suddenly smiled, in an unexpected and
man, adoring him sincerely and disinterestedly, as Rostov had done
man, be for her? In her thoughts of marriage Princess Mary dreamed of
man, but those with whom he happened to be. He loved his dog, his
man, had not the five rubles that would make him happy.
man, he felt uneasy. He looked round at the captive drummer boy and felt
man, like an officer--comes in and sits down to table with her."
man, of medium height, with firm, clearcut features. Everything about
man, positively blind? A fine idea to have a blind general! He can't see
man, shaking his powdered head as much as the tail, which Tikhon was
man, with gray bushy eyebrows overhanging bright eyes of an indefinite
man--Napoleon--to say that Russia remained a power because Napoleon
man--seem less guilty, that is, less free and more subject to the law of
man--the other evidently a private or an orderly, sunburned, short, and
man.
man. Had Speranski sprung from the same class as himself and possessed
man. He was being conveyed in a caleche with a raised hood, and was
man. I used to meet him at Mary Antonovna's," said the countess in an
man. This was the celebrated Petersburg doctor, Lorrain.
man."
man." Again he pressed the hand of the latter with an expression of
man... Simplicity is submission to God. Suffering is necessary... the
man; by his acquaintances as a handsome lieutenant of hussars, a good
man? On such matters I am only severe with myself. I understand such
manage very well without a doctor."
managed from my first promotion." (Berg measured his life not by years
managed to escape.
managed to get away from it. Your excellency, I venture to suggest..."
managed to sit down in a particular chair before anyone else and
management, disliked factories, the raising of expensive products,
mane--which, though he saw other faces as well, he had not lost sight of
manes. They tried to make their way forward to the opposite bank and,
maneuvers or plans, again began running along the beaten track, neither
maneuvers suggested for tomorrow. It was proposed to make a flank march
maneuvers, and his profound plans which guided the army, as well as the
maneuvers, or encounters with the perishing enemy. Dokhturov went to
manifessto zat he cannot fiew wiz indifference ze danger vreatening
manipulates lifeless objects, but everything results from innumerable
manly and yet childlike.... No, I had better not think of him; not think
manly thing to do. When the carriages had all passed in, the crowd,
manly," continued the countess, taking her daughter's hand.
manly-looking, but what amazed and estranged Pierre till he got used
manner agreeable to yourself, and in so far as circumstances allowed, I
manner and with an obvious effort to remember.
manner he wore in drawing rooms, but with the animated face with which
manner in which she spoke to other men, "the vicomte has been telling us
manner peculiar to herself.
manner were so serious, though she was still holding the ends of
manner, orders will be given in accordance with the enemy's movements,
manner, she reminded one of a pretty, half-grown kitten which promises
manner.
manner.
manner. If he ever thought of Helene, it was just of her beauty and her
manner. Nesvitski laughed and nudged the others to make them look at the
manner. What a good fellow Uncle is! Don't you think so?... Well, and
manner: they were all evidently firmly convinced of Pierre's noble
manners, who evidently considered himself a celebrity but out of
manservant to the Vozdvizhenka to ascertain whether he had come. He had
mantle on her arm.
mantle, and stretched his long legs forward in French fashion. This man
manuscript--his "Remarks" as he termed it--which was to be transmitted
many a man will be missing tomorrow!" he remarked.
many left alive. Go that way, to that village, all the commanders are
many left of us old friends! That's why I so value your friendship."
many men is expressed by the actions of any one historic personage, is
many months she felt calm and not oppressed by the thought of the life
many more of you to come?"
many officers and generals in full parade uniform, whom he had to pass.
many officers like him were always coming there and that everybody was
many people there, but nearly all strangers to Natasha. Count Rostov was
many people, some one of the opinions or wishes expressed is sure to be
many pretty girls and the Rostov girls were among the prettiest. They
many relatives in Moscow! So you are Boris? Of course. Well, now we
many secondary personages accompanying the army because their principals
many spiritual doubts and joys.
many that there'd have been a heap of them."
many wives or husbands may perhaps obtain much pleasure, but in that
many wrinkles on his large features, to Rostov who was crimson with
many young men to his parents' house. Vera was a handsome girl of
many, like himself, had entered that life and that Club temporarily,
map, but at Prince Andrew's face.
marauding. At Smolensk too he judged correctly that the French might
march there and there," and so on; and on paper, all these columns
march, and then in the same way it was impossible not to retreat another
march, rode to his father's estate where he had been born and spent his
march, to the Tula road beyond the Pakhra, the Russian commanders
march. Cossacks, foot and horse soldiers, wagons, caissons, and cannon
marched gaily, as they always do when going into action, especially to
marched, followed only by their escort and the vehicles and wagons
marching along both.
marching kit, and on his cold face appeared that same it which Pierre
marching with particular grace and boldness in time to the song and
mare he rode, his hand in a white glove gathered up the reins, and he
market place, where there had been some rather heavy firing before the
market stalls, granaries--for the most part still stocked with
marking off each hundred with a chalk line on the gate.
marriage between their children and had received a favorable answer
marriage but the pleasure married people get from one another, that is,
marriage for you. It is neither more nor less than with Prince Vasili's
marriage was Helene's mother, Princess Kuragina. She was continually
marriage, Natasha's love for his best friend, her betrayal of him, and
marriage--when the marriageable daughters and their mothers had nothing
marriage. He recalled her former words and looks and the words and looks
marriageable daughters, and of the young ladies themselves, toward
married during the previous winter, and being pregnant did not go to
married secretly.
married to an heiress occupied the old countess' mind more and more. She
married, la petite est gentille." *
married, they met as good friends of long standing.
married.
married. She said she could lie down in her grave peacefully if that
married. What about you? That's what I want to know."
married? And also from my husband's friend Bolkonski, Prince Andrew
marry an heiress and choosing the dowerless Sonya. On this occasion, he
marry her would be dishonorable. Boris made up his mind to avoid meeting
marry his daughter. Anatole had very soon abandoned his wife and, for a
marry the prince"--he meant the younger man--and he crooked one finger,
marrying a maiden had its effect on him too. Had Helene herself shown
marrying him to Prince Andrew's sister.
marrying some rich woman, which was suggested to him by his female
marsh. The French were evidently firing and shouting at him.
marshal had been found in his possession.
marshal of the court, Count Tolstoy.
marshal's great weakness and failing health.
marshal. An hour later a squad of soldiers arrived and Pierre with
marshal; he pressed the hands of some and nodded to others. His adjutant
marshals, kept galloping up to Napoleon with reports of the progress
marshals, nor was there any need of that special and supreme quality
marshals, sitting on a sofa by the fire! That is true, but still why
marshals. His eye fell on Pierre's large and striking figure, and in
martial swagger in their clothes, and a touch of the gaiety and spirit
martial touch appropriate to a campaign. He wore a long coat and like
martyrdom as only Germans are, because only Germans are self-confident
martyrlike expression it so often wore, as she submitted herself to
mass of dogs, and then her forepaws were on the edge of the gully. She
mass. Looking down over the rails Prince Nesvitski saw the rapid, noisy
masses of Russian troops. At the bend of the Danube, vessels, an island,
masses of soldiers, or green ammunition chests and ordnance. And all
masses of the enemy came into view through the smoke, no one paid any
masses of troops--ours and the enemy's. The ground to the right--along
masses of well-ordered troops. But contrary to what had always happened
masses.
master and yet regretful of her cloak.
master to teach him Russian. It is becoming dangerous to speak French in
master's house. Come in," said Mavra Kuzminichna. "Is he very ill?" she
master's thoughts. He guessed that the question referred to Prince
master, "The count has come!" and Denisov, who had been asleep on his
master--may the kingdom of heaven be his--has remained here, but he is
master. The masters, both the old prince and the young, and the steward
master... the peasants' affairs first and then his own. Of course he was
mastered him as at something strange, apart from and independent of
match but a splendid, noble fellow... he is my friend..."
match--blushed like a girl.
match... and Sonya...?" And on taking leave of the governor's wife,
matchmaking chronicles of Moscow now speak of me as the future Countess
mathematically clear, as it is that if when playing draughts I have one
mathematics from her father, and when the old prince was at home went
mats, and was speaking to a pale young officer who lay inside.
matted on the forehead, but his face, though puffy and yellow, expressed
matter acquired a large sum of money which was at that moment in his
matter in hand: I left him alone and began with nurse's help to get the
matter plainly and simply, and we will not abandon that right.
matter the conditions and circumstances of which are unknown and cannot
matter to the commander in chief.
matter what he thought about, he always returned to these same questions
matter whether it is St. Nicholas or St. Blasius? You see it's burned
matter with him and remembered being wounded and how was when he asked
matter! Abroad no one will know anything about it. Isn't that so? And
matter, and to that I reply: 'You are my best friend, as you know,
matter, he only uttered some incoherent oaths and threats in a hoarse,
matter, she felt herself all the time in an awkward position. And when
matter--something independent of cleverness and knowledge. Prince
matter-of-fact man which showed him what he ought to do.
matter.
matters for which his mother had called him home. To throw off this
matters in hand, their whole property would be sold by auction and they
matters so that where there is a wealthy heiress there he is too. I
matters unrelated to his past interests, and he seized on these the more
matters very satisfactorily. Boris, during the campaign, had made the
matters without looking at the Russian general.
matters, social interests and the fair sex occupied no small part of his
matters. Listening to Bennigsen and the generals criticizing the
matters. No jokes, or laughter, or smiles even, were seen among all
matters. To Pierre's timid look of inquiry after reading the letter she
mature and culminate, to lift him out of that spellbound, petty sphere
maximum. Kutuzov saw this and merely sighed and shrugged his shoulders.
may be my only chance of seeing the Emperor. It won't be long now before
may be, re-establish public confidence, the source of the welfare of
may belong to anyone--to you too," said her glance. And at that moment
may end badly."
may take back to my poor boy."
may, we shall win!"
may--then out of all the continually expressed wishes of different
may?"
me about yourself."
me all about it, and I will help you in everything." Pierre had
me alone with him!"
me alone! I hate you!"
me and I shall always be your most devoted slave-slafe with an f, as
me as an incendiary."
me away or say that you knew what I was reporting, but then I shouldn't
me from returning to the country. But now, at the commencement of the
me from the pleasure of smashing your head with this!" said Pierre,
me luck!"
me only the day before yesterday not to forget Boris. But he had no
me quarrel with him, but you see I need neither her nor you!"
me satisfaction..."
me say 'Je vous aime'?" On the contrary, he now repeated in imagination
me that you would not abandon Moscow without another battle; all this
me the honor of calling on me on Wednesday," he added, "I will, after
me to a building to enter which we had to pass along a narrow plank.
me to give this refusal."
me to her so strangely only for me to die?... Is it possible that the
me to her, take me to her.' It's the real truth I'm telling you, I saw
me to inquire into the position of affairs," he added.
me to sacrifice my feelings and my honor for the sake of money?" he
me to take me there."
me too? Who are these men?" thought Rostov, scarcely believing his eyes.
me what forces are being collected against him! While you and I never
me! What will become of us? I am the wife of the doctor of the Seventh
me!" Rostov whispered.
me!" prayed Natasha, with impatient emotion in her heart, not crossing
me, 'I am sorry I can do so little for you, dear Princess. I am at
me, Pierre. I shall not forget your interests."
me, it hurts. I'm old and weak and this is what you wanted. Well then,
me, my dear boy, there is nothing stronger than those two: patience and
me, now! I've got no strength left," he added, with sudden resolution
me, the commander in chief, than to him."
me," and he offered his cheek.
me," cried Denisov who, unable to keep still on one spot, kept turning
me--everyone must know it: Pierre, and that young girl who wanted to
me. 'Everyone fears a bear,' he says, 'but when you see one your fear's
me. And tears came into my eyes, and I was glad he noticed this. But he
me. It seemed to me that his object in entering the Brotherhood was
me. Really I have some," Rostov repeated.
me. They say Semenova acts marvelously. Count Pierre never used to
me. Yet I was once at home, strong, happy, and loved." He sighed and,
me."
me."
me... I confess it. For some reason you wish to deprive me of our former
me..."
me: it hurts the same whichever finger gets bitten. But if Platon hadn't
me; but he did not reply, gave me a kind look, and then we suddenly
me?"
me?" She concluded from his tone that he was vexed with her and wished
me?" he said to God. "I know Thou art great, and that it is a sin to ask
me?" thought he. He had the unfortunate capacity many men, especially
me?..."
meadow beside an oatfield, with head bowed and arms behind his back.
meadow nor the Demkin hill, and heaven only knows what it is! It is
meadows, troops, woods, the smoke of campfires, villages, mounds, and
meaning but must keep them. The second pair of man's gloves he was
meaning of all Pierre's mental travail.
meaning of all he had seen and thought in the dream had been destroyed.
meaning of all... one must harness... my wife is getting married... One
meaning of that word. It is only to prevent some Pugachev or other from
meaning of the feminine whispering behind the door, and a desire to
meaning of true civilization, I will make generations of boyars remember
meaning of what was happening but merely wanted to do something himself
meaning what Pierre himself had in mind, namely: "If you want to eat
meaning, for this force is understood by them all not only differently
meaning. One can cut off a slice of bread, but not an army. To cut
meaningless words that happened to enter his head.
meaningless, at any rate Rostopchin made no reply and hastily left him.
meaningless.
meaninglessly, breathless with irrational animal fury and the need to
means being Napoleon's guest. Not only did I never see him but I heard
means of arousing him.
means of his broadsheets and posters, written in a coarse tone which the
means that we have deserved it, it's not for us to judge. If the Emperor
means to rest after a ceremony. He drew his left foot out of the stirrup
meant her little son.) "Oh, it's time to go to him.... The milk's
meant it seriously. It makes it as if you were marrying her because you
meant not only a reward but an important step toward promotion.
meant that of the peoples occupying a small northwesterly portion of a
meant to retire and lure the enemy into the depths of the country. Our
meanwhile Kutuzov sent his adjutants back to hasten to the utmost the
meanwhile had pounced on.
measured tones of a man who intends to tell a long story, "that our name
measures--the removal of injunctions, petitions, permits, and so
mechanically to sing: "Save from calamity Thy servants, O Mother of
meddle in business affairs. But once the countess called her son and
medicine when it can't cure a cold! Corvisart gave me these lozenges but
medicine--not a disease of the lungs, liver, skin, heart, nerves, and
medicines to drink, he recovered.
meditatively and rapidly:
meekly downcast eyes.
meekly followed her.
meekness, love, and self-sacrifice--all this now shone in those radiant
meet her with a look of emotion. This was the countess. She embraced
meet me and give me an order as he would to any other officer; he'll
meeting arrives. Not daring to look round and without looking round, he
meeting immediately struck Rostov as a romantic event. "A helpless girl
meeting me in Moscow after our duel, said he hoped I was enjoying
meeting was a full one. After the usual ceremonies Pierre rose and began
meeting, they had kissed each other, but today they felt it could not
meeting. Parties were formed, some accusing Pierre of Illuminism, others
melancholy enjoyment imagined his own destruction and heroic endurance.
melancholy she showed at the mention of her most august Majesty the
melancholy upon them, planned the arrangements of a splendid house in
melancholy with Mademoiselle Karagina," said Pierre.
melodramatically gentle expression and he held out his hand.
melody that unexpectedly came to his mind seemed to him particularly
melting away.
member of the Hofkriegsrath mildly and attentively.
members and guests jostling one another and trying to get a good look at
members of our lodge (a question to which I could not reply) and that
members of the committee were aware of the Emperor's dislike of Kutuzov,
members of the company, and asked himself each time, "What is she
members, of whom half were as well able to pay as himself, Pierre
memorable an impression on him. In the forest the harness bells sounded
memorable week, there had been the extraordinary autumn weather that
memories of old age, but poetic, youthful ones--those impressions of
memories which, he knew not why, suddenly arose in his mind. While
memories, interpretations, and happy meditations for Pierre. "'I shall
memory from that realm of pure and loving childhood presented itself to
memory of the distant past. He felt himself not only free from social
memory of the easy victory at Tarutino, urged Kutuzov to carry out
memory, and he told everybody that his son had been killed. He tried not
memory, and which he narrated with rapid gestures and glowing face, was
memory, not merely as something past but as something present.
men I held the enemy at bay for thirty-five hours and beat him; but he
men and money, a necessity that as soon as the promises had been made
men as the old count and his worthy son," said she. Of the behavior of
men as well as bad," said he, and still speaking, he turned on his knees
men at Borodino was not due to Napoleon's will, though he ordered the
men being free and equal. This caused people all over France to begin
men belonged was as clearly defined in his mind as the category of
men from various sides turned with surprise to see what this strange and
men had begun firing. They were still firing, not at the cavalry which
men nearest to him," thought he, "the rest could not have seen how or
men nor fodder for the horses had been issued. As no transports could
men of firmness and virtue bound together by unity of conviction--aiming
men of his squadron who, unknown to him, had appropriated five barrels
men pressed close to the wall to let Pierre and Anna Mikhaylovna pass
men sat together.
men should be in their greatcoats and in marching order, and that the
men should continue to march at ease, and he and all his suite showed
men so painstakingly acquire and guard--if it has any worth has so only
men standing before him, wearing aprons like the Rhetor's and holding
men such as I had never seen before, that we had held the French for
men take their first steps on life's road, each saw immense changes in
men up.
men was to attack the French from different sides. The old prince did
men was training a trotter of his own for a race. He knew a lady on one
men who commit these crimes, especially their leader, assure themselves
men who did not wish to commit them, it was as if the mainspring of
men who, she fancied, had suddenly learned to appreciate her worth.
men with broad, self-confident faces, fat fingers, and resolute gestures
men with yellow shakos, dark-green jackets braided with cord, and blue
men wrote some books at that time. At the end of the eighteenth century
men! Enough! Cease... bethink yourselves! What are you doing?"
men's end the voices sounded louder and louder, especially that of the
men's epaulets; servants in scarlet liveries moved round the table, the
men's moral responsibilities from their path.
men's opinions and their lives, and between one man and another, pleased
men's will.
men, Kutuzov--having taken into consideration the Cossack's report, a
men, among them Boris, entered more deeply into Julie's melancholy, and
men, by a soldier discharging a musket close to my ear as one of them
men, one of whom he knew. After greeting Pierre they continued their
men, seemed so immeasurably above him, an insignificant officer of the
men, who here, as in Vienna, formed a special set which Bilibin, their
men--the best in the world and led by the best general--could be
men--who was saying it of her. "There is everything, everything in her,"
men.
men. And the light shineth in darkness; and the darkness comprehended it
men. Bagration was the best, Napoleon himself admitted that. And of
men. Disregarding Napoleon they rushed after the plunder and Napoleon
men. It is not difficult to capture a fortress but it is difficult to
men. On the other hand, even if we admitted that words could be the
menace than to strike the running animal on the head.
mental effort has been applied in this direction by historians as has
mental image of his future activity in this direction rose in his mind.
mental state. The unaccustomed coarse food, the vodka he drank during
mentally--remained.
mention it, Monsieur Kiril. The other day if it had not been for you
mention the estate and home of my birth--my father, who died of grief. I
mention this, because I like you."
mention, and which you think is the result of your own mental efforts,
mentioned by name the greatest dignitaries of the day.
mentioned each one's name and then left them.
mentioned he had said absent-mindedly: "Yes, she's good looking," he had
mentioned that Prince Andrew was among the wounded traveling with them;
mentioned their age. "If you marry it will be a different thing," she
mentioned. But Princess Mary experienced a painful rather than a joyful
mentioned. Moreover, toward evening, as if everything conspired to make
mentioning. But in the secret depths of her soul the question whether
merchant free and give him a compensation that had been awarded. The
merchant-class--les etats generaux (States-General)--evoked in him
merchants, one of whom Pierre knew, a fat otkupshchik. The other was
merciful...."
mercy on us and save us!" he concluded, then bowed to the ground, got
mere amusement."
mere" playing of course an important part in the story.
merely as good-looking as before but even far more attractive. She
merely for propriety's sake in the list of the so-called heroes of
merely indifferent to them but regarded them with hostility. She heard
merely looked in front of him without straining his eyes.
merely lying low, the hunter did not know. Suddenly the beast was heard
merely owners of serfs whom we are willing to devote to his service,
merely to avoid responsibility or to please the Emperor, would declare
merely to be intimate and in favor with members of our lodge. Apart
merely unthinkable to fight for ten hours and secure an indecisive
merged in her memory with what followed.)
merriest, and most magnanimous of cranks, a heedless, genial nobleman of
merrily and prettily as ever.
merrily than on the previous night. Denisov celebrated his promotion to
merrily to everyone at once, sat down and gaily arranged herself in her
merrily, and inquisitively at him. And Prince Andrew, crossing his
merriment. But beneath the slope, by the cart with the wounded near the
merry faces. Pelageya Danilovna began to recognize the mummers, admired
message to Kutuzov, perhaps even to the sovereign himself. The morning
messenger was Michaud, a Frenchman who did not know Russian, but who was
met by recognizing a divinity which subjected the nations to the will of
met him at the first door and, expressing their delight at seeing such a
met in private houses in intimate circles, and the Moscovites who took
met once before for a short time at his wedding, were in each other's
met that evening.
met the Rostovs.
met the regiment announced that all the huts were full of sick and dead
met, she fell on his breast, sobbing. She could not lift her face, but
met. Involuntarily he noticed a Georgian or Armenian family
metallic roar, and a whistling grenade flew above the heads of our
metallic sound of the bells reverberated high above and the hot rays of
metaphysics.
method of enlightenment. Our Order imitates the ancient societies that
methode) as far as possible retaining troops in reserve.
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
methods had already been employed, yet not only was there no victory,
methods that he had better leave Genoa alone?" retorted Prince Andrew in
mi l'ha dato. Guai a chi la tocchi!'"
middle horse, sank in the snow, which was dry and glittered like sugar,
middle of a small room containing baggage. Another man--Timokhin--was
middle of his talk and gazing intently with his laughing, kindly eyes.
middle of the drawing room on the first chair he had come across,
middle of the hall and choosing the place where the resonance was best,
middle of which soldiers were watering their lean horses at the pump
middle, a cry was heard, then Princess Mary's heavy tread and the sound
midnight she went to Natasha's room fingering the key in her pocket.
midnight the voices began to subside, a cock crowed, the full moon began
midnight, after he had left the countess' apartments, he was sitting
midnight. Prince Andrew went out.
midst of a most complex play of intrigues, worries, contingencies,
midst of the momentary silence that ensued, "Count! One God is above us
midway, and the same increasing rapidity as the goal is approached.
midwife.
midwinter was the count at last handed a letter addressed in his son's
might appear. "I am so glad you should get to know one another... very
might be he did not care, but it gave him great pleasure to prepare a
might be killed like the three sons of one of her acquaintances, struck
might be recognized.
might be some caprice of a sick and half-crazy man, or it might relate
might be the kindest, bravest, most wonderful, most splendid man in the
might break through his center, he himself might be killed by a stray
might call for his rapidity of perception and decision.
might cease and the sky clear, but after a short break it began raining
might dispense with permission from his dotard father. For a moment he
might easily succeed to the post; how popular he was with everyone in
might find in the Russian Empire by sticking a pin into the map at
might go to the Melyukovs', Sonya, generally so timid and shy, more
might happen, only not that.
might have been funny, but it lacked just that something which is the
might have been more decisive had the commander in chief not been so
might have lost half his army but could not have taken Smolensk. Our
might have saved Russia, and consequently the valet who omitted to bring
might help her daughter more than medicines and, though not without
might help her.
might hope for help from his fellows and the definite place he held
might marry whom he pleased, but that neither she nor his father would
might mean, but thanks to this letter Nicholas suddenly became almost as
might say something about him. "There she is again! As if it were on
might take it amiss that the mistress was being detained. Dron was of
might think that I... I understand, quite understand. I could not have
might, and a passionate attraction to him who was the cause of this
might, and then kissed him.
might, feeling that he would like to injure himself by that shout, if
migrate. He learned from domestic serfs loyal to him that the peasant
migrations of peoples, the foundations on which history had been built
mild solemnity which has so elevating and soothing an effect on the
mild, sympathetic face which he had rarely shown, and which therefore
mildness of his features, was all the greater. Rostov was happy in the
mildness.... And the feeling of enthusiasm and love for his sovereign
mile and a half away, but had suddenly and unexpectedly appeared just in
mile and a half from the house.)
miles and have duties to attend to and no time to wait. Announce me.'
miles away from the French. At Grunth also some apprehension and alarm
miles from Bogucharovo to where the road was occupied by our troops. At
miles, and reining in his horse he sighed restfully and looked round
military action depends not on them, but on the man in the ranks who
military and civil authorities, and your tears will soon cease to flow!
military code, which he and the others knew in the regiment, there was
military exploits, as he himself had done when recounting them; besides
military genius shown by his marshals.
military group of the east, (2) that they should abandon all established
military matters.
military or not, that it was here the French should attack. It would
military rank--corporals and noncommissioned officers of whom there are
military service has consisted and will consist in this compulsory and
military service, though he knew that sooner or later he would have to
militia officer, "you won't catch me. Speak of the sun and you see its
militia uniforms, wept for Russia and its ancient capital and talked of
militia. For the Minister is leading these visitors after him to Moscow
militiamen.
milk-white sea. Nothing was visible in the valley to the left into which
millions in Moscow. Is that true?"
millions in hand might smile at a poor fellow who told him that he, poor
millions of human beings who grew up in the same way. As twenty
millions of money are paid him.
millions of other men assumes an historic significance. The higher a man
mind at that time was: who was it that had really sentenced him to
mind gave him the most malevolent and bitter replies. I recollected
mind her! And all will come right and she won't say anything to Mamma.
mind taking a parcel for someone?--he replied: "Yes, perhaps," or, "I
mind that I was already tired of it all, and that we must all die.
mind to ask him a question about the roads, the traveler had closed his
mind was so full of the question why she alone was granted so little
mind's eye the estate as a whole and not any particular part of it. The
mind, and now that they did, they did not act on him with nearly their
mind. This day the horrible appearance of the battlefield overcame
mind: the idea occurred to her of jumping onto the edge of the box and
mind? Kiss me," said Sonya.
mindful of his uprightness and meekness, reward him according to his
minds, and they realized that they were both children of humanity and
minds, by means handed on to us by tradition from those who have striven
mine is yours," she concluded, scanning the faces before her.
mine when I married and was so deep in debt that I was threatened with
mine. I have written to my poor mother," said the smiling Mademoiselle
mingle. He mentally appointed a governor, one who would win the
mingled into the same sweet and solemn hymn. "Oh, this is delightful!
mingled shame and vexation.
miniature portrait of her son on the lid of a snuffbox, while the tears
minimum of free will. If we examine a man little dependent on external
minister seated at a large table reading some papers and making pencil
ministers, parliaments, or newspapers be imagined? Is there any
minute to speak to Chernyshev.
minute," said the resolute Dunyasha taking a needle that was stuck on
minute.
minutely how in its opinion power should be constituted and what
minuteness.
minutes before the troops had passed the Emperors. Not only would it
minutes later crowds of wounded men and stretcher-bearers came back from
minutes later the eldest sister came out with a pale hard face, again
minutest details himself. Princess Mary had ceased taking lessons in
mirror her eyes full of tears and her mouth quivering, ready to burst
mirth as radiated from Anisya Fedorovna's whole being. Anisya Fedorovna
mirth were in their hearts and so everything that happened was a cause
misdirected will, and that the very ideas of 1789 were arrested in their
miserable man who stood before him, but the task he had begun had to be
miserable wretches who had done much evil for which they had now to
misery.
misery. A man offended you and you shot him, and you say you do not know
misfortune has driven from the city, and you scattered tillers of
misfortune make my Russians lose heart?... Never!"
misfortune! Call it what you please, I know that what happened to you in
misfortune." He seemed to emphasize the last word, as if to say--"Yes,
misfortune?... But perhaps she really has already refused Bolkonski--she
misfortunes with a certain artificiality, but her brother was too near
misleading us all the week and now that he's brought us to this pass
mismanaged his wife's property and was to blame toward his children,
miss any chance to do something really heroic. He was highly delighted
missed him. His one desire was to know what was happening and at any
missed several chances of forcing an engagement. In August he was at
missed them. They have gone to your estate near Moscow."
misshapen, and grim as ever.
mission; the abundance of provisions at Tarutino; the reports coming in
misspelled, and without punctuation: "Unsoundly constructed because
missy! Ooh!" lamented Aniska, who at the sight of the fire felt that she
mist and taking it for a tree can again take it for a tree after he has
mist of damp and smoke and a strange acid smell of saltpeter and blood.
mist!"
mist, and here and there the roofs of huts in Borodino as well as dense
mistake and that Anatole meant to flirt with Mademoiselle Bourienne,
mistake in speaking about the distribution of the grain she wished to
mistake to which he pays attention, because his opponent took advantage
mistake, and that in his perception whatever he did was right, not
mistake. Marry when you are old and good for nothing--or all that is
mistaken if you reckon me or my mother among such people. We are very
mistaken in his identification of the different wards of Moscow.
mistaken," said the stranger in a deliberate and loud voice.
mistaken. Yes, at once, that very instant, her fate would be decided.
mistakes and that none of his moves were perfect. He only notices the
mistakes even at the cost of diminishing the glory due to the Russian
mistakes in speaking French. With her he behaved with special care and
mistakes of the diplomatists, and so on.
mistakes, he is drawn into a conspiracy that aims at seizing power and
mistakes, on craft, or on the weakness of a diplomatist, a ruler, or a
mistress--entered the room inaudibly but hurriedly and with a beaming
mistresses and such and such ministers and he ruled France badly. His
misunderstandings and did not now feel she had a right to ask him for
misunderstandings that occurred between us and should wish you not to
misunderstandings they are caused by that worthless woman, who is not
misunderstandings were at an end; that availing herself of the
mixed feeling of estrangement and tenderness pressed her lips to his
moaned piteously and, exchanging looks, they set him down again.
moaning of the adjutant's? Yes, he was altogether like that. In her
moaning sounded terrible in the darkness of the autumn night. He had
mock me so... and now!" He was in a state of physical suffering as if
mode of government is determined by certain geographical and economic
moderate and amicable tone in which the French Emperor spoke, Balashev
moderately and after dinner copied out some passages for the Brothers.
modern history, like a deaf man, answers questions no one has asked.
modern science of strategics, had been handed to Kutuzov when he was in
modest little Dokhturov whom no one had described to us as drawing up
modesty, and only desired and insisted that their adored sovereign
moisture was descending from above. Near by, the campfires were dimly
moment I could make only one movement, and whatever movement I made
moment and because many of the adjutants did not go to the actual place
moment at the ambulance station when he had seen Kuragin, he could not
moment at the ambulance station when, at the sight of the sufferings of
moment consider what she should do), but all this had long been familiar
moment fearful screams reached them from the huge crowd on the Moskva
moment had arrived. With the air of a practical Petersburg lady she now,
moment he entered because on that face whose eyes had always shone with
moment he entered. She did not smile or nod, but only gazed fixedly at
moment he was clearly thinking of nothing but how dashing a fellow he
moment his kindly eyes grew moist with tears of joy and enthusiasm. The
moment in which the first movement was made is irrevocable, and at that
moment jealous of her past, then reproaching himself for that feeling.
moment later he heard a cry from the wooded ravine that a fox had been
moment marching with the company. The hussar cornet of Kutuzov's suite
moment of making the effort to lift those legs up and turn over on the
moment of meeting had been so beatific that his present joy seemed
moment of the present in which alone I am conscious of myself as living,
moment people would be too busy to refuse him. A fourth while seemingly
moment several voices began speaking together.
moment the Emperor may see them.... But no, these must be only a handful
moment the French who were attacking, suddenly and without any apparent
moment these men might have been seized with horror at what they were
moment when the first report was heard a fourth was seen. Then two
moment, and, evidently understanding what Rostov hinted at, seized his
moment, sat beside him: the rest, crowding round him, watched every
moment.
moment. He made thousands of different conjectures as to where and
moment. Moreover, just as Pierre was speaking a sharp rattle of drums
moment.)
moment?" thought Princess Mary. "And that caused his sister to refuse my
moments of antagonism. Occasionally, and it was always just after they
moments of humility; and after living some time in Moscow he no longer
moments, he strode back to Michaud and pressed his arm below the elbow
moments: but his words sounded so weak that he felt ashamed of himself.
mon cousin, seem to consider me a perfect fool," said the princess with
monarch.
monarch. 'Boyars,' I will say to them, 'I do not desire war, I desire
monastery), Prince Andrew, who was rather late, found the friendly
money for food; the man said an officer had once given him a thrashing
money for? As if that money could add a hair's breadth to happiness or
money in hand--he would turn up of a morning quite sober and with a deep
money nor the time, like Prince Galitsyn, to engage a master to teach me
money prepared for use in Russia should be delivered as quickly as
money relations with his father, and nothing to recall that terrible
money under the guise of loans.
money," and he threw the purse to him and ran out of the inn.
money--I consider that dishonorable--but a wife should bring her
money. Pierre recalled how Helene had smilingly expressed disapproval of
money. They wanted to introduce him to me, but I quite declined: I have
monk he received and had a long talk with."
monogram were displayed, and the Polish ladies, welcoming him, waved
month and without fighting a battle had dwindled to half their number,
month of arduous melancholy service to Julie, and of seeing all the
month, reviewing troops and holding maneuvers. Nothing was ready for the
months she felt that she did not love him she would have full right to
months, there was nothing to think out or decide, you had only to do
months, where they were every moment fighting death from hunger and
months.
months. Besides that, four times a year, on the name days and birthdays
monument from Moscow which he intended to erect in his own garden to his
monuments and tradition of that period.
mood in which everything seems possible and everything succeeds. He sat
mood of courting Mary Hendrikhovna. She, seeing herself surrounded by
mood. All alike were taciturn and morose. Talk was rarely heard in the
moonlight through the frosty windowpanes.
moonlight, but as soon as they were past the fence, the snowy plain
moonlight--the horses began to tug at the reins of their own accord and
moral support, and the same sense of being at home here in his own
more agitated than ever. When they got home Natasha was the first to
more and I should have understood it all! But what am I to do? Harness,
more and at last the wall fell, and with it the men who had been pushing
more and more frequently.
more and more warmth. It was long since there had been so stormy a
more and more.
more and sneered malevolently.
more as he looked at Pierre.
more carts and carriages, and the Rostovs were being shouted at to move
more clearly than he had done before, now that he was sure of being
more comfortably. Pierre did not take his eyes from him and did not miss
more confident was the appearance of our troops. The soldiers in
more confirmed the farther he rode into the region behind the village of
more convinced that it was necessary.
more could be wished for?"
more cunning or subtle diplomatist--you know, a combination of French
more emotional and ingratiating the expression of Natasha's face became,
more expedient than by the destruction of wealth and of human lives.
more frequent complaints from his mother that their affairs were falling
more frivolous, as always happens with people who see a great danger
more impatient the longer he waited. Lying on his bed during those
more important cares, but he continued to speak, surprising them by
more important guests--an old general and his wife, and Anna Pavlovna
more individuality, originality, and independence. But if even one of
more insight than at any other time, and understood all that is worth
more intense glowed in the faces of these men.
more joyful. Still more and more joyful!" And from an unknown depth rose
more just, more magnanimous than he? And even if they did arrest me for
more manly, lost his former affectation, pride, and contemptuous irony,
more noticeable how much plainer she had become. Some unobtrusive touch
more one-sided in the dispute. They were Russians: Bagration, Ermolov
more openly. He shrugged his shoulders when Pierre was mentioned and,
more outcries, and tears of joy. He could not distinguish which was
more profound, more skillful, or more admirable," and enters into a
more provoked at the thought that our forces were retreating into the
more readily your object might be attained," he said to Nicholas.
more regularly and rapidly, and the action at the Goldbach Stream began.
more remote, ten years ago or more, then the consequences of my action
more self-confident, Prince Andrew thought. Dessalles, the tutor he had
more settled outlook on practical matters was furnished by his decision
more soldiers, and now and then women.
more strongly fortified than any other post? And why were all efforts
more than Timokhin had done when he was reprimanded by the regimental
more than anything in the world. What the result must be was quite
more than enough for him and that he gave his word of honor not to take
more than he could pay.
more than once come to the conclusion that the chief mistake made by the
more than once impressed on his daughter that Michael Ivanovich was "not
more than one thing about each of them which would long ago have sent an
more than the others what his words meant. During his diplomatic career
more than thirty miles in a day--everybody pointed laughingly at Tikhon.
more that she with such a soul not only belonged to him but was part of
more things might have been taken out, but Natasha insisted on having
more unjust. He is an honest and very punctilious German."
more violently than ever yesterday evening, last night, and today. The
more warmly than anyone else, and in the course of the dispute drew from
more wily than any of them and that it would not be a bad thing if he
more would evidently work less with his hands on account of his greater
more! Some more!" a merry voice was saying in his soul. But no more
more, but he waited and did nothing.
more, but this is something special.... Yes, of course-" he did not
more, we find at one and the same time quite contradictory views as to
more.
more. After five minutes of irksome, constrained conversation, they
more. But after her visit the old countess spoke of her several times a
more. The host and hostess, who had already been standing at the door
mori," said these glances.
morning I turned them all out and now look, it's full again. I must go
morning Petya was a long time dressing and arranging his hair and
morning and had been in a fever of excitement and activity all day. All
morning greeting, crossing herself with trepidation and repeating a
morning he became quiet and she fell asleep.
morning of his name day the prince was in one of his worst moods. He had
morning of the twenty-fifth without a position for our left flank, and
morning she told the Rostovs and all her acquaintances the details of
morning till night and abstemious, so of course I am well."
morning went away, avoiding Boris. In his civilian clothes and a
morning, Natasha insisted on fasting and preparing for the sacrament,
morning, the lines were so near together that the men could see one
morning, when he went to call at Rostopchin's he met there a courier
morning. Among other things he spoke of the Bogucharovo elder. Countess
morning. Pierre expected to find Prince Andrew in almost the same state
morning."
morning?"
mornings, and that day she returned to the old way of life which she had
morose, paced up and down in front of the Kammer-Kollezski rampart,
morsels. The group about Mortemart immediately began discussing the
mortal or not had hung over Kutuzov's head for a whole month. On the one
mortally wounded animal licks its wounds, they remained inert in Moscow
mortification, our opinion of Bonaparte cannot alter. We shall not cease
mortify you."
mortifying flesh that came from the wound, began examining that dreadful
most capable of them all, but I cannot say so, judging by his first
most complex sensations. He felt afraid of what would happen to him and
most important that the sinewy white arm he was flourishing should be
most in people. As to his inheritance and the part played by Prince
most instructive phenomena in history.
most intimate, memories rose in his imagination: he remembered his last
most joyful though erroneous rumors were rife of the imaginary approach
most legitimate questions humanity asks itself when it encounters the
most melancholy law of necessity, but considered themselves heroes and
most of all he liked to hear stories of real life. He would smile
most part handsome fellows and, as is always the case in an artillery
most poetic recollection. But he went with the firm intention of letting
most radiant looks, but even the one-year-old "Prince Nicholas" (as his
most recent bulletin. Glancing through the army orders, Pierre found in
most strongly expressed his insincere love for her, and he felt the
most was his absolute and unshakable belief in the power and authority
most? And perhaps they are both impostors?" In the old days he had been
mot d'ordre be not virtue alone but independence and action as well!"
mot d'ordre..." cried Dolokhov suddenly flaring up and riding straight
mother and called her so) "that I am spoiling Nicholas' career and am
mother and the youngest daughter--both named Nataly. Ever since
mother as showing their characters or suggesting general reflections
mother city, must feel her feminine character, and Napoleon felt it.
mother!..."
mother's door. Princess Mary, pale and with quivering chin, came out
mother's dress.
mother's face, and he smiled slightly.
mother's sympathy while she rubs the bump comforts it. The doctors were
mother's words, suddenly interrupted her:
mother's. We are at home on Thursdays--today is Thursday, so please come
mother, her father, and her daydreams; and Natasha, who with a passive
mother, isn't it?"
mother, quite excited.
mother, saw her agitation, and understood why her husband did not turn
mother," she went on; "today she showed me her accounts and letters from
mother.
mother.
mother.
mother. "Ah, my dear, I can't tell you how fond I have grown of Julie
mother. He first implored her to forgive him and Sonya and consent to
mother. The countess finished her prayers and came to the bed with a
motherly tenderness and pity for the unknown young officer.
motion toward Natasha.
motionless green and yellow foliage and white bark. "To die... to be
motionless masses of the French now swayed and that there really was
motionless presenting arms, looked again straight into Alexander's eyes,
motionless with outstretched arms.
motionless, looking at the heights visible above the mist, and his cold
motionless. He seemed altogether so thin, small, and pathetic. His face
motionless; then he came to the region occupied by Uvarov's cavalry
mount and ride to the bridge. (Observe that all three are Gascons.)
mountains with. It's a bad lookout, old fellow! But what's the matter
mounted Frenchmen, probably adjutants, were galloping up the hill. A
mounted dragoons.
mounted his bay and rode off. The others all followed, dispirited and
mounted infantryman) and riding up to Rostov, he burst out laughing.
mournful effect.
mournful sketches, maxims, and verses.
mournful smile that she now had no one to write to, since Julie--whose
mouse.
mouth all seemed puckered into a vacant, wearied grimace, and his arms
mouth and flew out involuntarily he went on: "How was it, sir, that you
mouth in rings. This was Lieutenant Berg, an officer in the Semenov
mouth to the other with her tongue.
mouth with his handkerchief.
mouth!" said Bilibin, and the mop of hair on his head moved with
mouth, he turned with his glass to Pierre.
mouth. Another was walking sturdily by himself but without his musket,
mouths were closed by the opinion uttered by the simple-minded soldier
mouths. When they passed through a village they all rushed to the wells
move about and talk, dressmakers came again. Marya Dmitrievna appeared,
move my serfs from Bald Hills to Bogucharovo or my Ryazan estates."
move on. The horses moved off the bank. The ice, that had held under
move.
moved across the bridge.
moved across the room.
moved an armchair toward Princess Mary.
moved and halted at the officers' command, turned with banners flying,
moved away from the door.
moved by fear or vanity, rejoiced or were indignant, reasoned, imagining
moved closer up to him.
moved farther away and did not think about him.
moved forward.
moved from the place where it had spent the night, advancing into action
moved his forces to attack the center and outflank both the Russian
moved noisily, their runners squeaking. At first they drove at a steady
moved off accompanied by an irregularly swaying sea of aides-de-camp.
moved to Moscow. At that time enthusiasm for the Emperor Alexander's
moved toward the door with a more cheerful expression.
moved. No one can say in how far it is possible for man to advance
movement also.
movement and long ago foreseen its result.
movement by Napoleon which might endanger the army--news subsequently
movement is God. And while there is life there is joy in consciousness
movement of columns on a battlefield never coincides with the plans--the
movement of his troops from west to east. He went in a traveling coach
movement of humanity, he might have arranged matters according to the
movement of peoples from east to west, and for this fresh war another
movement of peoples, and in no case can one admit that intellectual
movement of soldiers forming ranks and getting their muskets ready,
movement of the French as was desired in Petersburg and by the Russian
movement of the Tsar's seemed to him enchanting.
movement of the bodies, he expressed the property common to all bodies
movement of the engine.
movement of the locomotive in the pressure of steam in the boiler, he
movement of those waves will be the only perceptible motion.
movement when a rational and sacred aim for the Crusade--the deliverance
movement which first increases and then slackens. What was the cause of
movement, and those sounds. He turned to look at Kutuzov and his suite,
movement, reached Murat's position apparently in order to give
movement, word, or look of his, never taking their blissfully adoring
movements are conditioned by the activity of the nerves; the soul and
movements of the baggage trains of the entire army along the Krems-Znaim
movements of the bearers, and the cold listless gaze fixed itself upon
movements of the crowd had any sense. So one might have thought that
movements of the mass of which in his regiment he felt himself a tiny,
movements of the other armies. Though, by this course, neither one aim
movements of those who crowded round the invalid chair that they had
movements were still slow and measured.
movements, her beauty. Then it would suddenly seem to him that it was
movements, outflankings, and so forth. Pfuel and his adherents demanded
movements.
movements. And what are they doing, all these courtiers? Pfuel proposes,
moving a chair close to hers seated himself beside her.
moving a muscle.
moving about, following their old habits and hardly aware of what they
moving amid the rows of soldiers and of other vehicles, had to stop.
moving freely, then the laws of Kepler and Newton are negatived and no
moving from the battlefield.
moving the trunks, which were placed one on another, and was dragging
moving to the door of the room assigned to him. The priest's wife
moving toward our left flank, the higher command found that our center
moving toward the door. Boris, fluttering as if he had not had time to
moving toward the porch.
moving, naturally imagines that his efforts move the ship he is holding
moving, or of the winds of spring. To that I must entirely change my
mowers, then he counted his steps, calculating how often he must walk
mown down while still green. The peasants were ruined; some of them too
moyens de soutenir ce sentiment." *
much as a sailor is by his ship. However far he has walked, whatever
much as possible to reform their hearts, to purify and enlighten their
much because he heard their sound as because he saw uneasiness on
much better than warfare. If the aim was the progress of civilization,
much better.
much food and fresh troops awaited them in Smolensk, nor that they were
much heat, and, as it seemed to Pierre, gave orders of great military
much in life. This melancholy, which did not prevent her amusing
much interest him because at that moment he felt with delight that he
much like to be an adjutant and not remain at the front."
much more frequently in the Foot Guards. Then just think what can be
much on the fact that the news had arrived on the Emperor's birthday as
much self-confidence as if he were addressing school children--that he
much since Princess Mary had last seen him. Then he had been a brisk,
much strength and youth in me," he said to himself. "Pierre was right
much talk of the grandeur of this important meeting.
much that the count held him up as a pattern to the other guests. Berg
much that was painful and difficult awaited them on this journey.
much the same as usual. These dispositions and orders only seem worse
much to say to one another in private and so they had been seeking an
much to tell them but dare not say it before the old countess. Denisov,
much wrinkled and his eyes deep set. His hair had evidently been hastily
much! I have promised myself not to serve again in the active Russian
much, but please don't laugh at my people." After exchanging the first
much--informing him of her intention to marry N.N. and of her having
much.
much."
mud results; and in the same way the entry of the famished army into the
mud, defiled in fours and moved along the broad road planted with birch
mud-bespattered breeches. The German landlady, hearing Rostov's loud
mud. He did not even trouble to find out where Denisov had gone. Having
muffled shout almost behind them in the wood. The French had attacked
mummers seated themselves in the other two sleighs.
mummers.
munching a pie in his moist-lipped handsome mouth, "would be to slip in
munching his food rapidly with his strong teeth, continually smacking
munching their oats. In the dark Petya recognized his own horse, which
municipality did not stop the robberies and was only of use to certain
municipality or city government. It will take care of you, of your
murder he had restored it to the rightful king, I should have called him
murder of the Duc d'Enghien. The vicomte said that the Duc d'Enghien had
murder, and so on?
murderers, even more dreadful because of their disquiet. And he opened
murmurs were heard, there was a sense of confusion, and finally a
muscles and lines of the count's face began to twitch. The twitching
museum and belabor them in the Russian way till all the nonsense jumps
mushroom, and even the oak, which blossom into full growth and no longer
music he heard from the left side of the field, and felt and realized
music on wet boards, and young girls and old men, and the nearly naked
music, being the rhythmic click of the spurs on his rapid, agile feet,
music, now into something dazzlingly brilliant and triumphant.
music--"it stretches, stretches, spreading out and stretching," said
music. Amid these sounds, only the youthful kindly voice of the Emperor
music. The host followed with Marya Antonovna Naryshkina; then came
music... and suddenly I felt so depressed..."
music:
musician and his wife, Vogel the dancing master and his family, Belova,
musketeer..." he sang, pretending to hiccough after each syllable.
musketry ahead of him. The firing grew louder and louder.
musketry at the foot of the hill, now diminishing, now increasing,
musketry fire, now Russians were seen alone, now Frenchmen alone, now
musketry, but it was irregular and feeble in comparison with the reports
muskets and went on their knees. 'Pardon!' they say. That's only one
muskets of the nearest soldiers. The soldiers started firing without
muskets, entering the Bazaar empty-handed and silently making their way
must act." Pierre raised his notebook and began to read.
must be abandoned. The army must retreat and the order to do so must
must be allowed to disturb the appointed order of the day. Prince Andrew
must be hesitating between the two camps: the masters' and the serfs'.
must be horrible and senseless--was the very time to fight and conquer
must be reorganized and the accounts published," recounted Bitski,
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
must dance." He stepped forward in the direction Pierre indicated. The
must excuse me," said he, putting Pierre at ease instead of being put
must explain it, and he must hear me out," thought the old prince.
must forget and understand..." And going to his bed he threw himself on
must gain his confidence and friendship and through him obtain a special
must go and call on her. You would at least be seeing somebody, and I
must go away too, take away what you can and tell the serfs to go to the
must go, go, go!...."
must have personal hopes, Princess Mary in the profoundest depths of her
must look somewhere, or it meant too much. Pierre hesitated, not knowing
must love, and we must believe that we live not only today on this scrap
must not give way. He sprang forward and upset an old woman who was
must prostrate himself at the Gates of the Temple.
must return quickly and fire the bridge.'"
must seem to be a genius. And it must appear an astonishing conjunction
must take the same terrible step.
must, and that wouldn't do at all."
mustache I don't know, but I love her."
mustache and lightly touched his hat.
mustache and winked so joyfully, when warm steady rain began to fall
mustache he had grown, moving his fingers slowly. His eyes gazed at them
mustache.
mustache. "I'd have killed him if they hadn't taken him away!"
mustache. "Now then, get on," he shouted to the driver. "Do wake up,
mustaches and whiskers rode up to the gate and, glancing at Prince
mustaches... I thought about him too, just opposite Guryev's house...
muttered Denisov.
muttered as he lay down, pulling his coat over him.
muttered something and colored.
muttered the old man, and after looking Natasha over from head to foot
muttered.
muttering something with his helpless tongue, twitching his gray
muttering the prayer at Communion: "Let the bold and insolent
my advance guard, and have no right to arrange an armistice without my
my advice," she began. "Yesterday, as you know, I went to see Prince
my angel." She kissed Lise and was about to leave the room.
my brother has found happiness...."
my brother so little as to be able to forget him so soon?" she thought
my business. I owe you my life. That is enough for me. I am quite at
my carriage. I am very glad. All our important business here is now
my conscience was at ease. I came forward...." (Berg stood up and showed
my conversations with him, and deduced from it all that I ought not
my countwy honowably and have not stolen! And am I to be degwaded?...
my cross. But if I forgive her for the sake of doing right, then let
my daughters to consider."
my dear boy, among other things you are too attentive to the other, the
my dear boy, are you serving in the Horse Guards?" asked the old man,
my dear fellow! What a glance! A goddess!" he added in French. "What?"
my dear friend. May God keep you in His holy and mighty care. My dear
my dear sir, it is only in the midst of worldly cares that we can attain
my dear sir--took on yourself responsibility for the guidance of a young
my dear! I tasted it. The thousand rubles I paid for Taras were not
my dear, I am getting on for sixty and must be prepared for anything. Do
my dear. One day you are dull, and the next you refuse to see anyone."
my debauchery if Thou utterly desertest me!
my empire. It still offers me more than my enemies suppose," said the
my enemies, and with whom? With Steins, Armfeldts, Bennigsens, and
my engagements with Your Majesty, your troops have crossed the Russian
my every word and deed? Yes, but what did he ask me?"
my father was much affected by it. He says the count was the last
my father!... Robbing us!..." and so on.
my fault. But it all hurts terribly. Oh, why doesn't he come?..."
my friend never speak to me of that... of all that! Well, good-by. So
my hands. Scarcely had I torn it off before another, a bigger one, began
my heart at ease.... Aniska, go, you horrid girl, show him the way!" she
my legs fail, and I'll lie down and die somewhere, and shall at last
my life in falsity? I love her more than anything in the world! But what
my message wrong. I only said that you were to give them the grain."
my people? Have they reached Moscow at last?" he asked seriously.
my place," she thought as she went out in the twilight toward the crowd
my pocket--can't remember..."
my poor aunt who adores you. Go and keep her company for ten minutes.
my principles--everything aboveboard? I will ask her tomorrow in your
my relations with him, transient as they were, have been one of the
my request that they should let no one in," he went on, glancing angrily
my respects to monsieur your father and my compliments to Mademoiselle
my rupture with the Brothers. Joseph Alexeevich, having remained silent
my sides: as they have grown so I stand, and I do not believe in your
my sin, my brother would have had to go as a soldier. But he, my younger
my sister today. I will introduce you to her. But of course you know her
my sole desire is conscientiously to carry out his wishes; that is my
my sovereign pleases, but I cannot work with the Minister (meaning
my tea."
my teacher, and with Denisov, but this is quite different. I feel at
my wife," said Prince Andrew to himself quite to his own surprise, as he
my word, they didn't let us get near before they just threw down their
myself about you, and you also know quite well that what I propose is
myself above him and so become much worse than he, for he is lenient
myself and drove away that thought only when I found myself glowing with
myself personally above all to keep a watch over myself, and to that end
myself so much the worse for Drubetskoy who drives me to it!" And
myself, if I fall asleep it's finished. And then I am used to not
myself. We're done for!..." and Ferapontov ran into the yard.
myself."
myself?" he thought. He rode on to the region where the greatest number
mysteries, had been raised to a higher grade, and was bringing back with
mysterious and fascinating in Speranski suddenly became plain and
mysterious forces that move humanity (mysterious because the laws of
mysterious limitless vistas that for an instant had opened out before
mysterious reflection.
mysteriously. "Yes, tomorrow, tomorrow!" he thought. "Tomorrow
mystical book I am sending you; it has an enormous success here. Though
n'a pas de sexe," * they said of him.
n'est pas des plus victorieuses." *
nails and spat a little for luck as she returned to the drawing room.
nails. All the officers appeared to be, and really were, in love with
naive a question. "Will he agree?"
naive and precise attitude preparatory to a folk dance.
naive, cheerful, and good-natured.
naked body and shuddered, not from cold but from a sense of disgust
naked shoulders. She did not give him the money, but let herself be
name day and then going home. I was so happy, so free, so lighthearted!
name his fancy gave to the farthest gun of the battery, which was large
name of my dead father, who was a good master to you, and of my brother
name so that Nicholas at once understood that Anna Ignatyevna was a very
name to rectify this omission, Prince Andrew galloped back. Kutuzov
name! Go out into the frost... the frost... the frost!"
name!" would be given him: and he knew that even when it was said
name-day party.
name.
named. More than half the ladies already had partners and were taking
namely, that the course of human events is predetermined from on
naming his guests. Rostov looked frowningly at the Frenchmen, bowed
narrated that episode so persistently and with so important an air that
narration of episodes in the lives of individuals, it too, setting
narrow, unchanging frame, he experienced the same sense of peace, of
nation and would endeavor to be worthy of it. This rescript began with
nation like Russia--barbaric as she is said to be--to place herself
nation, appears impossible.
national character. In such actions, instead of two crowds opposing
national war but to die, and Kutuzov died.
national war. And only that feeling placed him on that highest human
nations and humanity at large are tending.
nations? Adorable! It is enough to make one's head whirl! It is as if
natural and agreeable for them to think that the activity of their class
natural and animated than usual, so that the wrinkles round his mouth
natural justice."
natural that they should cry, and apparently it never entered their
natural to him was very gentle and wary with them both at dinner. On
natural tone of good-natured familiarity. He laid his hand on the
naturally to her, but was now very ill-suited to her careworn face.
naturally turned on the peace. The officers, his comrades, like most of
nature. Let life go on in it unhindered and let it defend itself, it
nature. Millions of men perpetrated against one another such innumerable
naughty..."
naval officer, was speaking in one of the rooms, and a small crowd was
naval uniform, with a dirk, and holding his cap under his arm, he handed
ne vous fera pas de mal," * he added shyly and affectionately, touching
near Moscow either today or tomorrow morning, with her nephew."
near Neskuchny, endless rows of troops and carts stretched away into
near Vyazma and how a certain hussar had distinguished himself there.
near Vyazma could not resist their desire to cut off and break up two
near a regiment of Polish Uhlans stationed by the river.
near and that they were galloping in disorder; he knew they could not
near by the news spread that the Emperor was unwell. He ate nothing and
near everything grew brighter, more joyful, more significant, and more
near him. Everybody said that Buonaparte himself was at Braunau."
near sixty, dear friend... I too... All will end in death, all! Death is
near the gun waved their arms and beat the horses to make them turn and
near the strange lady. Prince Vasili in front of the door, near the
near them and there too the dogs were lying. The huntsmen waved their
nearer in disorderly crowds came the Uhlans and the French dragoons
nearer to the honored guest, as naturally as water flows deepest where
nearer, faster and louder, louder and faster, a cannon ball, as if it
nearer. Then the clang of hoofs, as of several horses galloping,
nearest him were not to blame for they were themselves pressed still
nearest, were the first to see and pursue him, but they had not gone far
nearly a minute with the steady gaze of a commander and then turned to
nearly stormed at Mamma. I will never let anyone say anything bad of
neatly glued floor, swept by the bees with the fanning of their wings,
neatness, and order; so it was quite comprehensible and not strange that
necessary for a young man as the society of clever women."
necessary for him to go to the count at all, still less why he had to go
necessary in the organism of nature, and they always exist, always
necessary money and warrants, and having sent some hussars on in
necessary to enable it to retreat without losing its heavy equipment.
necessary to grasp clearly the meaning of the fact that, while not
necessary to introduce himself, and without experiencing the least
necessary to order an attack, and it was fixed for the fifth of October.
necessary to set aside his final goal and to say to himself: "Today I
necessary to take some part in it.
necessary, would himself lead the troops, whose spirits would thereby be
necessary," said the younger of the two speakers, evidently in the same
necessities of life. The French did not need to be informed of the fact
necessity is increased and diminished depend on three considerations:
necessity of a future life, but this: when you go hand in hand with
necessity of submitting, for a time, to this new order of things which
necessity the smaller the conception of freedom and vice versa.
necessity to Dolokhov.
necessity to which he is subject cannot be solved by comparative
necessity, to one who knows the circumstances in which these people were
neck of a jug, and having seized a handful of nuts will not open its
neck, and her bare arms. Natasha knew for certain that he was enraptured
neck, and his head, that had been half shaved, was again covered by
neck, she kissed her on the throat. In her behavior to her mother
neck. It seemed to Rostov that Bogdanich was only pretending not to
neck. That officer did not take his eyes from Dolokhov and again asked
necks while they carried him and began wailing plaintively:
need be unhappy and lack freedom. He learned that suffering and freedom
need of re-establishing les bons principes, and to the diplomatists of
need some money."
need, even the inevitability, of entering into conversation with this
needed for success in the service was not effort or work, or courage, or
needed for the dance, had tears in her eyes, though she laughed as she
needed further proofs and it was necessary to wait.
needed in his angry mood. One of the first bullets killed him, and other
needed to exercise her tongue and lungs. She cried as a child does,
needed to run such a salon, or because those who were deceived found
needed to sacrifice herself, but made others sacrifice themselves for
needed which he did not possess.
needed.
needful was to get away as quickly as possible; and no one, not
needles, and which, when they were ready, she always triumphantly drew,
needs repose? Worldly conversation at a moment when his soul is already
needs, and of your welfare. Its members will be distinguished by a red
needs, while great freedom in the choice of occupation--such freedom as
negative concept of not doing what is blameworthy or it is a source of
neglect him in favor of my own: we all have children and relations while
neglect the game.
negligence or inefficiency so staggered him that, forgetting the
negotiate with Prince Auersperg. He lets them enter the tete-de-pont. *
negotiate, and above all why retreat, when to retreat is so contrary
negotiations except on condition that... Here Balashev hesitated:
negotiations for peace were already proceeding, and that he therefore
negotiations, what is demanded of me?" he said, frowning and making an
negotiations.
nehmen." *
neighbor on his right quickly turned in alarm to Bezukhov.
neighbor, and may envy never dim the purity of that bliss. Forgive thy
neighbor," he added, when he heard who Rostov wanted. "Here, here," and
neighbor.) "I knew you wouldn't be able to resist it and it's a good
neighbor? No! You have spent your life in idleness. Then you married,
neighboring town, who had been at Bald Hills for the last fortnight.)
neighboring villages with Ilyin; he let Lavrushka have another horse and
neighboring wheel is as quiet and motionless as though it were prepared
neighbors' glasses, not neglecting his own. The countess in turn,
neithah soldiers no' peasants, and we'll get only depwavity fwom them.
neither moving forward to protect the battery nor backward with the
neither of them expected, reproached her niece for trying to catch
neither quickly nor slowly. At this Natasha dashed swiftly among the
neither. With wide-open eyes she gazed at the moonlight and the shadows,
neither: a look of animosity appeared on his face and the other turned
nephew's lessons, she was informed that Rostov had called. With a firm
nephew, General Chatrov an old war comrade of the prince's, and of the
nervous. I am anxious about him and glad he is taking this trip abroad
neutrality is just a trap. I have faith only in God and the lofty
never I must prove that I remember the family's goodness to me and that
never authorized to make that demand, and as soon as I was informed of
never be his.
never be known to anyone. Believe me," he went on, "if things
never been her husband's wife, and that she had been sacrificed.
never been so much in the grip of inevitable laws, which compelled him,
never been to blame, might be held responsible at headquarters for
never carries out that intention, but unexpectedly falls upon Mack and
never coincides with the direction of any one force.
never considered personal danger.
never could appreciate it. No, mon cousin," she added with a sigh, "I
never felt any hesitation in dealing with the peasants. He knew that his
never felt till that moment. She ran out sobbing into the garden and as
never gave such a dinner as ours will be!"
never had been sharpened.) "Can you do it?"
never have led me to suppose that that could serve as a pretext for
never in his life done anything base. He was incapable of considering
never knew any Madame Jacquot."
never laughed without a sound of tears in her laughter. She could not
never lost sight of) and smiled happily.
never loved anyone. You have no heart! You are a Madame de Genlis
never many people in the church; Natasha always stood beside Belova in
never reach absolute inevitability.
never reached when he was in health, but suddenly in the midst of its
never shall have. Why should she marry? We might always drive about
never take it off. Do you promise?"
never takes direct part in the action itself, but only gives general
never to blame," were the last words he heard from his sister when he
never to dare to change your way of dress without my consent."
never was much to my liking. Of course he is an excellent man, but
never wished to go where he was sent: Chichagov, noted for the boldness
never yet mentioned to anyone--all she had lived through during those
never-varying direction of his will otherwise than as a limitation of
nevertheless immediately ran away again, abandoning to its fate the
new and unshakable foundations.
new arrivals in the vestibule.
new church, previously begun, had cost about 10,000 in each of the last
new disease broke out among the soldiers, a swelling of the arms, legs,
new dresses everyone put on, there were no special festivities, though
new guard--both officers and men--he was not as interesting as he had
new life.
new officers arrived, new men and horses, and above all everybody was
new pair of handsome silk-embroidered braces that, for some reason,
new significance for him. The presence and remarks of Willarski who
new triumph, tomorrow's levee and parade, and the audience with the
newly bled arm so violently that the table nearly broke down and
newly emerging opinion and for this object would produce arguments more
newly erected buildings were standing empty and that the serfs continued
newly furnished Petersburg house, the happy possessor, as people said,
news and common acquaintances like people who do not know each other
news of a victory by the Archduke Karl or Ferdinand (one archduke's as
news that Dolokhov was soon coming and that all was well with him.
news that the Cossacks were destroying deserted villages, but that the
news that you, with the army, have decided to abandon Moscow. You can
news was bad, rose as if to stretch his legs and, taking Scherbinin's
news we had received for a long time."
news which I have inspires me yet more.
news with delight, he could not resist the temptation.
news, it was done in a whisper and they immediately reverted to general
news, though Schmidt's death is a heavy price to pay for the victory.
next balls, about theatricals, and who would meet whom, and when and
next day a throng of acquaintances who came to pay their last respects
next day and night. She did not sleep and did not leave her mother. Her
next day it was not even mentioned in the Orders of the Day. That's what
next day they moved the prince to Bogucharovo, the doctor accompanying
next day to allow time for the relay horses to be sent on in advance.
next morning, was unable to rest and leaped up. The pack on leash rushed
next phrase, and everything in the world was divided into three beats:
next room, marching stiffly, and drew up in front of Rostov.
next to himself the most important guest. The old people sat with the
next--to drink tea in the servants' wing with Vasilich, or into the
nice youth! What a scoundrel! And she's expecting him--expecting
nice. He is very nice, and I love him like a son. But what then?...
nice. Only not quite my taste--he is so narrow, like the dining-room
niece passed, "Sonya, won't you write to Nicholas?" She spoke in a soft,
night I looked at the campfires and there was no end of them. A regular
night around through the forest and across the Dnieper and escaped to
night on the twenty-fourth? A Cossack patrol would have sufficed to
night the convicts were gathered just as we are, with the old man among
night was warm and light. To the left of the house on the Pokrovka a
night, often lingered with his master's boots in his hands and clothes
night, so dark that the coachman could not see the carriage pole.
night.
night. He opened his eyes as they were closing.
night."
night; it sometimes made excursions into the town but always returned
nightcap and hospital dressing gown, with a pipe between his teeth.
nightcap, came in.
nights," replied the doctor, and he sat down morosely beside his wife,
nightshirt over his dried-up old body and gray-haired chest. "I never
ninety thousand strong, was to threaten Prussia so as to bring her out
no action been taken against the enemy or for the relief of the ancient
no clear solution of what puzzled him so, the wheel of fortune in the
no connection with the previous conversation. For a few moments all were
no connections. Yet, though Anatole spent tens of thousands of rubles,
no difficulties daunted her. Thanks to her activity and energy, which
no difficulties in your way.... But Nicholas is my cousin... one would
no doubt is calming her jealousy of me. They needn't trouble themselves!
no doubt, forgotten it and will wish to destroy it. You understand that
no external aims--only a need to exercise her various functions and
no food), some with more innocent games, such as quoits and skittles.
no fresh war could improve the position or add to the glory of Russia,
no further part in any business affairs, but devoted himself with
no getting them together. The army should push on before the rest bolt,
no great cold, it was always warm walking in the daytime, and at night
no harm to anyone; why must I suffer so? Help me!" her look seemed to
no hindrance to loyalty, and that he was ready to... While
no idea, never guessed at all."
no joke, this plot you've hatched."
no knowledge of them. This city was evidently living with the full force
no longer a young diplomat, as he had entered the service at the age
no longer aroused in him the former feeling of careful pity, an
no longer in general use. Prince Andrew remembered the story of Suvorov
no longer in the unpleasantly hostile tone of Nicholas' last remark.
no longer looked at the French but paid attention to the sight-seers and
no longer was and at that moment considered themselves happy.
no longer with the same troops and baggage trains with which it had left
no military appointment in the army, their position gave them influence,
no more intimidate him than Rostov's, or a sergeant major's with the
no more. The old count cried because he felt that before long, he, too,
no need of any other or better husband, but as all the powers of her
no one any harm but praying for all--for those who drive one away as
no one else drew them into the social life of the household as he did.
no one knew anything of the general position of affairs. They talked of
no one knows when? Armfeldt says our army is cut in half, and Paulucci
no one saw her. Rostov, holding his breath, looked round at the borzois.
no one spoke of, except some who abused him in whispers, calling him a
no one there." But he had hardly entered the room before he felt her
no one will ever know it." And his soul felt calm and peaceful.
no one would understand that it was not to quench his thirst or from
no reason to preserve the honor of a man who was nothing to him.... "I
no right to reproach her even in her heart.
no single quiver in Pierre's voice, no look, no twitch of a muscle in
no time for reflection, as in Petersburg. Instead of the new life he had
no time to ask himself whether these people were sincere or not. He
no use to anyone."
no way binding) might give time for part of the transport to pass, and
no! Good-by, good-by!" he muttered. "It's an awful time!" and dropping
no! Mountains of books have been written by the historians about this
no, it can't be true that I am in Moscow," he suddenly thought.
no--this is something new I've never seen before. This isn't the Kosoy
nobility and gentry, that they would furnish ten men, fully equipped,
nobility. He was answered by a voice which informed him of the
noble soul peacefully to leave this..."
noble soul, able to understand her position and her sorrow. His kind,
noble, high-minded men, but I have not yet met any women--countesses
nobles. Every face expressed respectful, awe-struck curiosity. Pierre
nobody and had no name. The French called it Azor; the soldier who
nodded her head with a happy smile.
nodded to a Cossack beside him.
nodded to them. (He liked to see new faces.)
nodding to the aide-de-camp.
nods with acquaintances near her. From habit she scrutinized the ladies'
noise of firing, they came to a small wood. There it was cool and quiet,
noise the sound of their old voices saying one after another, "I
noise was heard which seemed to him louder than the most terrific
noise, or display, that Rostov could not believe his eyes and remained
noiseless, convulsive sobs which choked her. Marya Dmitrievna glanced
noiselessly.
noncommissioned officer began talking with his comrades about regimental
noncommissioned officer with a bandaged head. He had been wounded in the
none of the embarrassment so commonly shown by young men in their
none, but looked so unhappily and greedily at the others while they were
nonintervention. And..." he paused. "Finally one cannot impute the
nonobservance of the Continental System, the Duke of Oldenburg's
nonreceipt of our dispatch of November 18. That is how it will end." And
nonrecognition of something absolute, serving as the measure of visible
nonsense!" He glanced at his watch. "It's time!"
nonsense, but we are friends forever. She, if she loves anyone, does it
nonsense, continued to lie at the opposite side of the fire, but one
nonsense...."
nonsense; but if it is only some particular side of the activity of an
nor a commander in chief, but a father! If you want anything come
nor any particular care or trouble on the part of the Emperor and his
nor believed that it could be taken from them.
nor even listen to the music; she saw only the painted cardboard and the
nor is the air in which I lifted it the same that now surrounds me. The
nor of what she was telling. He listened to her and felt only pity for
nor the burning of Moscow nor anything else could seem of importance to
nor the other could be attained, yet it seemed best to the adherents of
nor their seconds suffered for it. But the story of the duel, confirmed
northerly or more southerly route (say by the road Kutuzov afterwards
northern, summer night. Pierre took an open cab intending to drive
nose, intimating that he did not understand him either, and moved,
nose, similar knobs over his black frowning brows, and a round belly.
nose, was already so close that the expression of his face could be
nose. Arakcheev turned his head toward him without looking at him.
nose. His face was depressed and gloomy. He seemed to see and hear
nose. That creature said: "You are angry, you are jealous, you would
nostrils and kissing it.
not Christians to ask it! Selivanov, now, did a good stroke last
not Moscow was taken as Smolensk had been, was suddenly checked in his
not abandon the edifice of argument he had laboriously constructed.
not accidentally, Natasha felt, that he alluded, when speaking of the
not admit of the possibility of abandoning Moscow, and the commander in
not agree with his limited understanding of what is good. Whether the
not and cannot believe this.
not answer. The hussar at that moment noticed the face of the red-nosed
not anxious or envious. Man's future and thy own fate must remain hidden
not appeared when Alpatych sent for him; and that in the morning when
not arrived. She suffered more now than during her first days in Moscow.
not as dreadful as he had thought. He was always conscious of some
not as the results of free transferences of the people's will, but as
not as they generally prepared for it in the Rostov family by attending
not ashamed to bury such pearls in the country?"
not ask himself why men struggled so about these things when all is so
not at all as the gunner and the Frenchman with frightened and angry
not at all realize that before having seen her future sister-in-law she
not at all the decisive episode of the campaign. If so much has been
not at all what Count Bennigsen intended. He meant to fortify that knoll
not at all worse than others issued in similar circumstances--did not
not at once raise, and he spent most of his time in the girls' room.
not attract a moment's attention to their own evolutions and did not
not be confounded in our hope of Thy mercy, and give us a token of Thy
not be executed. After passing through Borodino the vice-King was driven
not be given up--and thereby ruined?" "To preserve the tranquillity
not be happy. Before Natasha had finished singing, fourteen-year-old
not be responsible for what might happen. On the evening of the day the
not be understood or approved by her husband.
not be war because Paul Ivanovich had offended Michael Ivanovich. And
not bear the idea of letting the enemy even reach Smolensk, still less
not because of Napoleon's orders but by their own volition. The whole
not been committed much that resulted from it--good, agreeable, and even
not been found nor was he on the list of prisoners. What was worst of
not been so tall, so broad of limb, and so strong that he carried his
not been summoned for the purpose, and though it was not so called, they
not been to their house for nearly a month. But I cannot understand the
not being a member of the family, did not understand Pierre's caution
not believe in the truth of the light and who have not seen the light,
not billeted on the inhabitants as is usual in towns but lived in it as
not breathe. He knew that he must do something to put an end to this
not bring himself to do so.
not bring to a conclusion. Terrible doubts rose in his soul. Now he
not but believe in the sincerity of those around him. Besides, he had
not but tremble and his heart stand still at the imminence of that word.
not by men. Men are His instruments, they are not to blame. If you think
not by my fault!"
not captured." Again he pondered. "I am very glad you have brought good
not carry the weapon in his hand through the streets. It was difficult
not cause the least embarrassment to Countess Bezukhova, who evidently
not consecutive and clear but only the feeling that prompted them.
not continue, noticing that this theme was too egotistic.
not cure him of it.) Dessalles slept propped up on four pillows and his
not dare dine at the Club as a pastime, did not dare spend money on a
not dare to. He stood irresolutely beside him in the passage. Then in
not disfigured by the approach of death. It was the same as Pierre
not do and that he had to be quiet.
not do so at once, but continued to advance along the road at a walking
not draw closer to Sonya, but rather drifted away from her. She was very
not eat anything though he would very much have liked to. He looked
not even a continuity of most brilliant successes would secure them, and
not even ask whether he was to wait. He knew that when his master was
not even think or find time to think, but only talked, and talked
not evince the least interest during this explanation, but as if he were
not exasperated the vicomte, and had convinced herself that it was
not exist for her.
not express his personal views but the general mood of the Bogucharovo
not expressed so much in his relations with him as with all his family
not far off, in the village the vehicles were going to. Rostov
not fit in under any rule and is directly opposed to a well-known rule
not fond of Nicholas Bolkonski but was always anxious to recognize that
not for Napoleon but always against him.
not forsake him. He will fulfill his vocation and crush the hydra of
not get accustomed.
not give now to be unmarried! You are the first and only one to whom I
not giving Dunyasha time to finish what she was saying, and trying to
not have caused him to expect that honor. The prince, who generally kept
not have done more," said Napoleon, growing more and more excited as he
not have happened. Tell me, for God's sake, what will Russia, our mother
not have refrained from had the armies been united and had someone else,
not having done so, she again passed in fancy to the time when she was
not having served since 1805.
not hear the slightest sound from the study after that.
not heard his remark. But as soon as she had turned away she felt that
not hearing them, the Emperor, recognizing Bolkonski, addressed him
not hoping to find anyone but merely to ease his conscience. When he had
not improve. Natasha and Nicholas often noticed their parents conferring
not in his heart at once agree with her that what he had regarded
not in it, and she could not and did not know how to do anything except
not in time to avoid them.
not intend to devote her life to serving Prince Bolkonski, to reading
not intended her flight to bring her so far. Behind her in the doorway
not interest and did not even exist for Alpatych.
not interrupt him or laugh at what he said.
not jest with them.
not keep up with them; cavalry and artillery horses broke down, and the
not know how hard it was for me to see her again. I have settled on the
not know where to go. Lazarev stopped, casting a sidelong look at his
not know whether a certain order received in the form of advice emanated
not know, from another leash, rushed impetuously at the wolf from in
not know.
not know. "But was it really not possible for Kutuzov to state his views
not know. We only know that to produce the one or the other action,
not know: he therefore wished to speak to Dolgorukov.
not known that he was dying, how could he have failed to pity her and
not leave his face.
not left them for a day.
not let him and, on the other, Pierre himself feared to begin to speak
not like him."
not like us sinners of the line," cried Rostov, with martial swagger
not listen to me.
not listen.
not listening to it continued to dress while walking about, and three
not look at him. A vein in the young man's long thin neck swelled like a
not make out to what class he could belong. The French followed him with
not make out whether the tea was strong or weak, and the samovar held
not merely one but several such), presents a new project diametrically
not mistaken... I beg you to excuse me, to excuse me... I did not know,
not move, though her little bare foot, thrust out from under the quilt,
not notice the sound of the bullets whistling from every side, or the
not noticing his visitor's sarcastic smile.
not now abstaining from doing so at the first moment when I asked the
not now be altered. "We start tomorrow and I'm giving you a place in
not now occur to him to think of Russia, or the war, or politics, or
not occur to her that there was anything wrong in it.
not one of them had what you might call real boots on," said a soldier,
not only by the tales of those who had taken part in it, but also by
not only held the field but had repulsed the French. Though the troops
not only herself to be near her brother who was perhaps dying, but to do
not only kill with pleasure but whom he would slap in the face before
not only lightly but joyfully. And just at this time he obtained the
not only shall we have no need to see exceptional ability and genius in
not only was there no wish on the Russian side to draw the French
not please him, and I wished to come close to him and embrace him. But
not pleased by Pierre's arrival at that moment when it diverted her
not produced an effect upon him--he had not even once recalled it. But
not prove that I could have abstained from lifting it then. And since I
not prove that Napoleon caused it to retreat, but that the forces which
not purposely say things to please her, but whatever he was saying he
not quite in the right, you were impetuous..."
not quite see it; more particularly as it is he and his corps who are
not ready. He did not wish to deprive them of the pleasure of giving him
not refrain from asking what was the matter, so strangely dismal and
not refrain from grumbling at and worrying Sonya, often pulling her
not refuse, and promised to come.
not remember what it was that people say. He looked at her face. She
not responded to his greeting. When the Emperor's health was drunk,
not rest here?"
not restrain himself. He touched his horse, gave the word of command,
not right!' Our luck is like water in a dragnet: you pull at it and it
not right, Monsieur Pierre?" said he, growing animated. "Another glass?"
not right."
not sacrifice a single Russian for ten Frenchmen.
not satisfied, let us have a bunt of our own. That's all wight. Je suis
not say.
not see herself. She listened to the sounds in the hall. When she saw
not see him. She only felt a soft hand taking hers firmly, and she
not see ten paces ahead. Bushes looked like gigantic trees and level
not see what she ought to sacrifice, or for whom. She could not help
not seem to him slower than an awakening from sleep compared to the
not seen her with Prince Andrew. It always seemed to him that there was
not sent away with the other prisoners. Petya had heard in the army many
not she but he was so unusually beautiful, and that that was why they
not sleep.
not smile with pleasure or affection for his son, but with quiet, gentle
not so bright and poetic as the former, was stronger and more serious.
not so mad as I seemed. On the contrary I was then wiser and had
not stand his terrible physical labor but should die of it in a week, so
not stepping simply on the resounding parquet but treading with each
not stiffen while open, and with another handkerchief tied together the
not stir, for fear of betraying his unintentional presence.
not stop at any one of these positions because Kutuzov did not wish to
not submit to Speranski's opinions entirely. Everything was right and
not suppose me to be so bad. With my whole soul I wish to be what you
not survive the fall of Moscow, and now wrote French verses in albums
not take part, and after that an armistice was proclaimed. Rostov, who
not talk, but act. The spoken word is silver but the unspoken is golden.
not the French were running after them, but not daring to.
not the least feeling of fear. He was fearless, not because he had grown
not the outcome of cunning calculations, but of a feeling that lay in
not the same, not at all the same, as what had happened in his former
not the serfs' backs and foreheads, which, beat and shave as you may,
not the shaving which merely harms and hinders the working.
not think of it without tears, and did not know which had behaved better
not think of it--not till he comes back!" she told herself, and began
not thinking her own thoughts but feeling bound to think like her father
not to be the first to break silence, if she had to wait till morning.
not to be trifled with either--in a word, he was a real master!"
not to challenge Bolkonski. "Of course not!" he now thought. "Is it
not to come to the drawing room when he called to see her aunt--that it
not to fight either for or against Austria. Our political interests are
not to go to the prince with his report.
not to join in at least to listen to what he was saying. But the Emperor
not to leave their homes and that the French authorities would afford
not to let him see her cheered Princess Mary. She knew it was a proof
not to make a mistake this time but seize his hind leg.
not to notice one another. When having limbered up the only two cannon
not to slaying and destroying men but to saving and showing pity on
not to tell the whole truth which she saw. And suddenly, Natasha's lips
not to the fourth but to the fifteenth of October--that plan never was
not try to display any of these--but because of something else. He
not two hundred thousand men, and I have three times that number. I give
not understand what was said to them in French.
not understand). The more we try to explain such events in history
not understand. One was taller than the other; he wore an officer's hat
not undressed during the first three nights, in order to be ready to
not vain. He did not mind what people thought of him. Still less could
not venture to ask any questions, and shut the door again, now sitting
not vexed with her and did not reproach her. The reawakened power
not visible at all. All that struck the eye was a strong, handsome, and
not wait to be called. The shapely figure of the fair-haired soldier,
not want war and would always love and honor him--yet he set off to
not weep or shudder and during these last days they themselves felt
not what he had read that vexed him, but the fact that the life out
not what, and envying alike the notables he saw arriving at the entrance
not wish it. In a word, I make no promise. And I beg you to consider
not wish to bind Natasha and gave her perfect freedom. If after six
not wish to relate because it seemed to him not worth telling. He
not wish to see him, and would even avoid another meeting with him--an
not wish to, believe that.
not wishing to be the first to call.
not withdrawn, and was told that the enemy's fires were still in the
not worn for a long time, he went into Bilibin's study fresh, animated,
not yet been bandaged, took him, as a regimental commander, close up to
not yet dispersed before another puff appeared, followed by a report.
not yet feel himself sufficiently prepared. My benefactor then explained
not, and do not, in the least care about that scoundrel of a clerk who
not, and never did, like Speranski personally, but I like justice!"
not, it was decided at a consultation between the battalion commanders
not. Now only the commanders of detachments with staffs, and moving
not. The regiments would not be what they are if the would-be advisers
not." Joseph Alexeevich's face had looked young and bright. That day I
not?... It might easily happen," thought Rostov, "that the Emperor will
notabilities, all the Rostovs' acquaintances, were at the Razumovskis'
notabilities. At Erfurt her success had been brilliant. Napoleon himself
note from Bennigsen who sent personal reports to the Emperor, the wishes
note in the cries of the dogs.
note lying beside his plate, and proposed a toast, "To the health of the
note of hand for only sixty thousand."
note. Prince Andrew did not laugh and feared that he would be a damper
noted them down.
notes on them, and for the first two or three minutes taking no notice
nothing about firing it."
nothing about him--I was in much lower company!"
nothing about himself, adopted no prose, always appeared to be the
nothing and kept sighing for you, my charmer! He is madly, quite madly,
nothing at all except the unimportance of everything I understand, and
nothing but a trick! He has retreated and ordered the rearguard to
nothing but cause the Emperor annoyance.
nothing but harmed nobody and was a first-rate, good-natured fellow. But
nothing but love and an entreaty for forgiveness.
nothing but meanness, deceit, envy, intrigue, and ingratitude--the
nothing but satisfying his passions and would not advance from the Linen
nothing but them.
nothing but what they always said: "Having a good time? Well, I'm glad
nothing certain was known about it, partly because there was a vague
nothing else."
nothing except the people about him.
nothing extraordinary in the capture of Murat. Still, it is better to
nothing for the house, and now you wish to throw away all our--all the
nothing for their master's business. Quarante mille hommes massacres et
nothing from life but tranquillity, and that tranquillity only death
nothing in Freemasonry but the external forms and ceremonies, and prized
nothing is left for an intelligent and good man but to live out
nothing more to do. But his thoughts--the simplest, clearest, and
nothing of her and looks only at Bourienne. No, she has no pride... but
nothing of the kind. But what awaits us tomorrow? A hundred million most
nothing of what occupied everyone else. Not only did she fail to notice
nothing of what was going on around him and to be absorbed by some
nothing resembled reality. The big dark blotch might really be the
nothing shameful in this reminder. "Call him in. His name is Vincent
nothing that was considered bad in the Pavlograd regiment and, when
nothing to be said, and neither wished to give occasion for it to be
nothing to complain of."
nothing to encourage Zdrzhinski's enthusiasm but, on the contrary,
nothing to her about his love. Before he left he had a long talk with
nothing to hold on to."
nothing to learn--what softness, tenderness, and strength...."
nothing would make him alter his decision.
nothing! I,' he says, 'did that deed, and I put the knife under your
nothing! No, don't marry, my dear fellow; don't marry!" concluded Prince
nothing!"
nothing, and don't want to...."
nothing, now singly, now several at a time, some translucent, others
nothing.
nothing.
nothing. After that day he lived through many things, gaining knowledge,
nothing. Everything is now centered round the Emperor. So we will go to
nothing. I am very amiable and have a caustic wit," continued Prince
nothing. She felt that Sonya was speaking the truth, that there was such
nothing. So why should I not stay at his house? Then I played cards with
nothing. You shall be given food and lodging."
nothing... nobody. Did he know that? No, he did not and never will know
nothing; nor had he heard such a refined, smooth, soft voice; above all
nothing; teach me what to do and how to use my will! Take me, take
notice and allowed himself to reply that: 'We in France pay no attention
notice anything.
notice him, and that his whole aim now was to test the cadet's courage,
notice it at all and naively asked Balashev through what towns the
notice me? They do not even seem to see me, or if they do they look as
notice--forget what I have said!"
noticeable gap on one side of his mouth; in character he was the same as
noticed a face thrust out of the carriage window gazing at them, and
noticed by their faces that all those gentlemen had already heard that
noticed embarrassment and awkwardness on his part in her presence,
noticed everything..."
noticed how fast the troyka was flying. Nicholas looked back. With
noticed long ago at the ball in Petersburg. He was now in an adjutant's
noticed that he was pale and that his jaw quivered and shook as if in an
noticed that her father was really associating more and more with the
noticed that the wheels do not supply an explanation and has taken the
noticed the look of terror with which Pierre regarded that lifeless arm,
noticed the quivering of Napoleon's left leg which increased the more
noticed this and attributed it to his general kindness and shyness,
noticed this, as he noticed every shade of Princess Mary's character
noticed), twenty thousand were inevitably doomed to wounds and death
noticed, left the room with a pleasant smile.
noticing embarrassment on Pierre's face immediately grew bold and,
noticing that Pierre was listening, suddenly said to him:
noticing that Terenty wanted a chat, generally kept him there.
noticing that the sole of the dancer's boot was hanging loose. "What a
noticing the French drummer boy. "A prisoner? You've already been in
noticing the monk, who had risen to greet her and was drawing back the
noticing what a bad state of things it was. The regimental commander
notion of the outcome of any of his actions.
notion that medicine ever cured anyone! Killed them, yes!" said he,
notions of Antichrist, the end of the world, and "pure freedom."
notwithstanding this, Boris embraced him in a quiet, friendly way and
nourishment it affords; and the purpose of marriage is the family.
now I have no time." Besides, it seemed to him that the society of women
now and then, "Oh, why did he go away?"
now and then, silently or by a brief word, showing that he took heed of
now as the "Seeker," now as the "Sufferer," and now as the "Postulant,"
now at Pierre, that she was gradually reassured.
now at Pierre.
now at her, moved as if about to rise too, but changed his mind.
now at the cart by which he was standing, in which two wounded men
now be distributed, and surely a pardon would be granted...."
now become quite calm, quite calm."
now been admitted to the true Catholic Church and that in a few days the
now being performed and even approved of it. He now approached the
now both her daughters were settled, her only wish was to see him
now considered everything possible.
now found further confirmation of this surmise. The courtiers explained
now found nothing in common. "We will go after dinner. And would you now
now frolic about playing with a chip of wood or a straw.
now fully devoted to him and who must rejoice at his former master's
now gradually opening before me." But five of the other virtues which
now have I understood all the happiness of life. No, I shall not agree
now he again seemed to be saying the same words to her, only in her
now heard nothing else. On the right of the battery soldiers shouting
now his plump hairy chest to the brush with which his valet was rubbing
now in mourning. How can one think of it!"
now it seemed to him that that meeting had had in it something very
now knew. Prince Vasili, who having obtained a new post and some
now leading him somewhere with unhesitating assurance on their faces
now necessary that man, governed by his senses, should find in virtue
now numbered only nine hundred was one of the first to arrive that night
now nursing. She had grown stouter and broader, so that it was difficult
now ordered the people to catch all spies and bring them to him, and now
now realizing the danger to the old count, Nicholas, and Prince
now regain the feeling he then had, but was tormented by the question
now replaced by Marshal Junot's enormous baggage train, convoyed by
now rushing along the road to Brunn and will be here in a day or two."
now saw something else that absorbed all her attention. She saw the
now several quickly one after another. Again all was silent and then
now somewhat stiff in the saddle. Chekmar held in leash three formidable
now taken possession of her--the life of a world of strenuous and free
now taking place.
now that the time has come for these young ones to be thus boldly,
now the same happy smile as then when he had looked into her eyes. "I
now they wanted her to sacrifice the very thing that constituted the
now they were all bluish, lit up, and glittering with frost or dew.
now to approach the gentlemen-in-waiting in that plight he would not be
now turned on Moscow, the army, and Napoleon.
now two battalions of Poles, he gave a sidelong glance at Ermolov who
now went out into the passage to hear better.
now with the Swiss tutor Dessalles, and showing an unnatural animation,
now without some new fashion.... And what have you to do yourself?" she
now! It's your turn to sing the ba'cawolla--I entweat you!"
now!"
now, the whole difference of opinion is based on the recognition or
now, war is the favorite pastime of the idle and frivolous. The military
now, when my heart fails me and my mouth feels dry at the mere sight of
now--that's another thing; but you civilized people, you ought to know
now--this duel! Have these people no feeling, or honor? Knowing him to
now. Both liked to recall how they had regarded each other when as
now. But where am I?"
now. No one will deny that that cause was, on the one hand, its advance
now... it's not a tache... Natasha... sister, black eyes... Na...
now?" In front, already far ahead the deep bell of the sleigh ringing
now?" This question suddenly presented itself to her, and in answer she
now?" she thought.
nowadays? Why, if he was so jealous, as I see things he should have
nowhere else for the family to talk but here at the ball. She did not
nowhere encountering the enemy. On the contrary, the soldiers became
nowhere, and were ending their days leisurely; when he saw those old
nuisance to everybody, that snub-nosed Petya with his merry black eyes
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
number of those conditions is as infinite as the infinity of space. And
number, ever increasing and increasing, exceeded what it had been in
number--as a result of which the superiority had passed to the Russian
numbers, he was again allotted his old squadron.
numerous these detachments became.
nurse and nurse Savishna in the late princess' rooms and Princess Mary
nurse had told him long ago: that God is here and everywhere. In his
nurse is unnatural and harmful. When her next baby was born, despite
nurse's French, at which he and Boris used to laugh long ago.
nurse, Praskovya Savishna, who hardly ever came to that room as the old
nurse, as she stood in one of the doorways.
nurse, or with "God's folk" who sometimes came by the back door to see
nursery, but Sonya was not there either. Natasha concluded that she must
nurses who knit stockings, and that there is something soothing in
nursing of her children, and sharing every moment of her husband's life,
nuts. All these conversations, especially the joking with the girls,
o'clock all had been brought into due order. The ranks were drawn up on
o'clock left the third column with which he had been and galloped toward
o'clock the booming of cannon was added to the sound of musketry. Many
o'clock were stationed inactive behind Semenovsk, under heavy artillery
o'clock, but it was already five minutes to ten, and the girls were not
oak, I shall not discover the cause of the bells ringing, the engine
oats from their movable troughs and sparrows flew down and pecked the
oats were standing, and some bushes near which rose the smoke of
obedience--which did not even seem to him a virtue, but a joy. (He now
obedient, and insignificant atom. They followed Prince Dolgorukov out
obediently and was about to go but at that instant there came into
obey," answered the quartermaster.
obeying, and suddenly doubts arose in his mind. "Where am I? What am
object of all these words and all this trouble was, after converting her
object that lay on the salver. It was the Order of St. George of the
objective, and hardly ever uses a weapon himself. The commander in chief
objects mentioned by the Rhetor, this last, that of improving mankind,
obligation, assuming an air of much greater importance than he had done
obligations but also from that feeling which, it seemed to him, he had
obligations."
obliged the historians, after they had apparently rejected the divine
obliged to admit that some of these transfers are not normal delegations
obliged to take part in useless aggressive movements. The lesson of the
oblique movements deduced by him from the history of Frederick the
obscure rumors were always current among them: at one time a rumor that
obscure, impalpable, and general abstraction which can cover all
obscurity to the common task. Whatever question arose, a swarm of these
obscurity, power and subordination, strength and weakness, health and
observation she had of life, the greater was her wonder at the
observation, and experience, but had he possessed all the faculties he
observation, reason and the will are merely secretions of the brain, and
observations as to what had been burned down and what this or that part
observations were men who had no belief in anything, nor desire for
observe only the muscular nervous activity, but in man we observe
observe propriety. It was evident that Kutuzov despised cleverness and
observe the enemy. Thirdly, as proof that the position on which the
observed by the universal historians, and so to explain the resultant
observed in her at this time. He was, however, preparing to go away and
observed the faces of those around him.
observed. Some see it as a force directly inherent in heroes, as the
observing and the less complex the character and mind of the man in
obstinacy," said Kirsten.
obstinate. I tried threats, but he only grew angrier. Then I took the
obstinately taciturn Rostov, saying that the latter had probably come to
obtained all this? Chiefly by knowing how to choose my aquaintances. It
obtained could not be delivered in time. If news was received one day
obtained his captaincy during the campaign, had gained the confidence of
obtained his leave. His hussar comrades--not only those of his own
obtained through an acquaintance and sent to her son, asking him to take
obtained two decorations for Austerlitz.
obtuseness to everything other than himself disarmed Pierre.
obvious falsehood, and that Balashev still stood silently before him in
obvious, and yet Napoleon offered and Kutuzov accepted that battle.
occasion had been driven back by grapeshot from the four isolated guns
occasion, yet both would be right. He liked to talk and he talked well,
occasionally drew it down to meet the lower lip. As is always the case
occasionally glanced at her face as he explained his opinion on the
occasionally plucking leaves from a branch that met his hand, sometimes
occasionally went within musket range, made their own arrangements
occasionally.
occasioned by the sausage eaters.
occasioned the Emperor.
occasions, and of his orders during the battle not being as good as
occasions--that he loved her and had never loved any other woman more
occupation of Moscow by the enemy and its destruction by fire, the most
occupation of Moscow would not be the end of the campaign, for he had
occupation, came up to her for a moment and made haste to go away,
occupation.
occupation. It was too dreadful to be under the burden of these
occupations as hindrances to life, and considered that they were all
occupations, the children's upbringing, were all selected not merely
occupied by Boris and Zhilinski.
occupied by the Emperors and their retinues.
occupied by the French, with lilac bushes still showing dark green
occupied by the enemy, and thereby averting danger from Tula and other
occupied by them.
occupied by troops. Bennigsen loudly criticized this mistake, saying
occupied near Kaluga.
occupied not with what was before his eyes but with something special
occupied one of the highest posts in the Empire. In Vilna she had formed
occupied that region, and the Russians--the uninjured and slightly
occupied with evening parties, dinners, lunches, and balls, giving him
occupied. He was himself always occupied: writing his memoirs, solving
occupied. The German who knew little French, answered the two first
occupies the place?" asked Prince Andrew.
occupy a position he had not himself chosen, because the popular demand
occupy all the houses one after another. Pierre, who knew German,
occupy is a strong one, and while they are marching to go round me on
occupying Vienna, there is much evidence to the contrary. Napoleon's
occurred and the sovereigns once again all began to oppress their
occurred before our fathers' eyes, and for them it was a question of the
occurred to him. On the contrary, he became more and more elated. It
occurred to his regiment, but in reality he did not himself know what
occurred to none of them that it was three o'clock and time to go to
occurred, Princess Mary and Natasha were present.
occurred.
occurred. "Any police officer would have done as much! If we had had
occurrences quite apart from, and unconnected with, the battle. It was
occurs under certain limits of time, and where it is not one will that
occurs--the continuity of movement in time) and do not lose sight of the
occurs. The allies detest Napoleon whom they regard as the cause of
occurs: a backwash which serves to solve the apparently insuperable
of "author! author!" were heard in the crowd), said that "hell must be
of "the heart of Russia." Not only did it seem to him (as to all
of (broken but mended) glass in it for a window. When it was very cold,
of 1807 Rostov knew by experience that men always lie when describing
of 1812, has not experienced an uncomfortable feeling of regret,
of August (he considered that it could and should have been defended)
of Austerlitz, but wore a tight new uniform with Russian and foreign
of Austerlitz: nine tenths of the men in the Russian army were then in
of Austria, and having, as his historian tells us, tenderly embraced
of Bagration's detachment. His hussars were placed along the line
of Bonaparte's, that will be another story and we'll fire off some
of Bonaparte, encountering a population that was unfriendly to it,
of Bonaparte.
of Borodino was Napoleon's senseless flight from Moscow, his retreat
of Borodino. He had sought it in philanthropy, in Freemasonry, in the
of Buonaparte, spy, get out of my house! Be off, I tell you..."
of Christian men professing the law of love of their fellows slew one
of Eau de Cologne. His full face, rather young-looking, with its
of Emperor Paul, others again in the new uniforms of Alexander's time or
of England and expended on no other undertaking so much time and effort,
of England, inspired by such hatred of our nation! This victory will
of Europe!" he declared, his face pale and distorted by anger, and he
of Europe, though to the chroniclers of the Crusades that event appeared
of French soldiers by worn-out Russians continued at Krasnoe for three
of Godfreys and Minnesingers, but the history of the life of the peoples
of Helene. Some, as if unwilling to distract her from an important
of Him, my dear sir. Of what, of whom, are we speaking? Whom hast thou
of Honor for the affair on the seventh of September," he introduced
of Illuminism, * met it with a coldness that surprised Pierre. The Grand
of Jerusalem--had been clearly defined by historic leaders. Popes,
of Kuragin's in Moscow, and Natasha tried to overhear it just because he
of Mack's defeat, the camp life of the officers of this squadron was
of Moscow and had always been protected from the consequences by "my
of Moscow by making any individual, or any group of people, responsible
of Moscow habits in which he felt himself held captive and lead him to a
of Moscow, Rostov was not seized with despair, anger, the desire for
of Moscow, he proposed to move troops from the right to the left flank
of Natasha who had never experienced anything of this sort, had never
of Ney--a greatness of soul consisting in this: that he made his way by
of October this kind of warfare had taken definite shape: it had become
of October: kitchens and sheds were dismantled, carts loaded, and troops
of Ostrovna. Still laughing and talking, the officers began hurriedly
of Paul I of Russia who recognizes his government; chance contrives
of Peter and Paul, his patron saints. In another place the women with
of Petersburg.
of Platon who lay beside him, and he felt that the world that had been
of Police. "What a fine, good-looking officer and how kind. Fancy
of Prince Andrew Bolkonski, appointed to the command of a regiment of
of Prince Andrew, which seemed to her so apart from all human affairs
of Prince Gruzinski's house on the other, Pierre suddenly heard the
of Prince Vasili, but visualized her whole body only veiled by its gray
of Princess Mary he experienced a feeling of shyness and even of fear,
of Princess Mary's arrival, she softly left his room and hastened to her
of Providence in this meeting of the princess and Nicholas.
of Prussia, in order to draw Boris into the conversation.
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
of Rostov in the Club porch.
of Rousseau's view, with which he quite agreed, that to have a wet
of Rumyantsev, the French, Marya Fedorovna, the Tsarevich, and others,
of Russia, are evidently of that kind, and only by much straining can
of Russia, minimizing as far as possible the sufferings of our people
of Russia, or of the direction of affairs in Paris, or of diplomatic
of Russian defeats led to the total destruction of their enemy and the
of Sonya, who blushed and smiled unnaturally. In the midst of his talk
of Speranski's: this man, not long since an insignificant divinity
of St. Bartholomew was due to Charles IX's stomach being deranged. But
of Tikhon and the doctor when they turned him over. Several times she
of Vladimir and Anna, and he still filled the quiet and agreeable post
of War but also his Most August Majesty the Emperor and King Francis
of War needlessly deviating."
of War; Count Bennigsen, the senior general in rank; the Grand Duke
of Weyrother's voice, he opened his one eye with an effort.
of a Helen. "But no doubt it always is and must be so!" he consoled
of a contemporary, the consequences of which are still unknown to me.
of a conversation that was started about Napoleon's Spanish affairs,
of a doctor to whom an old wife wishes to explain the treatment of a
of a force compelling men to direct their activity toward a certain end.
of a great man executing a duc--or even an ordinary man who--is innocent
of a handsome youth at Sonya and the young lady visitor.
of a hot bath."
of a hundred thousand we must expect at least twenty thousand wounded,
of a kind then just coming into fashion.
of a list his wife drew up, had now bought everything, not forgetting
of a locomotive to clear the snow from the rails in front: they clear
of a man's footstep, and then her face resumed its cold and malevolent
of a mile was stopped on the highroad. Rostov saw the Cossacks and then
of a new gallery or conservatory, the inauguration of a private theater
of a prayer, but she could not pray. She felt that a different world had
of a ruling prince, in a crown--an alleged descendant of Rurik and
of a sack, dashed gaily across the brook toward the camp.
of a satirist, and laugh ironically at his opponents; now grow severely
of a side street.
of a skillful rider and, slightly bending over, disengaged his saber
of a solitary candle on an empty box, and these officers would on no
of a special shape the prince had himself designed, and a leather case
of a subject, she did not stop talking, but chattered about the
of a war, and Rostov, conscious of his advantageous position in the
of a wife who was a celebrated beauty and of millions of money.
of about forty, with a double chin and full red lips, entered carrying a
of actions that would so completely have accomplished that purpose,
of affairs in the Russian army, but no one anticipated any danger of
of affairs, whatever your ultimate plans may be, the interest of Your
of age, whom Pierre had formerly met at the gypsies' and knew as a bad
of agreement with which for fifteen years he had been accustomed to
of all differences of faith, understood the full importance of the rite
of all except Pfuel had one common trait that had not been noticeable
of all our levies, both those now barring the enemy's path and those
of all she did suddenly set to work too. At first her intervention in
of all that mass of huge and handsome men, of all those brilliant,
of all things human came to him oftener than before. At the same time
of all this, the soldiers of Denisov's squadron fed chiefly on "Mashka's
of all to Boris' narrative was shown by Helene. She asked him several
of all worldly things, and to them she showed her albums filled with
of all, absolutely all those who take part in an event, it is quite
of allegiance and duty... I am sorry you weren't there. They all fell
of amusement which someone for some reason had to provide for him.
of an attack spread through the squadron. The command to form up rang
of an event; but how a book, Le Contrat social, had the effect of making
of an uprising in the city? The inhabitants were leaving it and the
of another's health. Rostov went to the middle of the room and looking
of antiquity had been performed by General Raevski. He recounted how
of any word or deed taken separately.
of anything, Dolokhov, looking straight in his face, said slowly and
of appearing a ruler and a source of power, becomes an insignificant,
of approaching death. As she stepped to the door she already saw in
of approximately ascertaining the enemy's position--by cavalry
of army reform, which had been accepted for consideration and which they
of artistic pleasure.
of assistant to the head of the staff of the assistant commander of the
of author.
of awakening, she embraced her friend, but noticing Sonya's look of
of awe and even servility. A deference such as he had never before
of bareheaded officers, soldiers, and militiamen surrounded the icon.
of battle, and by the sight of the gallant Apsherons, his comrades in
of battle. There were still the same suffering, exhausted, and sometimes
of battles was evidently culminating in a panic.
of bees and declares that bees exist to sting people. A poet admires the
of being afraid roused him again. "I cannot be afraid," thought he, and
of being in uniform imparted something strange and fantastic to these
of being presented to the Duke. Prince Bolkonski glanced at the young
of blessedness which now flooded his heart with glad emotion.
of bloodthirsty rage. And when after Pierre's departure Helene returned
of blue cloth and wearing medals. In the noblemen's hall there was
of blunders. "The more mistakes that are made the better. It will at any
of both packs mingled and broke apart again, but both were becoming more
of both the army and the wealthy city.
of bread, to move farther into the interior of Prussia, for only one
of broadcloth, he had no knapsack or cap, his head was bandaged, and
of cards said: "Bank, gentlemen!"
of carpenters hoping for high pay arrived in Moscow every day, and on
of carriage horses, and began to overtake the hare, but it was easier
of cause, mathematics seeks law, that is, the property common to all
of cavalry came up and disappeared in the sea of mist. In front and
of chairs. Then one of those conversations began which last out until,
of chance or genius.
of chances of meeting her. But that day's encounter in church had, he
of chemical affinity, or of the vital force, forms the content of
of chief of the Emperor's staff. He came out of the study into the
of circumstances. But at the same time just this aim demands the
of citizens and of a deputation, and even the burning of Moscow, did not
of columns from Russia, of some victory gained by the Austrians, and of
of command, and from the battery one saw how those ranks of infantry
of communications, recross the river lower down, and frustrate his
of conflict but reported what they had heard from others; and also
of considering what might come of such love-making, as he never had any
of constraint or self-reproach on account of his outburst that morning,
of contemptible men whom he despises, saying only:
of corn, scrutinized the strips of ryefield which here and there were
of corpses. The keeper opens the two center partitions to examine
of correcting her faults, the possibility of a new, clean life, and of
of course in the Karagins' drawing room, and Julie, suddenly abandoning
of death. He consoled himself with the thought that he fulfilled
of debauchery; but to promise a maid to marry her... to deceive, to
of deceiving me, if it really were true. Yes, if it were true, but I
of decomposition; and as the wolves were kept off by the passing men the
of deep bass voices, and in the intervals sighs and the shuffling of
of delighted amazement.
of depression which she could not master. She felt sorry for herself:
of deviating from what had previously seemed the most natural course--a
of diamonds and a flight of marble steps and the silver roofs of fairy
of difficulties that might be encountered, as well as fresh people who
of disarmed Frenchmen pass by. The French, excited by all that had
of disease without help while material assistance could so easily be
of dissolution in which all those who are in it are inevitably wiped
of diverse and complex causes.
of dominating another's will was in itself a pleasure, a habit, and a
of doubt showed itself on his face as he spoke.
of duty, he rose to see some visitors off and, stroking his scanty gray
of each shot, as at the word of command, the whole squadron with its
of each.
of early dawn, hundreds of feet splashing through the mud. The esaul
of earth were already being thrown over the whole body. One of the
of earth, but have lived and shall live forever, there, in the Whole,"
of ecclesiastical, patriotic eloquence. Prince Vasili himself, famed for
of enterprise which always accompany the opening of a campaign.
of eternal peace and blessedness?" she thought.
of events and that Moscow was in effect already abandoned. The other
of events, he would listen with a mild and pitying smile and surprise
of events? It's too late now when Vienna is occupied by the French
of everyone, and the innumerable committees and commissions of whose
of everything. On earth, here on this earth" (Pierre pointed to the
of examples, if our observation is constantly directed to seeking the
of expressing his views regardless of anybody. All the benefit he might
of expression on his face. Now his forehead would pucker into deep folds
of face, evidently worn out with childbearing--she had had twelve.
of factory hands, house serfs, and peasants, with whom some officials,
of fate and the designs of rogues. During the few days he spent in
of feeling Pierre had noticed the day before and had fully understood
of feet be heard.
of fellow. As for the past two years people have amused themselves
of feminine charm so strange to me now, is it possible that it will one
of fighting at one point, and the hesitation of all the commanders. And
of fire and had descended into the dip, he was met by some of the staff,
of fire and sometimes even entered it--repeatedly led into it huge
of fire be increased in an abandoned, wooden town where foreign troops
of firing. Drawing himself up, he viewed the field of battle opening out
of flying projectiles from the booming of the reports, glanced at the
of formal demonstrations which would very soon end in peace, and the
of freedom not only would he be unable to understand life, but he would
of frieze, blue trousers, and large torn Hessian boots. The little
of fright. I did, 'pon my word, I got that frightened!" said he, as if
of frost, when there were only seven or eight hours of daylight and
of general, merry laughter.
of generation, he sees hundreds of dull, listless, and sleepy shells of
of genius with a whole series of extraordinary chances that this ram,
of giving battle, and above all the abundance of provisions in Kaluga
of giving way to the pity they felt for the prisoners and so rendering
of going to the back entrance where his carriage awaited him, went
of gold. It may indeed make jingling coin, but will do no more than
of gravity he had previously lacked. Formerly all pecuniary questions,
of green grass were pushing up and lifting last year's leaves. The
of greeting, he asked Pierre whether the soldier Platoche to whom he had
of hair sticking up behind and the hastily brushed hair on his temples
of hand and at once disperses uncontrollably as soon as it reaches rich
of happiness.
of hay or anything. You see, we were going away, so he would get it all;
of hearts with a torn corner, which he had picked up from the floor. He
of her beauty and fearful because of it. Her face struck Pierre and,
of her box, nodded to her, and leaning forward asked a question, with a
of her drooping face. She moved, and the ball rolled off her knees. She
of her friend's sorrow, "I'm sure Vera has said something to you since
of her life. This comforting dream and hope were given her by God's
of her nature; but now he seemed to be trying to understand the most
of her neutrality and draw her into the war; how part of that army was
of her saint's-day fete, turned away at once and addressed herself to
of her sight.
of her sons under her wing, and she hoped to arrange matters for her
of her. As soon as she had struck her pose, and smiled triumphantly,
of her. She must sacrifice herself for the family that had reared and
of her. She was ready to sacrifice everything for her benefactors.
of hers seemed to be the only serious and real society. Natasha saw by
of herself her eyes under their thick long lashes watched her cousin who
of him and loved him. But he was kind and gentle only to those of his
of him and the same words rose to his lips. But she did not give him
of him but forget him, quite forget him for the present. I can't bear
of him was misty darkness. Rostov could see nothing, peer as he would
of him--at the battery. He now saw clearly the figure of a red-haired
of him.
of him. "We French are merciful after victory, but we do not pardon
of him: when Achilles has covered that tenth, the tortoise has covered
of himself, he said, as if merely asking his father to let him have the
of his arrival she almost ran into the drawing room, flushed and beaming
of his arrival. A wax candle stood at each side of the minister's bent
of his battalion, his steward, his major-domo, and various petitioners.
of his book with his old hands which from excitement he could not keep
of his children, but this Pierre was his favorite."
of his coat and looking down at him--the Englishman was short--began
of his conduct and repenting of it, Rostov, with downcast eyes, was
of his displeasure without attaining her object. "Besides," he wrote,
of his friendly relations with Pierre as a boon companion, Dolokhov
of his gun..." a soldier whose greatcoat was well tucked up said gaily,
of his head. He came up to the porch gloomily, hanging his head.
of his heart; it did not enter his head that a pastime so pleasant to
of his kindness and irascibility. Berg, as usual, kept silent when the
of his leash, walked along just behind "Uncle's" horse with the serene
of his life could he understand goodness, beauty, or truth, or the
of his life.
of his life. With his hand on his saddlebow, he was ready to dismount
of his love for Natasha and his firm resolve to make her his wife.
of his marriage it had seemed strange to him that his wife should expect
of his mouth read to the Austrian general the following passage, in
of his orders during the fight could be executed.
of his orders were executed and during the battle he did not know what
of his own mots, releasing the wrinkles on his forehead, and pausing.
of his own--that is, which he had taken from other kings--to the Empress
of his own. The difference between his former and present self was that
of his reign, being the savior of Russia.
of his return.
of his sister's face to see if she was in earnest. Then he jumped down
of his supposed death and the tragic loss of his wife. Besides this
of his trap. A French cook accused of being a spy was being flogged. The
of his uniform, his chest expanded and his back drawn in, slightly
of his whip fell on the apron of the equipage. The woman screamed
of his, and that he was not called on to judge concerning them and
of historian to the question of what force causes events to happen are
of history can and should follow a path contrary to that taken by other
of home grew stronger the nearer he approached it--far stronger, as
of hope. The previous autumn, the hunting, "Uncle," and the Christmas
of horse's hoofs approaching at a trot along the line of hussars was
of horsemen coming toward them. In front of the group, on a black horse
of horses galloping forward was heard, shouts came from various sides,
of horses had been sent up the highroad to meet the German doctor from
of hostility to one another, but each camp retained its own tendency.
of how beside himself and all aflame with excitement, he had flown like
of how he had saved the life of a Pole (in general, the saving of
of human appellations he could not renounce it, said the officer's look
of human feeling, strained to the utmost, that had held the crowd in
of humanity be regarded--as the result of the free, or as the result of
of humanity went on as unceasingly as the flow of time. Various groups
of hussars, but in the distance was still the same misty darkness. "Why
of imitation gold can be used only among a group of people who agree to
of importance, when they relate to a battle that has been lost, and the
of influential men on the staff would be stirred up by this news,
of innumerable circumstances the Russians could not give battle till
of international relations, conquests, and alliances, the historians are
of invasion that had advanced with such momentum rolled on for some
of inviting the other to take a seat beside him. Pierre felt reluctant
of it and wished to hear it again and again. Anisya Fedorovna came in
of it gets made or because people try to exchange it for gold, so also
of it!"
of it," said "Uncle."
of it.
of it.
of it. How much more complex than this is the game of war, which
of it. If the whole activity of the leaders serves as the expression of
of it. The count had the father fetched, but the fellow stuck to it.
of its alliances..." he spoke this last word with particular emphasis as
of its burned ruins no one swore to be avenged on the French, but they
of its honeyed firmness and softness.
of its own life. By the indefinite signs which, even at a distance,
of its tireless hind wheels, and began arranging the breech-band on his
of itself when ripe, but if picked unripe the apple is spoiled, the tree
of joy in his eyes, looked round him, not knowing how to answer the
of joyful animation produced by the sights and sounds of the battlefield
of kissing. When Prince Andrew went in the two princesses, who had only
of languages, the respect shown him by the French, his simplicity, his
of large parties--one a Pole and the other a German--sent invitations
of laurels for us, you know, I said to myself: 'That is a monarch,' and
of laws for Russia. Nowadays they are always writing!" and he laughed
of life and make blunder after blunder. Kutuzov alone at last gains a
of life had seemed extinguished, now flashed with brilliant light. It
of life that had seized Natasha was so evidently irrepressible and
of life, devoting himself with special activity to building operations
of life, escaped from reality into a world of delirium.
of life, the arrangement of the day so as to be in time everywhere,
of life. And that other side of life, of which she had never before
of logic must admit that conclusion, and in spite of their lyrical
of love and happiness with her! Oh, what a boy I was!" he said aloud
of love and sadness. It was plain that she was following a train of
of love which pervaded the Rostov household that winter and, now after
of man, is sentenced to..." But before Pierre--who at that moment
of marriage, but there were not many such and they remained silent,
of marrying to her brother, and who was at that time in mourning for her
of means or because he did not like to part from his young wife in
of meat stuck on a ramrod. His sleeves were rolled up and his sinewy,
of men can do without the conception of power, the existence of power is
of men had perished in fleeing from Pratzen. The French had not yet
of men migrated, were impoverished, or were enriched, and millions
of men, reckoning those transporting and feeding the army--moved from
of men.
of mental development, like a child, a madman, or a simpleton--then,
of military bluntness and geniality with which he always addressed the
of millions in Russia for the humiliation of England. But these
of millions of Frenchmen submitting to the Bourbons. That Chateaubriand,
of millions. And therefore to explain how from these relations of theirs
of mind, Pierre carried out an intention he had long had of visiting his
of mingling shouts.
of moderation in judgment, hated him cordially from reports of his
of most of the Prussian fortresses had been received, when our troops
of mourning for the younger female generation in the Rostov household.
of music do when they hear a false note. The two women let go of one
of my fatherland.
of my nation." But he continued to exert all his powers to restrain his
of natural forces; they anticipate war between their sovereigns; the
of needles, he also saw by glimpses a red halo round the candle, and
of new and brilliant ideas occur which there is hardly time to put in
of nothing.
of observation it often happens that the observer, influenced by the
of occupation, that is, of his way of life--now that that was so
of occurrences; but each command follows from another, and never refers
of officers and courtiers, was riding a bobtailed chestnut mare, a
of old Cunctators."
of old acquaintances and at the same time, unaware of it himself and
of old beer. From Sventsyani they retired farther and farther to Drissa,
of one man, but in the interaction of many persons connected with the
of one of them.
of one side of it. For the fact that, from the point of view of
of operation was too extended, and it proposed that instead of, or
of our arms and of the day's work, they assumed a serious expression,
of our error in this matter is due to the fact that in the historical
of our life we shall more quickly reach our aim, but on the contrary,
of our men fell, among them the round-faced officer who had marched so
of our understanding of the definite position occupied by the man
of pensive tenderness. He felt that what he now said and did would
of people formed and dissolved, the coming formation and dissolution of
of people sat there, not merrymaking, but somberly whispering, and
of people shouting at a tavern Mamonov's Cossacks had set up across the
of peoples took place in consequence of such and such geographic,
of personal success; his mind, however, was occupied by the different
of police. You think I won't get to him? Robbery is not permitted to
of possessing it agitated and awed him.
of preparations for leaving Moscow, all confirmed the supposition that
of pride, indolence, and ignorance. Forgive me, my dear sir, but if I
of profound thought. The round, steady, hawk's eyes looked before him
of profound wisdom.
of purpose and possessed of authority and power.
of putting on speed as she usually did Milka suddenly raised her tail
of race among these people--this eighth and largest party of those
of raisins. "Have some, gentlemen, have some!"
of rapture and devotion to the man in the gray coat who was standing on
of reason is the assumption of and search for a cause, for without a
of reason. It was evident that the thought could never occur to him
of reflection are generally in a serious frame of mind. At such moments
of reinforcements needed, of the impossibility of driving back the
of ridiculing the Masonic beliefs--"I am afraid I am very far from
of right and wrong. For the "great" man nothing is wrong, there is no
of rubles every day by his neighbors, who looked upon an opportunity to
of rule, or words, or ideas, but faith in an ever-living, ever-manifest
of sale for them: (1) From today, peasants, husbandmen, and those
of scoundrels. It will soon be over, it can't be that, it can't be! Only
of separate states to the writers of general histories and the new
of several authorities, their struggles and their falls, result solely
of several thousand men could produce. The lights spread farther and
of simpletons.") L'amour which the Frenchman worshiped consisted
of sincere penitence, and Prince Andrew glanced so meekly now at her and
of singers stood outside the windows. The officer was admitted and
of sixteen who had recently joined the regiment, was now in the same
of sixteen, evidently passionately in love with him (he did not doubt
of sixteen, had been in Paris and Copenhagen, and now held a rather
of slaves? Have you helped them physically and morally? No! You have
of slender needles or splinters, to the sound of this whispered music.
of slime that covered her soul and seemed to her impenetrable, delicate
of society, they saw everything upside down, and all they did for the
of soldiers with brick-red hands, necks, and faces, who were splashing
of soldiers. "It can't be an attack, for they are not moving; it can't
of some dislocation and blunder spread through the ranks. How such
of some force commensurate with the whole movement of the peoples.
of some three acres around. Crowds of men of various arms, wounded and
of somebody and answered all her questions in monosyllables. He was in
of something too large and unsuited to the place, came over her face
of sons and brothers.
of sorrow.
of soul by not fearing to take on himself the whole responsibility of
of soul. She has refused to evacuate Malta. She wanted to find,
of sound, white teeth.
of speech, and their judgment of what was good and bad. Only when he
of states and nations increases or decreases.
of streets the patrol arrested five more Russian suspects: a small
of such a thing, it is only the cabinet that says it."
of such an incomprehensible Being, a Being all-powerful, eternal, and
of suffering and death for himself. At that moment he did not desire
of suppleness and especially of firmness and endurance.
of supporting one another in the path of virtue, and that is how
of suspense usual at such moments. Outside the house, beyond the gates,
of tactics which is accepted as infallible. That rule says that an
of talk that came from the resting troops. There was no wind. As he
of talking? As it is we have worn the poor girl out," said Marya
of temples and supplemented as far as he could the collection of alms,
of tempting wares. The Pavlograds held feast after feast, celebrating
of that crowd terrible screams arose. Petya galloped up, and the
of that day in his usual way. He examined the bailiff's accounts of
of that kind. He neither saw nor understood anything of the sort. He
of that man's will to the Deity, history cannot without contradictions
of that money, so that this seven of hearts meant for him not only the
of that morning's sitting of the Council of State opened by the Emperor,
of that same law of love and forgiveness, a priest, gave the soldier a
of that scoundrel?" he asked Denisov.
of that supposed power, turns away from it, and gives it into the hands
of the "great nation" and the "great man," and regretted our rupture
of the Archduke Ferdinand and Mack, and Kutuzov, not considering this
of the Azov and Podolsk infantry and the Pavlograd hussars--was
of the Bourbon cause. The sovereigns! Why, they are sending ambassadors
of the Bourbons plainly assert that these events were produced by the
of the Emperor Alexander from the army to Sergey Kuzmich, in which the
of the Emperor like a cloud of haze across a clear sky and vanished.
of the Emperor's anxiety. That day Prince Vasili no longer boasted of
of the Emperor."
of the First Class and the Emperor showed him the highest honors, but
of the French Emperor's palace, arrived at Napoleon's quarters at
of the French army along the Smolensk road became well defined, what
of the French bivouac they were to attack next day.
of the French came from all sides, and in one village, ten miles from
of the French had ceased, the Russian army, which had been continually
of the French was unguarded were merely final indications that it was
of the French were not to blame in the matter. Moscow was set on fire by
of the Gospel truth which has become for me a principle of life: not
of the Grand Duke's quick temper he related with gusto how in Galicia he
of the Highest Authorities it is said that Kutuzov was a cunning court
of the Legion of Honor and Napoleon the Order of St. Andrew of the
of the Preobrazhensk regiment stood on the right and a battalion of the
of the Prussian army. As soon as he had finished she turned to him with
of the Rostovs' house at Otradnoe. He heard merry girlish cries behind
of the Russian David, shall suddenly smite his head in his bloodthirsty
of the Russian army, sent army corps out along the different roads, and
of the Russian war, "half were Austrians, Prussians, Saxons, Poles,
of the Scottish lodge of Freemasons at a table in his low room cloudy
of the Song of Songs. And looking at those drawings I dreamed I felt
of the Swedes, Balashev wished to reply that when Russia is on her side
of the Thabor Bridge is delightful! It is not exactly stupidity, nor
of the Uhlans. They swooped down close to the French dragoons, something
of the accounts with Mitenka did not last long. The village elder,
of the accusations that were being directed against Kutuzov.
of the action and our judgment of it.
of the action balls and shells began flying all over his regiment and
of the action may be--can we ever conceive either complete freedom or
of the action, but all these reports were false, both because it was
of the actual battlefield. They began to meet wounded men. One with a
of the advance. As soon as an Austrian officer showed himself near a
of the apparently original action. That a criminal was reared among male
of the army and of the men and parties engaged in it, and he deduced for
of the army regulations quickly receded to a secondary place in his
of the barbarians, or of the decrees of Napoleon III, or of someone's
of the bare trees often fell across the road and hid the brilliant
of the barn, the burning grain in which diffused a cakelike aroma all
of the battle and had now caused him to run away from his home and, in
of the battlefield. From all sides adjutants continued to arrive at a
of the boulevards whom he visited of an evening. He led the mazurka at
of the camp at Drissa, according to Pfuel's plan, but on changing the
of the campfire, waving his uplifted arm.
of the cannon.
of the cannon. He heard the whistle of bullets above him unceasingly and
of the case. The fortifying of the Kremlin, for which la Mosquee (as
of the chase. The hare they had started was a strong and swift one. When
of the chiffonier and dressing table Berg involuntarily changed his tone
of the chimney stacks and tumble-down walls of the burned-out quarters
of the city and its regular life restored.
of the city was that they could see. A third officer, who by his accent
of the city," explains Count Rostopchin. "Why were bundles of useless
of the coach with wide open eyes, and the expression in them which the
of the coachmen helped him into the vehicle.
of the commander in chief's special favor he was sent with the news of
of the cost of rebuilding the town and country houses, speaking of this
of the council of war. They were drinking tea, and only awaited Prince
of the court scandals contained in the biographies of a Napoleon or
of the crew bustling round the guns, from the sight of the blood of men
of the crowd Petya had seen in the Square, there was a striking
of the crowd and the shrieks of the woman were due to the fact that
of the crowd.
of the crowd. Like the seventh and last wave that shatters a ship, that
of the day. Nicholas, who had been visiting some neighbors that morning,
of the devil. Thrust them aside as she would, questions continually
of the dip in the ground at the rear was hurried and noisy, but the
of the diplomatic corps. With Prince Hippolyte Kuragin, who was a
of the divine. To love life is to love God. Harder and more blessed
of the dragoons had already retreated beyond the dip in the ground, as
of the enemy flared up, and while it retreated the army increased and
of the enemy's lines, which all day long had yielded ground to us at
of the essence of life.
of the fact that he traveled ten times as fast as the tortoise. By
of the feast proposed the Emperor's health. "Not 'our Sovereign, the
of the feebleness of age, "Bolkonski!" he whispered, pointing to the
of the field he stood on was well-known and familiar ground. Though he
of the field of Borodino.
of the finest fortune in Russia. It is rumored that Prince Vasili played
of the firing and shouting. But the firing and shouting did not relate
of the flag... Well, never mind, it's true I'm to blame, to blame all
of the former spirituous fragrant smell of honey and venom, and the warm
of the future. "What then?... Then, I don't know.... But why talk
of the girl in white, obviously awaiting the beat to start singing with
of the guns and musketry on the fleches grew so dense that it covered
of the hand he breaks them to smithereens and installs himself in the
of the heap, something indestructible, which though intangible is the
of the heroism and devotion of his troops fighting at Salamanca, at
of the highroad (from Moscow to Smolensk) and almost at a right angle
of the hill amid the smoke a Russian battery that was still firing and
of the horse, of the morning, of the doctor's wife, but not once of the
of the hosts, as many as a hundred visitors would gather there for a day
of the hothouse to the ornamental garden, he saw that the carved garden
of the hussar of the line.
of the hut in which he was billeted with Nesvitski and began to walk up
of the impending moment that Pierre had seen on the faces at the foot of
of the import of what you were undertaking, you made a vow of conjugal
of the infinite goodness of the Creator, whose every action, though
of the knoll he was met by a dense crowd of Russian soldiers who,
of the last few days rose one after another in his imagination,
of the lathe he removed his foot from the pedal, wiped his chisel,
of the lean sinewy hand, showed that the prince still possessed the
of the least significant parts of the field.
of the little bottles and boxes of which Madame Schoss who was fond of
of the mad, merry moods characteristic of her, and then she particularly
of the maids who was present. (Mary Bogdanovna was a midwife from the
of the majestic Emperor. Casually, while surveying the squadron, the
of the man she loved. Nicholas also noticed that look and, as if
of the masculine element, both husband and wife felt with satisfaction
of the meal and was certain that there was some secret between her
of the means by which our holy Order will help you to reach your aim?"
of the meetings of a committee of which Berg was a member. He remembered
of the men like a child.
of the merriest music. Trap-ta-ta-tap! cracked the shots, now together,
of the mighty arm being stricken powerless, but all the generals and
of the movement of humanity, the historians study the men of whom the
of the nations!
of the nearness of the Emperor Francis' black cob, nor of all that was
of the necessity of physical rest.
of the newly commissioned officer were collected. Anna Mikhaylovna,
of the news.
of the night. The gloom that enveloped the army was filled with their
of the nobility; but he considered himself entitled to spend the eve
of the oft-repeated passage of the sonata. Prince Andrew stopped and
of the old prince had not disturbed the order of things in the house,
of the orchestra partition, looking at the Rostovs' box. Natasha knew he
of the other hospital patients, but it was not this that struck Rostov.
of the penthouse. The whole courtyard was permeated by a strong peaceful
of the people of Central Europe to the movement; the same hesitation
of the people to their rulers, and that historical leaders have power
of the people with the rulers and enlighteners of humanity is only based
of the people's will but are accidents dependent on cunning, on
of the people's will from one individual to another, especially in view
of the peoples it does not enter anyone's head today to suppose that
of the peoples, assured himself that the aim of his actions had been the
of the person who commands, and (2) the inevitability of the connection
of the plowed land, and reached some fleches * which were still being
of the political thermometer of legitimate Petersburg court society so
of the position, the state of the army, the plans suggested, the
of the presence of strangers and in a particularly resolute and solemn
of the press--and only for that reason did he obtain power."
of the previous day's thoughts. He thought of nothing. He listened with
of the principal lodge.
of the prisoners said a word.
of the privilege. I began the service from the lower grade."
of the protectors of disorder and to control them without their being
of the pwovince of Moscow thinks fit, it can show its loyalty to our
of the reception room and peeped through the crack, returned flourishing
of the regiment and felt himself deprived of liberty and bound in one
of the river, and for a long time did not notice the killed and wounded,
of the river.
of the road were forests of different kinds, fields, and villages.
of the road, sometimes in proof of its agility and self-satisfaction
of the room.
of the room.
of the room.
of the room. Prince Andrew turned to him, but the doctor gave him a
of the room. She and the countess and Sonya were standing by themselves
of the rulers of France, who submit to him; chance forms the character
of the sanctuary screen. The priest came out with his purple velvet
of the service the voices of the priests suddenly ceased, they whispered
of the sheds, and animated French talk mingled with curses sounded all
of the sleigh beside Rostov, who grew more and more impatient the nearer
of the soldier prisoners tunneled under the wall and ran away, but were
of the soldiers or of riotous peasants would be terrible."
of the soldiers remain with the standards of their regiments, the others
of the staff who asked where he was going.
of the state of the fatherland and offered various conjectures as to the
of the statutes and these remained in his mind.
of the street. He heard nothing and saw nothing of what went on around
of the stupidest women in the world," thought Pierre, "is regarded by
of the sun. In front, far off on the farther shore of that sea of mist,
of the tall lad who had pushed his way up to him, he began in a rather
of the third floor window with his legs hanging out.
of the town, stretching out and concealing one another, reminded him of
of the trees on the boulevard, the sounds of the band and the white
of the twentieth, when the memorable battle of Austerlitz was fought.
of the uniform or from some other cause Pierre saw before him quite a
of the unwritten code of subordination--looked so fixedly at the
of the upper lip formed a sharp wedge and closed firmly on the firm
of the vicomte's epigram, Pierre again broke into the conversation, and
of the wall, sprinkled with snow and creaking with frost, was seen
of the wall. "Who is that man?" said he, looking sternly at Pierre.
of the war, which all these men believed they were directing; but this
of the war. With Pfuel was Wolzogen, who expressed Pfuel's thoughts in
of the warmth of her body, the scent of perfume, and the creaking of her
of the waves kept up a refrain to Pierre's words, whispering:
of the window.
of the wood ran out of it, the different companies getting mixed, and
of the yard onto the uneven roadway; the other vehicles jolted in
of the young Countess Rostova the old prince (who apart from that was
of the young ladies should come into her box for the rest of the
of their rapier gracefully and politely, hand it to their magnanimous
of their time, he greeted the ladies, two of whom were sitting at
of them attribute to Pfuel, others to a certain Frenchman, others
of them for some time, arousing general attention and laughter, and only
of them had yet seen the manifesto, but they all knew it had appeared.
of them or independently of them, the strangest and most contradictory
of them removed the balloon that was being constructed by Leppich; now
of them that she might pray for them. But neither could she doubt the
of them were punished, some sent to Siberia, many died of cold and
of them were. The boy, thrusting his cold hands into his pockets and
of them will have any meaning for me. Tomorrow perhaps, even certainly,
of them, and they were thrown over the parapet and removed later on that
of them, one could feel by the occasional glances they gave that the
of them. He hurried to find the family of that civil servant in order to
of these last moments of meeting between the father and son. This lasted
of these projects. But even that he cannot do. Events and time do not
of things to him in the very worst light, pointing out the necessity of
of this class, by mutually destroying one another's positions, destroy
of this common attraction to Smolensk, their goal, drew each of them in
of this incident on Tikhon was that after being wounded he seldom
of this kind for another, which from pride he would never accept for
of this movement lay, for not much mental effort was needed to see that
of this sort, nullifying all his decisions and intentions. He went to
of this unknown factor and tries to discover it--now in a geometric
of this?..." said the huntsman, pointing to his dagger and probably
of those fifty thousand men who were left in hospitals and in graves
of those great people whom Peronskaya was pointing out--she had but one
of those who had seen them together. He recalled Anna Pavlovna's words
of those who loved her--and that is why there are, and always will be,
of thoughts and feelings arose in her. "What did Nicholas' smile mean
of thousands of voices. His horse and the horse of the hussar near him
of three hospitals with more than four hundred patients! It's well that
of three rubles a week made to officers); with his strength, which he
of timidity and submission. On seeing his daughter he moved his helpless
of treating historical material, merely deprives himself of the one
of troops the more was he overcome by restless agitation and a new and
of troops took part, we might treat it as an exception; but this event
of truth, my dear sir, but have thrust her into an abyss of deceit and
of twenty rubles.
of unconcern and ridicule of themselves, their situation, and the person
of unexecuted orders of Napoleon's one series, for the campaign of 1812,
of unheard-of losses, of the loss of half the army, and a fresh battle
of unknown, infinitely small, quantities. Abandoning the conception
of unprovoked anger. He seemed carefully to seek out her tender spots so
of us. Besides, I want to go very much and certainly will go, so don't
of use to Natasha because they kissed and rubbed her bump, assuring her
of using words the Cossacks did not know.
of utterance are related as commands to the events.
of view, presented themselves to the men of that day; but to us, to
of virtue," he read, "we must cleanse men from prejudice, diffuse
of virtue," said the Mason.
of voice. "Come here, my friend..." and she ominously tucked up her
of voices, the tramping feet, the horses' hoofs moving in mud, the
of waiting--prepare for the war. All the efforts of those who surrounded
of what happened after that. He only remembered beating someone and
of what was long past. Princess Mary spoke of her childhood, of her
of which Kutuzov was standing began to shout, he rode a little to one
of which could be seen in the failing twilight--and as if in reply
of which he was unable to judge.
of which her singing had been an unusually powerful part. She gave it up
of which his wife's nightcap was visible and her sleepy breathing
of which is hidden in the unknown but at the other end of which a
of which it attracts mercury, seizes it, holds it, and in combination
of which our last campaign can give you no idea. Half the regiments form
of which she had all the way been trying to get and had at last caught.
of which taken separately may seem to be the cause, he snatches at the
of which the very man who wrote it does not understand. We all profess
of which was occupied by Prince Andrew. The wounded man was much better
of who had come to it. There was no one in the hall. "Oh God! Is
of whom has been sent me under flag of truce."
of wind blowing over the army slightly stirred the streamers on the
of wine with him and, despite the jolting ruts across the snow-covered
of women chattering as they rinsed their linen or beat it with wooden
of women who crowded near the wall, not having been invited to dance.
of years' time.
of you! Well, thank God. Now lie down. We can still get a nap before
of you."
of your brother-in-law having sought her hand, or something of that
of, and am going to rejoin my regiment, I am giving a farewell supper
of, eh?"
of?" she went on, turning to Prince Hippolyte. "Fetch me my workbag."
off an army--to bar its road--is quite impossible, for there is always
off at every moment. They waited and listened.
off her engagement without consulting anybody? It's true this engagement
off her husband's face, lest he should wake up.
off his cloak.
off his face with his sleeve. "Perched up there, you're more like a bird
off if everything is not here in a week. Have received another letter
off the wolf, and the borzois passed it, running faster still. Nicholas
off their belts.
off to Korchevo without delay and carry out instructions!
off to his company, buttoning up his coat as he ran.
off!" he shouted. "Whether we meet again or not..." and turning away
off, and an hour later, Lavrushka, the serf Denisov had handed over
off, and the firing had begun to subside. Suddenly, near by on the
off, fell on the balcony parapet, and then to the ground. A coachman in
off--and this is what comes of it!" said Prince Andrew in an exasperated
off. That she had not heard from Prince Andrew himself, Princess Mary
off. The door of the private room opened and Kutuzov appeared in the
off... and then everything... So you see... I never told this to anyone
off; and here at last was a Russian prince. Mademoiselle Bourienne knew
offended and the young ladies' summer dresses could not be left behind.
offended tone.
offended tone; and still more offended that they all remained silent,
offense, but you don't mind disgracing the whole regiment!" The staff
offense; now assembled the people at the Three Hills to fight the French
offensive, the plan of which, carefully prepared in accord with the
offensive.
offer which was intended expressly for her. When she came ready dressed
offer.
offered a most striking contrast to his quiet, little wife. It was
offered her guests this time was not Mortemart, but a diplomatist fresh
offered surmises about the weather, or touched on questions of health,
offered this truce to avoid unnecessary bloodshed. Count Nostitz, the
offers of assistance; he avoided all distraction and recreation, and
offers to retell it, or who wish to adopt it to some thought of their
office. On the previous day Platov reconnoitered with two Cossack
officer Bagration.
officer and a wounded hero, would it be right to remind him of herself
officer and then at the other.
officer arrived, but at a sign resumed his measured, monotonous pacing.
officer as in a looking glass--started, moved forward, and answered:
officer entering his room. Pierre paused. He had left Moscow when Boris
officer fell, not so much from the blow--which had but slightly cut his
officer had gone away, Denisov, who did not himself know what Rostov's
officer had to say, took the papers from him without a word.
officer in charge of transport was beating the soldier who was driving
officer into his hut to warm him, and when the messenger returned and
officer named Ilyin, his protege, was sitting in a hastily constructed
officer of the French army; and Nicholas felt that the presence of that
officer passing by addressed him:
officer pounced on the soldiers who were in the shops, but at that
officer ran out of the ranks and taking him by the elbow dragged him to
officer reported that no order to advance had been received.
officer smiled.) "Kindly return to your posts, gentlemen, all of you,
officer still less often acts directly himself, but commands still more
officer that it was all Denisov could do to prevent a duel. When the
officer who just before the battle had rushed out of Tushin's wattle
officer's command took the two convicts who stood first in the row. The
officer's saddle.
officer, a tall, long-legged, pockmarked man, moved over to Pierre as if
officer, and an old friend of his.
officer, but in reply to the third question which he did not understand
officer, that he would drink a bottle of rum sitting on the outer ledge
officer--all looked at their commander like children in an embarrassing
officer.
officer.
officer.
officer.
officer?"
officers (of whom there are fewer) perform the action itself less
officers again demanded action. Generals on the staff, excited by the
officers and even the soldiers (who too reason) also considered the
officers and men at Austerlitz. One had saved a standard, another had
officers and men of the Old Guard who had run up to see the portrait.
officers collected round to greet the new arrival, Rostov experienced
officers congratulated him, Kutuzov smiled.
officers in Denisov's quarters.
officers in full parade uniform stood in front of the castle, as well as
officers of the Guard and from French headquarters were dining and
officers ran after and around them shouting, "Hurrah!"
officers were counting the men, poking the last man in each section in
officers were whispering together. Dolokhov was a long time mounting
officers who had been standing together rode off to their places. The
officers who had gathered at his quarters. The little old man with
officers with whom he was talking.
officers' order, the men sat on the ground. One, having taken off his
officers' saying that it was humiliating to look at the French, Rostov
officers, and generals were heroes. But the hero of heroes was Prince
officers, but every soldier with his freshly washed and shaven face and
officers, carrying out the French corpses that were in the huts, and
officers, generals, and gentlemen-in-waiting came running out of the
officers," continued the staff captain, "and Bogdanich" (the colonel was
officers.
officers. In the regiment they called him "our prince," were proud
officers. In the stillness around him his slowly uttered words were
officers. Now what was the colonel to do? Have the officer tried and
officers. Perhaps I ought not to have spoken before them, but I am not
officers. Prince Andrew lay on his chest with his face in the grass,
officers."
official appointed to the province in which the prince's estate lay
official in felt boots and wearing a commissariat uniform ran round from
official whom Dolokhov made use of in his gambling transactions, and
official with a cross hanging on his neck to follow him, and vanished
officials of all kinds, tradesmen, artisans, and peasants--streamed into
often come nowadays as it is, and this girl of mine," said the count
often did, and was glad when he heard someone coming.
often heard from his fellow hussars.
often heard. "What is this?" thought Prince Andrew approaching the crowd
often laughed at him, now said, with a common feeling of self-reproach
often occurred to me: 'This is fate.' Especially if you remember that
often passed through his mind and left no trace behind.
often thinking they were escaping ran right into the Russians.
often to be found.
often," thought Boris. "The affair has been begun and must be finished!"
oh yes, that French officer with the dimple. And I remember how my arm
old Count Bezukhov, and his inheritance. Fancy! The three princesses
old Russian peasant women employ. "Don't fret, friend--'suffer an hour,
old acquaintance."
old attendant. A doctor and two soldiers followed the carriage in a
old boy. Really," said Natasha, "look, look!"
old count came up to them and pressed Dolokhov's hand.
old count, suddenly setting to work, kept passing from the yard to the
old countess, waiting for the return of her husband and son, sat playing
old countess, who felt jealous and would have liked them to disagree,
old courtier, and by Russians as something indefinite--a sort of puppet
old enemy Bonaparte against our old ally the Emperor of Austria, and in
old fellow?" he said, turning to an old man who was passing, but before
old fool who, without any reason, keeps his own daughter at a distance
old head. Planning beforehand what he would say to Kutuzov, Rostopchin
old lady, who was always kind to me and to whom I am under many
old man continued to fold and seal his letter, snatching up and throwing
old man had only one leg bent under him, the other had been amputated
old man's bald head shining in the sun and seeing by the expression on
old man's good-natured expletives, was not merely understood but lay
old man, extended his arms and embraced him. And this embrace too, owing
old man, living alone in the country for so many years, could know and
old man. Makar Alexeevich, frowning with exertion, held on to the pistol
old miller had been accustomed to sit in his tasseled cap peacefully
old nurse's arms. A dirty, barefooted maid was sitting on a trunk,
old prince died the Marshal went away, promising to return next day for
old prince knew very well that he tormented his daughter and that her
old prince not only excluded her from his room, but did not admit
old prince to her.
old prince understood from this official report that our army had been
old prince's face.
old prince's household. General in Chief Prince Nicholas Andreevich
old prince.
old retainers of the Bourbons knew how to make, and approached him,
old scars nor old doubts and sorrows were any of them in evidence now.
old soldier of placid temperament, being also upset by all the delay,
old views and accused the new of violating revelation. But when truth
old, familiar acquaintance, "we are getting up a costume tournament; you
old, the young with the young, and the hostess at the tea table, on
old-fashioned coat and powdered wig and, aroused by anyone, told his
older than her sister and behaved already like a grown-up person), were
oldest rose. Marya Dmitrievna paused at the door. Tall and stout,
on Dolokhov's face when looking at him. "Yes, he is a bully," thought
on Friday."
on Petersburg?... In any of these eventualities the flank march that
on Pierre the usual animating effects of a conflagration. It had a
on Pierre. The latter was conscious of something pleasant, comforting,
on Prince Vasili's face so out of keeping with his dignity that Pierre
on Sonya, felt for the first time the sorrowful side of the news.
on Stone Island. Michaud, who had never seen Moscow before the campaign
on Sundays.
on a hard sofa without undressing and eat the same food as Gerasim.
on a house close to them. Meanwhile still more projectiles, now with
on a sofa with his face to the wall. Pierre hid his face, from which a
on account of the smoke nothing could be seen. The nearer they got to
on ahead. Not one of those dismounted cavalrymen who had marched in
on all sides, had stopped because a horse in front had fallen under a
on and not block the way.
on and will meet them with the fire of the whole battalion'--and that's
on anything. It was about this choice that Prince Andrew was speaking.
on around him. He remembered the meadow, the wormwood, the field, the
on at the back porch. A woman, bent with age, with a wallet on her back,
on batteries, and so on, and who was thought to be and was spoken of
on both sides of him other people with similarly ferocious faces pushed
on both sides.
on both sides. Behind our position was a steep and deep dip, making it
on clean shirts."
on condition that she should tell no one.
on duty in a discontented voice, "the plans must be examined and several
on duty.
on earth is worrying me?" he asked himself as he rode back from the
on educational methods. They were for the most part quite insignificant
on every face and only Kutuzov's angry grunts and occasional cough
on everyone, smiled and, evidently unmoved by what had been said to her,
on externals. He did not think of doubting Freemasonry itself, but
on finding that they are respected. Any violence to them or to their
on first recognizing Rostov.
on having her own way, and after that nursed all her babies herself.
on hearing of the arrival of the letter went softly into the room and
on hearing the news was one of anger with Sonya.... He tried to say,
on her back, along the dusty road, directing her wanderings from one
on her bed, laughed at the pleasant thought that she would immediately
on her face and showing no concern for her mistress.
on her face.
on her knees (she was unable to stir), with frightened eyes riveted on
on her lips, she got up and left the room. All Nicholas' animation
on her with outstretched hands shouted, "Get out!" in such a terrible
on her, and there were so many different faces, that she could not
on him and winking joyfully at him. Young Rostov stood at a window with
on him by the doctors, clergy, and relatives of the family. Prince
on him on his right, and he turned. Close to the corner, on an overcoat,
on him without changing their expression. "I love you all and have done
on him--as if his soul, making ready for a hard struggle, refused to
on him--poor stuff! How could I bring him? And so rude, your honor! Why,
on him--though it happened not to be the Emperor--frantically shouted
on him. I am not a man, that I should repay kindness with ingratitude!
on himself. He could remain silent for hours without being at all put
on his cheek, in shirt sleeves, really did jump out of a window on the
on his companion's face. Ramballe, with genuine distress and sympathy in
on his elbow, fell asleep at once. Natasha and Nicholas were silent.
on his face now.
on his farm. In autumn he gave himself up to hunting with the same
on his hand stooped, kissed them, and replied to their inquiries. But
on his head and his features were quite changed. And I said, "I should
on his hunting knives and horn, he mounted his good, sleek, well-fed,
on his journey, looking round at the fields of yellow rye and the
on his knees for her hand and her love--uttered at a moment when she was
on his mission. He stood a minute or two, waiting. He heard hurried
on his organization, his character, and the motives acting upon him; yet
on his own judgment, but Dokhturov insisted that he must have Kutuzov's
on his side of it.
on his thin bony legs, and keeping on a worn, nankeen-covered, sheepskin
on holy days to church and after the service to jails and prisons on
on in a trembling voice, "that you can do nothing for him but grieve
on in front.
on it long. "Yes, it was a very brilliant ball," and then... "Yes, that
on it that scoundrel will not enter Moscow." These words showed Pierre
on it, and when he has time tears out its contents and burns it clean.
on its steps.
on man--a happiness of the soul alone, the happiness of loving. Every
on me--Denisov and Natasha... Natasha is absurd. How she rules over him!
on my conscience. Would it be difficult for you to send thirty or
on my heels, putting my arms round my knees like this, straining tight,
on one side whispered something to him, pointing at Rostov, who noticed
on one side, now on the other, giving his face an unpleasant expression
on our army, and as for him, he ought, it seems to me, not to live. If
on quietly:
on reaching Bald Hills it struck him as strange and unexpected to find
on reading his paper.
on reconnaissance, all describe the position of the enemy's army
on seeing Rostov before him, with whom he would inevitably collide.
on show and not a human being able to hear or understand what was said
on snowy-white smooth pillows, evidently freshly changed, Pierre
on some acquaintances who were back in Moscow, and he intended to leave
on strategics and tactics, contradict each other.
on that day wore an invariable look of solemn festivity.
on the Rostovs, and Natasha, very glad of this diversion, having shut
on the Russian army with double its strength and destroy it; negotiate
on the arbitrary assumption that the collective will of the people is
on the arm of a colonel of hussars, a man of importance to them because
on the bank of the Niemen awaiting Napoleon's arrival, saw both Emperors
on the basis of an abstract notion--science, that is, the supposed
on the bed, lit his pipe, furiously scattered his things about, took
on the contrary it gave her an unnatural, and therefore unpleasant,
on the dry and thirsty shoots of the young oats, or why when the wind
on the edge of it and I burned with longing to caress him and lie down
on the faces of both father and daughter.
on the fact of the victory itself. It was like a successfully arranged
on the farther side and wait. But before that order was given--almost
on the field before the fortress. Now thousands of feet and bayonets
on the field.
on the fire.
on the frightened, exhausted, and hesitating men, as if to say: "Enough,
on the ground.
on the high ground above the bridge involuntarily asked himself with a
on the hillock.
on the horizon turned away from the hare, and the whips, but not the
on the lazy, the depraved, and the weak, and tried to get them expelled
on the left flank the columns of infantry, cavalry, and artillery, which
on the left, near which some troops could be seen.
on the line of Kutuzov's retreat. If he reached Znaim before the
on the lips that wore a mustache and had a smell of burnt cork. Sonya
on the march to Radzivilov.
on the meaning of the phenomena of life; but knowing by experience that
on the new dresses. Just as she had put on a bodice without sleeves and
on the old general. He carefully and hastily felt himself all over,
on the one hand indecision and the avoidance of a battle (which we could
on the other an immense case containing icons, was brightly illuminated
on the other hand, having put on her best gown, was in the highest
on the other hand, with our left wing by far outflank his right, it is
on the other on her breast, and to him, too, her face seemed to say:
on the part of the Russians, it had to perish, bleeding from the mortal
on the position of affairs. Everything precious and valuable had been
on the snow beside it. His left hand was bloody; he wiped it on his
on the sofa. They were silent for a while.
on the sofa: he felt it unpleasant to have dropped in on bad company.
on the soft springs of the carriage, he turned to Prince Andrew.
on the spirits of the company, but no one took any notice of his being
on the stage, and expressed delight which to Natasha seemed feigned. "I
on the stairs, and the general, leaving him, went to the porch. The
on the state of their affairs and with advice and suggestions that they
on the steps in the "reception room"--as Denisov called that part of
on the subject.
on the supposition that he was drunk.
on the table (made of a door with its hinges still hanging on it, laid
on the table, again bound his eyes.
on the third they placed Prince Andrew. For a little while he was left
on the threshold appeared the handsome figure of the terrified Metivier
on the top of her head (a style that quite altered and spoiled her
on the village and turn the enemy's position.
on them all. He thought that, as in Africa he had to put on a burnoose
on them.
on thinking, or hearing, in his dream) is to be able in your soul to
on this visit, at heart he felt afraid. He well remembered the last
on this), while she was very young. Thirdly, he had a son whom it would
on till he reached Vereshchagin, a half educated tradesman, you know, 'a
on time at an appointed place was so remote as to be tantamount to
on tiptoe, with a soldier's obsequious expression on his purple face,
on to place an heroic torch in the hands of their own people, it is
on to say that he knew her parents would not give her to him--for this
on to. But as soon as a storm arises and the sea begins to heave and
on us, you, and your lines of communication."
on well-kept plowland, lay from ten to fifteen dead and wounded to each
on what he thought right. The steward promised to do all in his power
on what remains of your property, and finally that you should not doubt
on what was passing in Lobnoe Place that no one answered him. The stout
on which he lay. I made the sign of the Knights of the East and of
on which with a broken bit of chalk he had written "800 rubles" in clear
on which--with a terrible questioning too great for her strength--her
on you. You complain of our separation. What then should I say, if I
on! Go on!" And cries of horror were heard in the crowd. The soldiers
on!" he continued without looking at Pierre.
on!--ought to burst out."
on, but strain his attention as he would he could not understand or make
on, his eyes fixed on the conqueror whose fame had reached him across
on, my music! Now!..."
on, with a somber and scornful smile. "And thou art more foolish and
on--that Pierre became quite bewildered and only replied:
on.
on. The preoccupation and despondency which Pierre had noticed in his
once again, as usurpations of power. And so these historians also see
once but only looked up with a smile that said reproachfully: "How can
once his voice and the expression of his face changed. It was no longer
once noticed that her mistress leaned out of the window and smiled at
once recognized it to be a tuft of grass. She was terribly close to him.
once remarked: "We regard everything that is above the common level of
once seemed good, ten years later seems bad, and vice versa. And what is
once she has said..."
once the stranger closed the book, putting in a marker, and again,
once to the general on duty."
once!" he thought as he rode with "Uncle" and Ilagin toward the hare.
once, as a clock begins to strike and chime as soon as the minute hand
once, to embrace the man she loved, to speak and hear from him words of
once, without leaving the church, thanks were rendered to the Creator
once. "You know it won't do to leave your posts like this. The prince
once."
one after another poured in a ceaseless stream out of the vast forest
one after another to her memory. With mournful pleasure she now lingered
one and again became separate and again blended, now into solemn church
one and the same law (whether he observes the necessity of taking
one another and mingling with the rustling of dresses and the scraping
one another in a world of indifferent people.
one another that the larger number take a more direct share, and the
one another uninterruptedly, the man hung the leg bands up on some pegs
one another's prices to below what they had been in former days. Gangs
one another, and all pressed toward the exit from the bridge.
one another, and in her heart she sided with "Granddad." In the midst of
one another, beginning to see one another through the mist. They had the
one another, laughing, and shouting.
one another, that is, leaving aside the question of the cause of the
one another, they moved at the double or at a trot, vanishing amid the
one another.
one another.
one another.
one another. Again the footmen rushed about, chairs scraped, and in the
one another. And corresponding to the event its justification appears in
one another. Pierre, breathing heavily, looked around as if asking what
one another. To keep one another back, to breathe in that stifling
one at Borodino.
one banner--that of active virtue.' Prince Sergey is a fine fellow and
one booted foot, he advanced, while Willarski held a sword to his
one but the Emperor of Russia has that right.
one can answer for himself."
one can live with such ideas. I had such moments myself not long ago, in
one can't permit the land to be pillaged and accustom the troops to
one can't unmarry. Don't be afraid; I won't tell anyone, but you know it
one cart."
one day, closing his eyes and fingering Pierre's elbow, speaking as if
one do without government? Or else there would be plenty who'd rob us."
one else. At that time the two famous decrees were being prepared that
one evening in the official and ceremonious manner in which Dolokhov's
one ever spoke of it, and they all made every possible effort to satisfy
one finger. The yard porter, his arms akimbo, stood smiling with
one had a little mole on her lip which made her much prettier. Pierre
one had put but which was always in her mind, "and how much suffering,
one had to ridicule the Moscow enthusiasm, at Anna Pavlovna's one had to
one hand that the military business in which he had played his part was
one has with these girls without their mother! I do so regret having
one heard curses on Bonaparte, "the enemy of mankind." Militiamen and
one in honor of their Polish Mademoiselle Borzozowska) would take place
one in spectacles is the universal Freemason," she went on, indicating
one leg crossed high above the other. His cheeks, which were so flabby
one leg.
one live for? And what am I? What is life, and what is death? What power
one man.
one moment prayed to God as he had done on the battlefield at the bridge
one must wait and see, that the malady was chiefly mental, but... And
one night prepared for a journey and started for Moscow to see Joseph
one o'clock at night. Dismounting at a cottage on whose wattle fence
one of God's chosen, he's a benefactor, he once gave me ten rubles, I
one of Russia's oldest generals would be captured or killed, and he
one of disdain which was quite uncalled for. His fertile mind instantly
one of her customary states in which she needed the mental exertion of
one of the Apsheron regiment went forward past the Emperor.
one of the tents and there stopped, awaiting instructions. Prince Andrew
one of them he dwelt long and joyfully. He vividly recalled an evening
one of them knew, not one of them wanted to know, and not one of them
one of them wished to or, evidently, could have done it. It was not
one of them, in the lists of killed, wounded, and rewarded, the name of
one of those who sympathized with his plans and ought to rejoice at
one of us will go, for our father the Tsar!" he shouted, rolling his
one out of the other, in the children's presence.
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
one pair at each window. She stopped and smiled scornfully. Sonya was
one plan, Armfeldt another, and they are all good and all bad, and the
one proposal but dozens simultaneously. And all these proposals, based
one quite at home, and from habit immediately lay down on the sofa, took
one reviews the past and plans for the future. Prince Andrew's face
one sees on the face of a boy happily in love. The marshals stood
one seldom finds nowadays among our old men of twenty and, particularly,
one side of the road. The cavalry regiment, as it descended the hill
one side of which symbolized God, another moral things, a third
one son was out of danger she became the more anxious about Petya.
one thing he wished for was rest, tranquillity, and freedom. But when he
one thing only--his future happiness. Sometimes it seemed to him that
one to do?" and, having given his order, he returned to Telyanin.
one to help her, and they do cheat her so!"
one to penetrate to his soul, and his delicate white hands, which Prince
one to two: previously we had a hundred thousand against a hundred and
one trivial topic to another and repeatedly broke off. He stayed so long
one window which was open. A little serf boy, seeing Prince Andrew, ran
one word after another, came through the open door. She was speaking as
one would have expected of him.
one wouldn't hurt a fly. She has asked me to bring you two together.
one's head is gone one doesn't weep for one's hair! Take what any of you
one's most distant past in which dreams and realities blend--and they
one's occupation, that is, of one's way of life, now seemed to Pierre to
one's own army. Our men have had nothing to eat for two days."
one's own carriages as well. Thirty carts could not save all the wounded
one, a young soldier, his face deadly pale, his shako pushed back, and
one, had already been prepared and submitted to the Emperor. He thought
one--a domination based on the application or threat of physical force,
one.... How not the right one?... O Lord! And there's another has been
one.... Whom, I ask you, can we rely on?... England with her commercial
ones, with offerings of icons and the bread and salt of hospitality,
oneself or walks about to get rid of stiffness, and the sounds were
oneself to God, whom she felt guiding her soul at those moments. She
oneself to regard the arrangements without religious awe of his genius,
onlookers for what was to follow. As soon as the provocatively gay
only a slight blush suffused her cheeks and her eyes lit up with a new
only a sort of puppet show at which the men of the day were playing,
only a withdrawal beyond the Niemen was now demanded. Napoleon turned
only after some seconds that the impression produced by Prince Andrew's
only an expression for the unknown remainder over and above what we know
only answered them in order to get rid of these people. When left alone
only as he kissed her hand on taking leave said unexpectedly and in a
only be negative, but had said it with a shade of bitterness and irony
only be seen till they had entered the hollow that lay between them and
only because he had somehow forgotten how good it is to be virtuous. Not
only become known, but people had grown accustomed to him and accepted
only but even new laws. My Andrew there has written a whole volume
only by her husband and generalizing from that observation, supposed
only charred green boards and rags littered the scorched grass, and a
only conditionally on carrying out the program that the will of the
only conscious of her stern father's withered face close to her, of his
only consolation was the fact that the princess allowed her to share her
only for God. But how did God enjoin that law? And why was the Son...?"
only had to shake himself, to be ready without a moment's delay for some
only have bent his head a little to have touched them. He was conscious
only have had it from the Postmaster. But evidently they had come to
only heard them splashing through the unseen mud.
only helped toward fulfilling Napoleon's wish that it should be blown
only his momentary action in the present, unevoked by any cause--we were
only hope," said Petya.
only important possibilities: "If the enemy attacks the right flank,"
only in so far as this free will is defined by those laws.
only less pretty than at the ball, but only redeemed from plainness by
only lit fires to deceive us.
only monarchs, generals, and ministers as being such men, while another
only need see Prince Vasili Sergeevich: he is staying here, is he not?
only need to be restrained and held back! On all sides, new and fresh
only now found full satisfaction for it. Moreover, at this moment Pierre
only of whatever he was engaged on.
only one goes wrong, but it is her fancy and mine. They have been
only one thing was lacking that he had always seen at the evening
only peasants to fight, we should not have let the enemy come so far,"
only pressed it to the cold braiding of his hussar's jacket. Denisov,
only reached the quarter where Pierre was staying by the evening of the
only reason for being here. I came simply to help him and you."
only redder than usual. With his shaggy head thrown back like birds when
only resource obviously presenting itself to the old count was to apply
only saw her daughter's face in profile. That face struck her by its
only saw in her a pretty and fresh young girl, with whom he did not
only serve to exalt him--and though he himself has no plan, he is quite
only six tumblers of water, but this made it all the pleasanter to
only such man."
only suppositions, which seemed important to the younger men but not to
only tacked together, and was turning her head to see in the glass how
only that all the men of the day were mere babies who did not know the
only the beginnings of marriage and not its whole significance, which
only the capacity calmly to contemplate the course of events--the more
only the dull gray weather now rainy and now snowy, internal physical
only the ecossaise, the anglaise, and the mazurka, which was just coming
only the whites were seen, and on his bare legs and arms which were
only then that what is new and good begins. While there is life there is
only thoughts. Something was lacking in them, they were not clear, they
only to express his rapture fully.
only to give measure to the words. As a result of this the unconsidered
only to repeat it again and again. There was now not a shadow of doubt
only turned away his eyes when the Austrian chief of staff finished
only wanted to know your opinion," and Anna Pavlovna let Pierre go.
only we abstain from attributing to the activity of the mass aims that
only when he himself had offered to undertake them, he now found an
only white dresses and white ribbons all that time) gave her pleasure,
only with a sword, had rushed at the enemy with such a desperate cry and
only without interest but even as if ashamed of what Pierre was telling
only wonders at the long-suffering or blindness of the crowned heads.
only.
onto his cheeks, who after riding to the staff had been overtaken by the
onto the Kaluga road.
onto the ryefield, again put on speed still more viciously, sinking to
onto the snow. She was sitting on some bundles a little behind the old
onto which he threw it.
open and almost unentrenched position, with forces only half as numerous
open bureau with screened candles, holding a paper in his
open it. Someone was holding it shut.
open under the sky once more.
open, and divine service is performed in them unhindered. Your fellow
open, the padlocks smashed, the books mutilated, and other disorders
opened a restaurant there with girls as waitresses. Rostov, who had
opened and Countess Bezukhova, dressed in a purple velvet gown with
opened his eyes and for a long time could not make out what was going
opened his eyes and saw the same penthouse roofs, posts, and yard, but
opened his mouth when one of the senators, a man without a tooth in his
opened in partially burned houses. The clergy resumed the services
opened it and took a pinch. "Back!" cried Simon to a borzoi that was
opened the bedroom door.
opened the creaking door, went up to the sofa with energetic steps of
opened the door for him.
opened the door of their box. The music sounded louder and through the
opened the door softly and saw her, in the lilac dress she had worn at
opened the door which moved noiselessly and easily. She paused at the
opened the door, but when, turning quickly, she saw his broad, surprised
opened, a gentleman-in-waiting, bending respectfully, handed the Emperor
opening his door.
opening, but forgets that at each stage of the game there were similar
operations according to him were connected with such complicated
opinion of the specialist historian, tries to prove that the campaign of
opinion sure to carry him off. But on the seventh day he ate with
opinion to Kutuzov, to Weyrother, and to the Emperors. All are struck by
opinion was nothing of the kind. We civilians, as you know, have a very
opinion was that Pierre was under his wife's thumb, which was really
opinion which had that day originated among the higher French officers,
opinion), but he urged that at this point the army should unite and
opinion, he merely said:
opinion.
opinion.
opinion. Though this was impolite to Prince Vasili in Anna Pavlovna's
opinion..."
opinions, but you see what a capital, good-natured fellow I am." And
opponent at the moment of conflict.
opponent") "with the gentleman... whom I have not the honor of knowing,
opponent's face, evidently thinking about the game as he always thought
opportunities for attacking, no one captured or killed more Frenchmen,
opportunities to fix the problem.
opportunity of joining in the general current of recollections.
opportunity since morning to meet one another alone. When Princess Mary
opportunity to air it. It was one of the millions of proposals, one as
opportunity to express his doubts.
oppose no reasonable ideal to the insensate Napoleonic ideal of
opposed so illegal an intention) but simply that the unfortunate and
opposed to that of turning to the Kaluga road, and the commander in
opposing this is not a power but a violation of power--mere violence.
opposite of what they order occurs.
opposite reputations. Some, a minority, acknowledged him to be different
opposite room.
opposite side stood Dolokhov's Cossack, counting the prisoners and
opposite to it hung that bright comet which was connected in Pierre's
opposite, was looking at Boris as girls of thirteen look at the boy they
opposition to the government.
oppressed and ashamed in court society, and dark thoughts of the vanity
oppressed by the fact that the mood of everyone around her was so far
oppressed. When she was not looking at him she felt that he was looking
or "Rhine wine" as the case might be. Of the four crystal glasses
or "You do not know my aunt?" and very gravely conducted him or her to
or German sources, and the incomprehensible surrender of whole corps
or I, are left. What I say is widen the scope of our society, let the
or Kutuzov was. Some said the report that the Emperor was wounded was
or Napoleon could deprive him of.
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
or Prince Andrew, of herself, of his grandson, or of his own death, and
or Prince Vasili. Forty thousand serfs and millions of rubles! I know
or a child?..."
or a couple of thousand rubles.
or a sick child was convalescent, or when she and Countess Mary spoke of
or abandoned. Three wagons had been raided and robbed by stragglers
or allow it, but I don't exact compensation either. One can't get on
or an orchestra. She was accustomed always to oppose anything announced
or another peasant would have to explain to him that it is not the devil
or anticipation, he did not know. Speranski's whole figure was of a
or anyone else, and I don't want anything of the kind."
or anywhere else, neither Barclay nor the Emperor, neither Pfuel nor
or army corps had been captured in two months, when he looked at the
or asking a question to make the moral beauty of what he was told clear
or because of those memories of a childhood that could not return, or
or betrayed, well... what then?..." "Well then," Prince Andrew answered
or carve spoons. In Denisov's party he held a peculiar and exceptional
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
or cooks--who were not venal. I have not yet met that divine purity and
or could be executed, for it was quite out of touch with the facts
or deliberately deceive themselves. No battle--Tarutino, Borodino, or
or discord in the family that has been so good to me (she wrote), and my
or elbow, or knee. Can't I go away from here, run away, bury myself
or else what is to become of them?"
or enlightenment of citizens of France or some other country. But not
or even in the rear.)
or even to wish to be thought to listen. Exactly opposite Weyrother,
or even two pieces with pleasure. For we feel how it is; but what's all
or evening than night. On the way Pierre remembered that Anatole Kuragin
or five necessary calls or appointments for certain hours. The mechanism
or followed by other circumstances, might have proved ruinous to the
or gray horses; then again, spreading out with the brazen clatter of the
or guided by other, personal considerations, these generals seemed not
or have kept awake thinking everything over all night," thought he to
or horses. He gave me his word he would not retreat, but suddenly sent
or impossible, she did not ask and did not want to know: it was her duty
or in heaps. Neither Napoleon nor any of his generals had ever before
or in human affairs, but were exclusively occupied with the mystical
or increases according to the greater or lesser connection with the
or insulted or wished harm to anyone? Why such a terrible misfortune?
or knew where he was.
or less forcible and correct.
or love. Now reason suggested quite the opposite. After that journey
or making her feel uncomfortable or displeased.
or me. You can't help thinking. I go to bed after two in the morning,
or money, and they go over to that camp. No independent men, such as you
or more passed by. The old man was living as a convict, submitting as
or mother, or self-sacrifice with the possibility of a reward, is more
or move to another place, because of the crowd. One of the generals who
or not rubbed fine enough. After these fits of irritability her face
or not, lispingly expressed his views, which were sometimes not at all
or not? Do you remember what fun it was?"
or not? Won't that be best?"
or occasioned the migrations can no longer be regarded as the cause.
or of crimes is subject to mathematical laws, and that this or that
or of the necessity of rebuilding factories and workshops. So the first
or of the sofa for his dear guest, but being apparently painfully
or other Moscow revelers', drank whole nights through, outvying everyone
or ought not, to have an explanation; here was no possibility of going
or quits... it can't be!... And why is he doing this to me?" Rostov
or reaping to have tea with her. She did not understand why he spoke
or religion. Under the influence of this feeling Sonya, whose life of
or ribbon. For me tomorrow means this: a Russian army of a hundred
or roasting themselves to death at the campfires, while carriages
or shame, on the contrary, with good-natured naivete she told her
or shot a post-boy's horse with a pistol. That expression was often
or sitting, jolted over the stones that had been thrown on the steep
or sleep, grew visibly thinner, coughed, and, as the doctors made them
or stick pins into maps, but to fight, beat the enemy, keep him out of
or such plans to the Russian commanders. All the facts are in flat
or take away a single grain, and that's all about it!" cried another.
or the acknowledgment of the merit of the virtuous act, or the freedom
or the announcement of his intention to take the wonder-working icon of
or to assume a beginning of any phenomenon, or to say that the will of
or to choosing her words was that she really had no time to spare for
or to the place of execution his companions had pointed out to him as
or two in his head but dozens, some only beginning to form themselves,
or two. The rest of the year life pursued its unbroken routine with its
or understanding. He could only hear and see. And he had only one
or weeping over its downfall. The tales and descriptions of that time
or when the war or any general political affairs were discussed on the
or whether some other thought flitted across his dying brain, at any
or wounded horses and harnessing fresh ones, and shouting in his feeble
or, "Be in to dinner or I shall not see you," or, "I am staying in for
or, worst of all, at dinner when there were no visitors to excite him
orchestra, everyone ran off, again dragging one of their number away,
ordeal was about to begin.
order Dron lowered his eyes and remained silent. Alpatych named certain
order a retreat."
order about the prisoners that day. Sokolov, one of the soldiers in the
order and strictness are essential.... That's all about it!" said he,
order for a battle next day, immediately became known from one end of
order for it and thought it was done as a result of that order; and
order must be given him at once, that instant. And the order to retreat
order not to lose his head and do foolish things he must not act on his
order of Maria Theresa on his neck and a black bandage round his head,
order she brought them until the count himself, in his wife's name,
order to be able to improve it, but he was unable to speak. Many voices
order to destroy the French army, which without external interference
order to make Boris' better acquaintance, promised to come to dinner,
order to shoot them which had been announced to them. As if in reaction
order what can be executed. But to know what can and what cannot be
order, too, could not possibly meet with any opposition.
order.
order. Have you got it, Denisov?"
order. The officer on duty, a handsome, elegantly dressed man with a
order. You are causing me to lose the fruits of a campaign. Break
ordered a direct advance on Moscow.
ordered another glass to be brought for Rapp, and silently sipped his
ordered dinners and suppers and obviously tried to appear cheerful, but
ordered four light guns to be moved forward to fire at the gates.
ordered his horse at once and, coldly taking leave of Boris, rode
ordered it!"
ordered the horses to be harnessed. Only those things he always kept
ordered the horses to be saddled. But just as Daniel was about to
ordered things he had long been deprived of in camp, and next day, very
ordered to remain where they were, suddenly, seeing Russians
ordered to turn back to the right. Several thousand cavalry crossed in
ordered two battalions from the center to be sent to reinforce the right
ordered us to retreat, and all our efforts and losses went for nothing.
ordered was done.
ordered--and all would be well.
orderlies looked at him as if they wished to impress on him that a great
orderlies of the wounded officers, after attending to their masters, had
orderlies. Much of it true. But when Napoleon asked him whether the
orderly by the shoulders and knocking him against the wall.
orderly to the bravest general, and still more, he was going with a
orderly's tone, dismounted, gave his horse to a dispatch runner, and
orderly, who, with the peculiar contempt with which a commander in
orderly. "Has something happened?" he added, surprised at the cadet's
orders and reports were only on paper, nothing in them was acted upon
orders being given. Stores of wood were brought for the night, shelters
orders concerning the movement of the mass of the troops. A similar
orders for the evacuation of Kaluga--a retreat beyond which town seemed
orders from him were not now needed, that the whole affair, carefully
orders he gave before and during the battle would have been still more
orders he had received, the whole French army having, in its convulsive
orders issued it was stated, not that the Emperor would take command,
orders or for acting on their own initiative, for in battle what is at
orders the sergeant to be arrested. Come, you must own that this affair
orders these pilgrims to be driven away, but she receives them."
orders to admit no more, but the porter was told to be sure to invite
orders to get ready.
orders to let him do so.
orders to the club steward and to the famous Feoktist, the Club's head
orders which showed that the Russian troops, who had hitherto been
orders while in reality learning from them their methods, their manner
orders, and rescind them. And this premonition was disagreeable to him
orders, but only assented to or dissented from what others suggested.
orders, to go against the French, and they shouted something about
orders--as the historians tell us--to retreat by the Smolensk road.
orders.
orders. Not one of these was, or could be, carried out.
orders."
ordinary conditions of life were nowhere to be found.
ordinary language as the lowest depth of baseness which every child
ordinary life. Often after collecting alms, and reckoning up twenty
ordinary man to Siberia. They often called Balaga into their orgies and
ordinary occupations, and its breakfasts, lunches, dinners, and suppers,
ordinary staid and respectful good manners habitual in the prince's
ordinary things. He wrote letters to his daughters and to Madame de
oreille, voila le mal. * Some want a thing--others don't. What's one to
organized and strong and has withdrawn to Drissa without suffering
origin (as in fact many did), caused Prince Andrew to cherish his
original and interesting series of maneuvers. Our aim is no longer, as
original number, the French entered Moscow in good marching order. It
originality, at once made Prince Nicholas Bolkonski an object of
originated.
ostentatiously approached the officer, swinging his arms.
other Russians who gazed at the French with fear and curiosity, paid no
other arrested suspects, as the separate room he had occupied was
other causes for it, but as soon as an event occurs--be it what it
other causes that adapted themselves to the event that was happening or
other children up, telling him that I did not love him. For a long time
other committeemen. "There will be many toasts, it's time to begin," he
other details of life ordered by the doctors, the carrying out of which
other fare, was splendid, yet he could not feel quite at ease till the
other half brightly lit by the sun. Alpatych looked out of the window
other half is everything where she is not, and there is all gloom and
other hounds joined in, now pausing and now again giving tongue. A
other lady visitors were farther down. At the other end sat the count,
other manifestations of life. And so it is with the purpose of historic
other on the face, and then to Prince Andrew's surprise both began to
other people were all as pleased as he was himself and merely tried to
other people.
other places: he had never slept there yet.
other room.
other side of the room. "How young-looking he is!"
other side.
other soldiers. He stood looking about him, when suddenly he heard a
other that woman was leading the life she preferred? What did it matter
other things and to look in other directions, thought only of what
other times. A man who simply wished to retain his lucrative post would
other voices.
other was mortgaged and the interest so much in arrears that it would
other women, and that now, especially after having seen many women in
other young ladies in begging Natasha and Nicholas, who were noted for
other, awkwardly, like a child at a dancing lesson.
other, glanced inquiringly with his large, intelligent, kindly eyes from
other, unexecuted orders but because they coincided with the course of
other--who with beaming faces had come to see their master making merry.
others an enemy in regard to Anatole? As for Pierre, he evidently did
others and even from herself, the stronger it grew. "O God," she said,
others and, in shirt sleeves and breeches, went glass in hand to the
others appreciated Prince Hippolyte's social tact in so agreeably ending
others as ninety-nine to one, consisted of men who desired neither
others from various sides and all became silent.
others insisted that as the French had gathered things from different
others loved him in the same way.
others of that group stirred up so much trouble that Barclay, under
others still empty.
others were recognized. The further the campaign progressed the more
others whispered and laughed. Prince Andrew heard the nickname "Sila
others, and not almost, but quite, ruined my life. And I have become
others, chiefly Germans.
others, evidently does not equal the resultant, namely the phenomenon
others, the chanters relit their censers, and service began. The hot
others. "Well, you old sinner," she went on, turning to the count who
others. He nearly wept. "To the health of our Sovereign, the Emperor!"
others. He was instinctively and thoroughly convinced that it was
others. One instance, which had occurred some twenty years before, was
others..."
otherwise in his absence.
otherwise than as he had been here. She now saw him again as he had been
otherwise than through himself.)
otherwise, for in order that the will of Napoleon and Alexander (on whom
ought to avoid her and go away, Pierre, despite that decision, had not
ought to be, and the more amazed at my genius."
ought to be, now he fancied it was only something in his own eyes.
ought to behave like Mademoiselle Bourienne, but could not. She thought:
ought to do then it will be my affair--yes, my affair. I am her father."
ought to give Prince Vasili much satisfaction.
ought to have been there at seven in the morning."
ought to have made that effort, for as long as the Russians continued to
ought to have occupied her thoughts now. She was roused from her reverie
ought to know where they are, and must find them, because..."
ought to take part in it! It will be great fun. We shall all meet at the
our Fatherland! We will show Europe how Russia rises to the defense of
our Order can bestow it will render you, my dear sir. You are going to
our Sovereign, that good, enchanting, and great man! Let us drink to his
our Tsar and our country, rejoicing in the successes and grieving at
our aid," said Kutuzov.
our battery it is still bearable," said the adjutant. "Will you come?"
our eyes, it suddenly seemed quite clear and obvious to him that the
our failures were due to a want of unity in the command and though the
our farming! Bettah have another conscwiption... o' ou' men will wetu'n
our forces before Smolensk, which junction will be effected on the
our good.
our hearts are united by indissoluble bonds, my heart rebels against
our last two unfortunate campaigns, and with drawing up a proposal for a
our life is finished!"
our men or theirs run or do not run, and that this man or that man is
our men were leaving it.
our moral nature is such that we cannot be both idle and at ease. An
our most gracious sovereign lord, the Emperor Alexander Pavlovich; be
our observation, must leave aside kings, ministers, and generals, and
our outposts, inventing on the way all that had not taken place but that
our people..."
our position, halted behind our Uhlans who were in the front line. To
our present, depraved world. No one now loves virtue; it seems like
our rear guard (that is, immediately after the fight at Gridneva), and
our studies examining some campaign on the map, with a certain number of
our three chief aims: (1) Self-knowledge--for man can only know himself
our transgressions and iniquities! Create in us a clean heart and renew
our troops had descended and from whence came the sounds of firing.
our troops were known to him as far as they could be known to anyone
our vanguard. Seeing their enemy unexpectedly the French fell into
ourselves of the absolute inaccessibility of the causes, and then
ourselves to risks we must not risk our children."
ourselves to studying those sublime rules which our divine Saviour has
ourselves to the fact that for our epoch histories of that kind are
ourselves, dear prince," said the little princess (of course, in French)
ourselves... That is the least we can do!"
out a canopy of sappy dark-green foliage, stood rapt and slightly
out a traitor! They slander him as a traitor, and the only result will
out a whole suit and to his partner's delight taking five tricks,
out addressed him, one hand placed in the breast of his buttoned coat,
out again more evenly, and the clerk led Petya--pale and breathless--to
out again, and having told the footman to bring them up to her, she
out and coming in.
out and destroyed. And by chance an escape from this dangerous position
out and the sabers whizzed as they were drawn from their scabbards.
out and, leaning against the doorpost, looked with glittering envious
out anything of what was happening: there in the smoke men of some sort
out at any moment. But whether because stupidity was just what was
out by Prince Andrew without display and without perceptible difficulty.
out by the other gates. In spite of Rostopchin's broadsheets, or because
out everyone has been enraptured by her? They say she is amazingly
out everything two days ago. That's what other people do. It's only
out for eighty people; and looking at the footmen, who were bringing in
out foraging, when he had again entered into all the little interests
out from behind the clouds, and the clear sound of the solitary shot
out her arms to show her short-waisted, lace-trimmed, dainty gray dress,
out his dirty fingers. The sleeve of his coat kept slipping down and he
out his elbows in a menacing way. But within the Trinity Gateway he
out his flat feet with outturned toes in their bast shoes. "I took him
out his instructions strictly and return at once. But when he saw the
out his notebook and, leaning on the cannon, sketched a plan of the
out in front of a platoon of grenadiers before whom lay a naked man. Two
out in front of the outposts, parading his courage. A bullet fired by
out into society; everyone knew that her father would not let her go
out into the corridor, looked with pity and repulsion at the half-crazy
out into the hall with a pleasant sense of intimacy with his master and
out into the town. When lunatics command our armies God evidently means
out more dead than alive just in the things she is wearing; if you delay
out of Moscow."
out of Rostopchin's private room.
out of a swamp by its tail, skin it, slink in among the French, or walk
out of countenance himself or making others uncomfortable, but as
out of every thousand serfs, as the Smolensk gentry had done. Their
out of harmony with the general mood. They all seemed very gay.
out of hearing. Another musket missed fire but flashed in the pan.
out of my house this morning. He was here; they admitted him in spite of
out of the Cadet College, who was zealously commanding the two guns
out of the Governor's room. Involuntarily listening now to the firing,
out of the carriage and staring at a tall, stout man in a coachman's
out of the conservatory she followed and called Boris to her.
out of the question to be under French rule, it would be the worst thing
out of the question, "I am in love with your brother once for all and,
out of the room to change her costume. In the drawing room people began
out of the room, and then, leaving "God's folk" to finish their tea,
out of the room.
out of the room.
out of the tent. The night was dark and damp, a scarcely perceptible
out of the town. Other peasants, having heard of their comrades'
out of them! Fancy giving the command of the Semenov wegiment to a
out of them."
out of this position; that here was the Toulon that would lift him from
out on the logs. Without lifting his head he said something, and two of
out skirmishers. He had felt perfectly sure that there were other troops
out that when the cheaper things not worth taking had nearly all been
out the stinging and tormenting thoughts that confused his mind. "This
out through its passages with bundles. Tradesmen and their assistants
out to look for the child, so crowded was it now with people and goods
out to me?"
out to them.
out to them. It's all a trick," said Dunyasha, "and when Yakov Alpatych
out whether she was considering what he had just said or whether she was
out, and Rostov heard the hoofs of several horses splashing through the
out, and the strange face was before him. Prince Andrew collected all
out, even into the light of heaven again."
out, nothing discovered," Pierre again said to himself. "All we can know
out, reckoning on Fedya not fighting because he owed him money! What
out--we must part; so find some place for yourself...." But he could not
out--went round above the ravine.
out.
out. The fences and gates were new and solid; two fire pumps and a
out. The flames now died down and were lost in the black smoke, now
out:
outer man? There was a time when I could have done it. I could have run
outflank it, the enemy would inevitably be destroyed.
outflank the Drissa camp.
outflank us, as they had larger forces. But he could not understand
outgallop him. To ride this horse was a pleasure to him, and he thought
outing.
outlines. Dressed as she used to be in Petersburg society, it was still
outposts today and it is impossible to say where his chief forces are
outrages are committed against the almost unarmed inhabitants. And the
outright.
outside his uniform.
outside of time and independent of cause, is no longer a man.
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
outside the hospital. He seemed to try to forget that old life and
outside, and flames were visible through the cracks of the shed, but
outspread map, occasionally glancing along the road to Moscow from under
outstretched hand, and in a somewhat dramatic attitude was reading his
outstretched hind leg and her frightened choking head, with her ears
outstretched. His face was purple, his eyes were rolled back so that
outweigh all the courage of the Russian troops, and at the same time
over Bonaparte, just when I'm not serving. Yes, yes, he's always poking
over Buonaparte at Eylau. In Petersburg everyone is rejoicing, and
over a pole on the ground and had nearly fallen, coming his way. It was
over all the rising ground, and all along the road uphill from the
over and began kissing first one knuckle, then the space between the
over her perspiring face, while with the other she pressed down the
over him his nurse sang him to sleep and he, burying his head in the
over his arm, to see whether he would not start a talk. And Pierre,
over his shoulder a French munition pouch was slung. He had an officer's
over his shoulder by a thin strap. He sat heavily and swayed limply on
over his shoulder, as when Rostov had seen him on the eve of the battle
over his sister), Natasha gave him a wink, and neither refrained long
over his spectacles seeing no one.
over his spectacles, and then again resuming his walk, muttering
over his spectacles.
over in his mind.
over millions of people, had any particular moral qualities, but on the
over that occurrence independently of the others.
over the Enns, and then guessed that the card that came first to hand
over the battlefield had given final orders to strengthen the batteries
over the blonde lady and paying her mythological compliments with a
over the earthwork.
over the fire, and not waiting for an answer he gave a grunt and added:
over the horrible details, but Natasha insisted that he should not omit
over the other and stroking his left hand with the slender fingers of
over the outstretched hand and not keeping it waiting a moment, laid
over the red baize at the entrance, she entered the hall, took off her
over the straw beneath the windows, Anna Mikhaylovna, having turned with
over the wall of the trench.
over the window to keep out the draft, and yet another waved the flies
over their heads, unstrapping their overcoats and drawing the sleeves on
over there, do you see that village and the smoke? That's Semenovsk,
over there."
over these images, repelling with horror only the last one, the
over to the new one and by their hum drowned and obscured the voices of
over to the wall, and began snuggling up the bedclothes as she settled
over with mystic forces! Yes, indeed, I loved her. I made romantic plans
over with, and I happen to be there, I'll go at once, to be out of
over, and they'll talk nineteen to the dozen. That's their woman's
over, the adjutant he had seen the previous day ceremoniously informed
over," Anna Pavlovna continued. "The sovereigns will not be able to
over. It will be a tremendous banquet."
overcame them. They all rushed forward to the bridge, onto it, and
overcoat and an immense cap evidently not his own, was crying in his
overcoat, stood in the middle of the sleigh, reins in hand.
overcoat, with a big snow-white beard and eyebrows and a ruddy face.
overcoat. He had in his hand a French book which he closed as Prince
overcoats, the same sounds of firing which, though distant now, still
overcoats, wounds, the smoke of gunpowder, the sounds of firing, and the
overcome a certain secret sorrow that has been in my heart ever since
overcome. That is why I should really like to save him from evil and
overflowed with animation and impulsiveness. To be an enthusiast had
overflowing with despair, shame, and humiliation, and that it was not
overflowing with life!"
overhear them. The commander in chief listened to what was being said
overnight to Shamshevo to capture a "tongue." But whether because he
overrun half Russia. "Love... that little girl who seemed to me brimming
overseers, the peasants on the roads and in the villages--had a
overshadowed by the trifling cares that engrossed him in that city.
overtake his regiment.
overtake the tortoise) resulted from this: that motion was arbitrarily
overtaken by the enemy and fighting rearguard actions only as far as
overtook him. A sergeant of the battalion ran up and took the flag
overtook the next one.
overtures for peace.
overwhelmed with business and it is purely out of charity that I trouble
overwhelmed with grief, left to the mercy of coarse, rioting peasants!
overwhelmed with work would often come accidentally under the Emperor's
owed to my friendship. Oh, what a splendid reign!" he repeated several
owing to the tact Bagration showed, his presence was very valuable.
own I hold out a brotherly hand to you."
own account, and yet it was only in consequence of their going away
own age. He was meeting Helene in Vilna after not having seen her for
own and goes barefoot summer and winter), he says, 'Why are you not
own and promptly contribute their own clever comments prepared in their
own army had melted away to half before reaching Krasnoe and a whole
own brother, killed in Turkey.
own but only repeats his sayings..." added Nicholas, yielding to that
own daughter dressed up as a Kazan-Tartar. "I suppose it is one of the
own eyes she comforted the count, and decided that at dinner and till
own family and valuables from his estate.
own family. So thought the major-domo on his master's behalf.
own father. She is very good-natured, and my father likes her way of
own feelings and those of the Russian people whose representative he
own form of government; and I believe that once free from the usurper,
own had taken possession of his brain and at that moment afforded him
own house; now wrote a proclamation to the French solemnly upbraiding
own ideas tonight, but must yield himself up entirely to the will of
own injustice toward her.
own insignificance and insincerity compared with the truth, simplicity,
own life, before whom one was to blame and had hoped to make it right"
own life, for she was accustomed to seek other joys, but she understood
own parish, but at a church where, according to the devout Agrafena
own particular tone. The largest of these was the French circle of the
own people. The chief cause of the wastage of Napoleon's army was
own reasoning, repeated the argument he had already put to Dolokhov
own surprise. "If you gave me Petersburg and Moscow I could not accept
own thoughts.
own voice. "All I can say, General, is that if the matter depended on my
own way! When the time comes I shall want both town and peasant lads and
own way. A queer lot!"
own--as though he did not understand his words.
own.
own. When she did not understand, it was sweeter still to think that
owned in the Taurida Gardens. In the parqueted dining room this small
owned some splendid horses.
owner of one of the largest fortunes in Russia, I am much amused to
pace.
pace.
paced the room with her. There was an expression of carefree happiness
paced up and down the large hall. I wished to meditate, but instead my
paced up and down the room, repeating to Balashev almost the very words
paces apart, but nevertheless the men were always in one and the same
paces from him, a cannon ball tore up the dry earth and disappeared. A
paces' distance nothing could be seen. For three minutes all had been
paces, and Nicholas could clearly distinguish every detail of his
pacifying his comrades.) Some of the prisoners who had heard Pierre
pacing angrily about and snorting. The old prince felt as though he
pacing the garden with hurried steps and pressing her hands to her bosom
pacing the room with large, resolute strides. "Now I'm very glad, very
pacing up and down in front of the shed.
pack joined the first three hounds and they could be heard in full cry,
packed as compactly as possible.
packed the night before now lay about the yard, and still they went on
packed the wagons and tied on the loads. The adjutants and battalion
packed up. The Empress Elisabeth, however, when asked what instructions
packet wrapped in paper. He did it all silently and very quickly. He
packing for the journey.
pad. "You've deserved it, that's it, come on!"
page at http://pglaf.org
pagodes chinoises, * this Moscow gave Napoleon's imagination no rest.
paid first, and those who like Mitenka held promissory notes given them
paid no attention to the newcomers. Those who were conscious raised
pain in his wounded leg, gazed with wide-open eyes at this strange
pain, must, he thought, have some effect on others too.
painful to him at this moment of sorrow; besides, what can I say to him
painful to think of the danger, since it is not in man's power to
painful, but good, very good!" said Natasha. "I am sure he really loved
painful, but, loving my benefactor and sovereign, I submit. Only I am
painfully in the knot. Then he drew his face down, kissed him, and
painfully pressed. "Natalie?"
painstaking effect that had been in it before; but she did not yet sing
palace at Potsdam.
pale and breathless and his face was angry. One of his eyes was black,
pale and exchanged looks in silence.
pale and ill. He had been feverish for two days and was now shivering
pale like Vereshchagin.
pale on seeing her father-in-law.
pale, now blushed and strained every nerve to overhear what Nicholas
pale, stood near. Judging by their faces they were both Frenchmen. With
pale, with a fixed look, was sitting on the bench under the icons just
pale, with compressed lips and feverishly glittering eyes.
pale-faced, fair-haired, with narrow light eyes and with calm
pallor suddenly turning to a vivid red. "Master, what have you said? God
palms, and smelled their pungent, sweetly bitter scent. Nothing remained
palpably of all on the twenty-fourth of August at Shevardino and on
panes broken and a courtyard surrounded by the remains of a wooden fence
panic and less gossip," ran the broadsheet "but I will stake my life
panting little nag where Pierre stood, it was damp, somber, and sad.
panting to catch up with his company. A cannon ball, cleaving the air,
pantry door and listened to herself and pondered. She was in a mood for
pantry into the large marble dining hall, where tables were being set
paper again. "Oh, this German precision!" he muttered, shaking his head.
paper and her hand moved rapidly over it. This is the reply she wrote,
paper arrived and they began to look for the old man. 'Where is the old
paper from his writing table. "Here!" and he handed it to Prince Andrew.
paper money valueless which Napoleon so graciously distributed to the
paper money. Anatole, with uniform unbuttoned, walked to and fro from
paper. He looked gloomily in Rostov's face and said: "I am witing to
papers all in due form--the authorities I mean--time passed. The affair
papers and it was the first time he had heard Villeneuve's name.
papers and still taking no notice of the special messenger.
papers from Kutuzov to the Tsarevich, he looked in on Boris, hoping to
papers from the government offices, and Leppich's balloon and other
papers have to be signed."
papers sent off in due form. The place was a long way off, and while
papers to be written to Vienna, to Berlin, and to Petersburg;
papers where human affairs and lives were indicated by numbers, Pierre
papers, so many people gathered that the orderlies brought in another
papers. Kutuzov and the Austrian member of the Hofkriegsrath were
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
paralyzed the action of fifty thousand men required to secure his
pardon. As soon as Rostov heard them, an enormous load of doubt fell
parents who have petted their children from babyhood, but which Prince
parents, and leave it to me. I will tell her when I can. I wish it to
parents.
parish church--the Church of the Assumption built over the graves of
part from his horse, and at last sprang down and called to his orderly.
part in it by self-sacrifice and heroism were the most useless members
part in the activity to devise considerations, justifications, and
part in the battle knew it.
part in the common action. It only seemed to Napoleon that it all took
part in the popular defense of Moscow which he knew was projected. And
part in, and for the first time in his life the possibility of death
part like the rest, Dron was made village Elder and overseer of
part of a doctor who hinders by his medicines--a role he so justly
part of a whole of which he was always conscious. His words and actions
part of his legs; he had on a kind of necklace above which rose a high
part of the dowry in advance, he would have to break matters off.
part of the hive and peers in. Instead of black, glossy bees--tamed by
part were leaving these Pratzen Heights which he intended to attack
part where the current was swift. Hundreds of Uhlans galloped in after
part, still less on his, or even to the kind of tender, self-conscious,
part--transfer the will of the people to a new ruler? In international
part. Anna Pavlovna Scherer on the contrary, despite her forty years,
partake of. A few days later Helene learned with pleasure that she had
partially. For the most part things happened contrary to their orders.
participation of Count Rostopchin and his broadsheets. The people
participation of the Deity in human affairs.
particles of drizzling mist. The bare twigs in the garden were hung with
particular about it.
particular attention. As happens to some people, especially to men
particular glamour and glad keenness of impression to everything that
particular part of the work on his estate. He always had before his
particular person was based. Thiers, a Bonapartist, says that Napoleon's
particular pleasure, and that he was proud to be at the head of such a
particular respect to the Moscovites and the center of the Moscow
particular state visit http://pglaf.org
particular--was such that the debts inevitably increased every year. The
particularly against such a genius as Bonaparte (they called him
particularly agreeable before going away. Besides this he was
particularly amiable smile.
particularly dignified and sad deference. This shade of deference also
particularly discontented and out of temper. Whether he was in a bad
particularly distinguished himself."
particularly gracious he was to a certain lady, or that Prince So-and-so
particularly kindly attention. "Yes, I heard," said he sympathetically,
particularly many round Alexander--generals and imperial aides-de-camp
particularly of the battle of Borodino and of that vague sense of his
particularly on the word possible... "as po-o-ossible," he ended, again
particularly pleasant at that moment. They had reached the battery at
particularly pleasant to him to dishonor my name and ridicule me, just
particularly pleased her. She listened joyfully (as though she had not
particularly slowly, as if to impress the fact that there was no need to
particularly so on this bright, hot summer day in town. "It's Sunday
particularly startling after a month of unfulfilled expectations, and at
particularly striking among all these drunken voices by its sober ring,
particularly striking contrast to the facts when some strong rise or
particularly those who had lately joined. These according to Pierre's
parties he wished to imitate. They had not yet had a loud conversation
parting from his father and his wife; he remembered the days when he
partly because Prince Andrew did not always feel equal to bearing with
partner's hand firmly, threw back his head, and advanced his foot,
partner) "are blue, her mouth coral and ivory; her figure" (he glanced
partner, and the old men began smilingly to talk about Poland and the
partner, herself offered to dance the mazurka with Boris. They were the
partners to her.
parts of the field, or to the driving of the herdsman, should attribute
party and that of Bennigsen, the chief of staff. Boris belonged to the
party cordially welcomed and courted him, in the first place because
party leader. So that the greater part of the events of history--civil
party was.
party, interrupting each other in their efforts to entertain their
party, subtle allusions to the tender passion were absolutely necessary
pass before the French Guards on the farther bank of the river, saw the
pass by them, when a soldier came up and took hold of the commander's
pass, allows his entire army to elude it. In Africa a whole series of
passage leading to the rooms on the ground floor. The count's face was
passage on the bare floor, lay a sick man, probably a Cossack to judge
passage to the stairs and, frowning and rubbing his forehead with
passage, heard with fear and delight first the young count's voice
passage. He was awaiting Petya's return in a state of agitation,
passed Rostov before he heard them shout, "Hurrah!" and looking back saw
passed Uvarov's cavalry he clearly heard the sound of cannon and
passed along the Sadovaya Street the carriages and carts formed two rows
passed along the road and quickly disappeared amid the trees in the mist
passed by, evidently not recognizing them. The handsome Anatole was
passed his time very gaily. After a short period of adapting himself
passed in step before the Emperors and their suites at a bold, brisk
passed the church opposite the house. Those who were to remain in Moscow
passed unnoticed.
passed, and at the cost of that temporary unpleasantness he had obtained
passed, the Pavlograd division was ordered to advance. In Wischau
passed. When they reached Yaroslavl the wound had begun to fester
passing among men and women who were entering and the program sellers,
passing by. From one of the drivers he learned that Kutuzov's staff were
passing instinctively glanced into the room, where Prince Vasili and the
passing it across Helene's back. Helene stooped forward to make room,
passing the time pleasantly. Every visitor who came to the house paid
passing three houses, turned into a yard on the right.
passing with a glass in her hand. "Yes it was exactly the same," thought
passing. Natasha apparently tried not to be a burden or a hindrance to
passion and stifles truth. On the one hand there is fear and regret for
passion," said the latter.
passionate admiration for him similar to that which he had once felt for
passionate affection. No one had instilled into him this love for Pierre
passionate enthusiasm to what was to him a new pursuit--the chase--for
passionately and tenderly, and old Mary Ivanovna, who had grown fond of
passionately devoted to the Emperor, not merely as a monarch but as a
passionately fond of the boy, and Princess Mary often deprived herself
passionately in love, left at the beginning of January to rejoin his
passionately once more to enjoy that dissipation he was so accustomed to
passions; but we must strive to direct them to a noble aim, and it is
past Tatarinova, a lot of digging is going on there. Go up the hillock
past and future hunts, of Rugay and Ilagin's dogs, while Natasha sat
past one o'clock."
past the ladies into the little drawing room. With quick steps he went
past the limbers to the farthest cannon.
past too and to understand a side of life previously incomprehensible to
past, suddenly cried out in joyful surprise:
past," continued the general, "and it seems the ambassador took no
past.
past. Anatole was sitting upright in the classic pose of military
past. The hare had squatted. Again the beautiful Erza reached him, but
past. When, intoxicated by the crimes he has committed so successfully,
past? And to feel not exactly dull, but sad?"
pastures, so did the army disperse all over the wealthy city.
pat, stwaight on his snout... 'Ah, what a... what a...!' and I sta'ted
paternal administration, chosen from among yourselves, will form your
paternal intentions of His Majesty the Emperor and King and to
paternal tenderness. His eyes grew dim, he moved forward, glanced round
path and his borzois once more stopped the animal's advance. She was
path in life of their own, and like me were brought by force of
path of regeneration and on the actively virtuous life of which he had
path, Miss. Only, don't look back."
pathetic expression of sorrow, prayer, and hope in it. As had occurred
pathetic, kindly old man much to be pitied.
patience and devotion, but tried to keep aloof from her.
patience than the horses, especially the near one, the chestnut Falcon,
patience with the old gentlewoman who lived in their house. Denisov,
patience), and only then will he be a brave leader. God forbid that he
patience, trying to divert his mother's attention to another topic.
patiently to disentangle them. The countess, with her loving heart, felt
patriotic fervor as not merely secondary but quite irrelevant and
patriotic intentions with which he had come that in spite of all his
patriotism (Kutuzov could not listen to this without wincing) by
patriotism of the Russian people. Another general stood in a martial
patriotism, he somehow felt ashamed to take the step. But the chief
patronage at the dancers.
patronage but stood on an equal footing with the highest of those of his
patronage, had given directions that they should all be removed to
patroness. She added that Her Majesty had deigned to show Baron Funke
patted his favorite, Rostov, on the shoulder.
pattern.
patterns with her.
pause, "but everyone lives in his own way. You lived for yourself and
pause, again rising and again pacing the room, "tomorrow you must get
pause. "He says she's moved them into the Otradnoe enclosure. They were
paused in her reading and silently stared at him with frightened eyes;
paused when I raised it."
paused, "by the authority entrusted to me by my Sovereign and country,
paused, looked ironically straight into Balashev's eyes, and said in a
paused, reflecting that this dear wife of his was after all but a weak
paused. "No, there's some mistake," thought he. "They can't have wanted
pausing, went into the study, giving instructions to his adjutant as he
pavilion he looked at his watch, and did not forget to look at it
pay visits, and then only to the most important persons in the town.
pay. And though they pretended to be concerned about the army, each
paying court to them. Julie was offended and replied that it was true
paying no attention to the varying quality of the pasturage in different
paying off the debts and undertaking new activities with serf labor,
payment which he agreed to send to his father-in-law, had arranged to be
pe vell. And ve must discuss it as little as po-o-ossible"... he dwelt
peace and settled. I know that no better man than he exists, and I am
peace and the abolition of war, and secondly, by the fact that when he
peace arising from consciousness of having stifled those personal dreams
peace but did not believe in its possibility; others talked of a battle
peace nor war, neither an advance nor a defensive camp at the Drissa
peace of mind. Can anything in the world make her or me less a prey
peace so long as a single armed enemy remained on Russian soil and told
peace with you. As for the Swedes--it is their fate to be governed
peace, he said: There can be no peace, for such is the people's will. He
peace."
peaceful refuge where he could recover himself, rest, and think over
peaceful, and glorious fatherland, I should have proclaimed
peak, nodding his head continually. When he came up to the guard of
peaked cap on his head. He was the buffoon, who went by a woman's name,
peal of merry laughter in which Tikhon himself joined.
peasant families together in the largest groups possible, not allowing
peasant in the knitted cap who, stepping lightly with outturned toes
peasant of his party, to Shamshevo to try and seize at least one of the
peasant sees the devil in the locomotive; others as a force resulting
peasant, or a woman with a baby, has no rest day or night and I give
peasantry of those parts the mysterious undercurrents in the life of
peasants and guerrilla troops over the French, the envy aroused by this;
peasants at work on the battlefield, with their queer, clumsy boots
peasants followed them.
peasants had and increased the number by all possible means. He kept the
peasants he knew, from whom he told him to take the carts.
peasants' needs and what there was in Bogucharovo that belonged to the
peasants, and women in cloaks and in pelisses--was so eagerly centered
peasants, did not bring their hay to Moscow for the high price offered
peasants.
peasants. She also knew that neither her father nor her brother would
pectoris."
peculiar form of beauty. Everyone brightened at the sight of this pretty
peculiar glow that came into Prince Andrew's eyes and by his silence,
peculiar to pregnant women. It was evident that her eyes did not see
peculiar type that made him easily recognizable. In the society in which
peculiarities of his reserved nature, Boris had managed during his
peculiarity of Speranski's mind that particularly attracted Prince
peculiarity of his speech was its directness and appositeness. It was
peculiarly serious and concentrated expression.
peculiarly strong effect on him because at the sight of the fire he felt
pedestal from which he, the commander in chief, devoted all his powers
penetration he understood all that was passing in Bolkonski's mind. "If
penny on drink, and a drunken man to smash mirrors or glasses for no
pens. "I loved you, but I have orders from Arakcheev and will kill
pensions and the same amount for asylums; 150,000 alimony was sent to
pensive attitude.
pensive face of the Emperor Alexander as he sat in silence in a tavern
pensively, while his handsome lips muttered tenderly to himself.
people I write a note: 'Princess So-and-So desires an interview with
people against their will to kill their fellow men--that force the
people and starting to join the army. You should have seen the state of
people appeared from right and left wearing black cloaks and holding
people are tortured, enlightenment is suppressed. All that is young and
people as the acme of intelligence and refinement, and they pay homage
people began talking loudly, to stifle their feelings of pity as it
people by his strange comments. But at this time he saw everybody--both
people combine in a certain formation in which they all take part, and
people dancing, Iogel with Natasha, his pride and his best pupil, were
people despise in their own class and do not understand from those in
people did not go, for the unknown cause which had previously impelled
people get over everything!"
people has by tacit agreement prescribed to them. But what this program
people in all walks of life.
people in the crowd rushed at the coachman. Seeing this the Emperor had
people misery!" he said with a malignity that alarmed Princess Mary.
people show to everyone when they are happy.
people some will always be found which by their meaning and their time
people speak when recalling an insult. "But I did not summon you to
people to leave Moscow was false; on the contrary he was glad that
people to others.
people were hurrying through the streets and there were many soldiers,
people were in one of the inner rooms, not considering it necessary to
people who formed part of that municipality and under pretext of
people who hated her, in order to pray for them. She included among her
people who looked after him with curiosity, he entered the porch of the
people who talk like that either do not know what they are talking about
people! Poor dear, he's as white as a sheet!"--various voices were heard
people's belief that this was necessary for the welfare of France, for
people's change of direction, are no longer in front, but on one side,
people's will cannot be verified, for it never occurred.
people, Cossacks, and a traveling carriage of the Governor's. At the
people, and flurrying them still more. Petya directed things in the
people," he went on, turning to Anna Pavlovna, "he ever was a hero,
people," the abbe was saying. "It is only necessary for one powerful
people--businessmen, relations, and acquaintances alike--were all
people--strengthened this idea. And imagining that in this direction
people.
people. At that time there was in France a man of genius--Napoleon. He
people. Napoleon led six hundred thousand men into Russia and captured
people. The difference, and sometimes complete contradiction, between
people. The old count's hospitality and good nature, which struck one
peoples for such a misunderstanding, and consents to withdraw your
peoples' welfare and that he could control the fate of millions and by
perceive its plain and terrible meaning, these causes seem insufficient.
perceptibly. He was silent, and she did not know what to say. She now
perception befitting a man of the world, he indicated by a movement of
perception the two were one and the same)--"but they are not even that!
percolating through sand--spread irresistibly through the city in all
perfect conviction that this information could not but be agreeable),
perfect peace of mind in spite of my wife's absence. At the time I gave
perfecting himself. We often think that by removing all the difficulties
perfection of Oriental beauty, with her sharply outlined, arched,
perfection toward which he strove, that he readily believed that in
perfectly happy. Just then the commander appeared on the bridge. Denisov
perform a great deed, and to save his life--the life of M. Ramballe,
perform toward them the duties demanded of him. And Nicholas' management
perform! Prussia has always declared that Buonaparte is invincible, and
performance, and Natasha moved over to it.
performed at a certain moment in time becomes irrevocable and belongs to
performed just where he did not happen to be. And he was always in a
performed.
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
perfumed, and powdered in just the same way. She had washed behind her
perhaps I may..."
perhaps are already there! Tikhon!" Tikhon jumped up. "No, no, I don't
perhaps because it was hard for him, hungry as he was, to look on at
perhaps even possess a tinge of poetry. But just as doubts of the real
perhaps he would then have been comforted and would have said that word
perhaps outlive us all, as I sincerely hope he will..."
perhaps she might someday be my wife and that I may be missing that
perhaps your flints are giving out, or are worn out--that happens
perhaps, see and take part in the first Russian encounter with the
period of the campaign is quite rightly considered by the French to be a
period of the campaign that the historians tell us how Miloradovich
period of time, however intelligible or incomprehensible the causes
period, nor would there have been any contradictions.
perish. Do they think we're dogs?" voices in the crowd were heard saying
perished by his own magnanimity, and that there were particular reasons
perished there were fewer Frenchmen than Hessians and Bavarians.
perished with each additional day it remained in Moscow. But it did not
perishing, but could not stop, any more than the Russian army, weaker
permissible; "the door to the left, ma'am."
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
permission here in hospital, that I may not have to play the part of a
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
permission previously given him by Kutuzov to be present at the council,
permission to ride round the position to see the disposition of the
permission."
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.
permitting himself to kiss her hand.
perpetrated."
perplexity about these questions. There was now within him a judge who
perplexity and fear, her evenings and dinner parties, where politics,
perplexity several times a day, involuntarily beginning to reflect anew
perplexity.
perplexity. "To give or not to give?" he had asked himself. "I have
perseverance, but only the knowledge of how to get on with those who can
persevering and patient love seemed completely to surround the countess
persisted in his request to Kutuzov, arrived at Grunth and reported
persistent, calculating expression on his plump face, hurriedly and
person in a bed of roses with one crumpled petal suffered as keenly as
person once dear. A dull, dejected look, random replies, and talk about
person she happened to look at she was in love with for that moment.
person the sufferings and death he had witnessed on the battlefield.
person was a gray-bearded old man in a woman's cloak, with a tall
person, who should set an example of discipline, carry disobedience to
person.
person. It has now come to my knowledge that you lent him your carriage
person. This letter having no other object, I pray God, monsieur le
person. While talking to Princess Mary he continually looked round as
personage he was referring to.
personages who, in their opinion, caused what they describe as the
personal activity of any soldier, merely coincided with the laws that
personal characteristics, habits, circumstances, and aims. They were
personal considerations as to the proposals made him to take part in the
personal considerations tens of thousands of lives, and my life, my
personal feeling became interwoven in the prayers with shades of its
personal grief; they wept with a reverent and softening emotion which
personal interview was refused, and instead of the Sovereign, Prince
personal matters but of the universal questions of life and death.
personal safety, and that the worst commander in chief if independent
personal spite against each of the prisoners, in unexpected contrast to
personal wish directed to something else. And above all," thought Prince
personal wishes, the will of His Majesty the Emperor Francis would have
personalities, and the less was it possible to arrive at any general
personality.
personality. But as in astronomy the new view said: "It is true that we
personally Nicholas could not wish for a better wife: by marrying her
personally in order to find a fresh pretext for a duel. But he again
personally to express the deep respect that, emulating his father, he
personally, to question him about Turkey, and that Prince Andrew was to
personally. To this semicouncil had been invited the Swedish General
persons is merely a paraphrase--a restatement of the question in other
persons, among them the elderly lady and Anna Pavlovna, did however
persons, briskly turning a shoulder to the orator at the end of a
perspiring, were at work on a huge knoll overgrown with grass to the
persuade her to prepare for her journey. When she had left the room the
persuade him to go abroad. He needs activity, and this quiet regular
persuaded him to return. She wrote that if he did not come and take
persuaded of it too and did not refuse him either a leading place
persuaded to make peace. They are burning for the combat," declared this
persuasiveness to his words. The staff officer joined in the colonel's
pertinaciously while he shook Pierre by the shoulder without looking at
pervaded by that atmosphere of an affianced couple which Natasha knew so
pet of a trader,'" said the adjutant smiling. "They asked him, 'Who gave
petisenfans, allay cushay dormir!" he exclaimed, imitating his Russian
petition. If he could only see the Emperor he would be happy!
petitioner on behalf of this young man. You see..." but before Prince
petty interests."
petty worldliness hiding itself in misty distance had seemed to him
peuples d'Alexandre, Moscou avec ses innombrables eglises en forme de
phenomena we are examining.
phenomena. In astronomy it was the immovability of the earth, in history
phenomenon comprehended, and therefore man's every action, must have
philanthropy is all very well of course. The aim is excellent but in the
philosophic theories--that from the point of view of reason man is
philosophic--we find a general law of necessity to which he (like all
philosophizing voice with pleasure.
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
phrase, said:
phrases. "Look, Anna Timofeevna," she added to her companion, "see what
physical consciousness of her nearness. She was sitting in an armchair
physical privation and strain he had suffered as prisoner until after
physical satisfaction. "Go on, harder, go on!" he muttered to the valet
physical things, and the fourth a combination of these. Now and then
physically at that moment, there was a weight on his chest and he could
physician to the Queen of Spain."
physics fire is not an element but a phenomenon.
physics) of patriotism which was present in all these men he had seen,
physiognomy changed: she shuddered, seeing what she had probably never
physiology and zoology, for in a frog, a rabbit, or an ape, we can
pick up the glove himself and to pass round the doctors who were not
picked up a book or some sewing, evidently waiting impatiently for the
picket ropes of the roan horses, when Lavrushka gleefully shouted to his
picture anything of future married life. If he tried, his pictures
picture of his death, which she felt she could not contemplate even in
pictured herself as Prince Andrew's wife, and the scenes of happiness
pictures of the magic lantern of life and regarding them now in the cold
pictures, engaged in building, and above all--read.
pieces.
pieces. He discovered that when he had married his wife--of his own free
pierced his skull.
piercing cries.
piercing the terrestrial globe with a toy stick, and just as they would
piercingly. Seeing Prince Andrew she leaned out from behind the apron
pilgrimage, of holy friendship, of the Eternal Architect of the
pilgrims, Princess Mary prepared a pilgrim's complete costume for
pillage his dearly beloved Bald Hills which he had built and peopled.
pillaging--October 9."
pillow, felt happy in the mere consciousness of life--returned to his
pillows. He was thin and pale. In one thin, translucently white hand
pinch of snuff.
pineapple ice. Before the ices, champagne was served round. The band
pining for the dear princess, and how she showed him the door? Oh, she
pipe firmly with the other. Panting and puffing, the major grumbled and
pipe the day before came up to it with two soldiers. The corporal and
pipe, now for the first time recognized the old Natasha. A flood of
pipes, make campfires of the Senate chairs in the Senate Square, and
pistol Makar Alexeevich at last got his fingers on the trigger, there
pistol, and took aim.
pistol, dagger, and peasant coat were ready. Napoleon was to enter the
pistols worn out? I brought some with me. Don't you want any? You can
pitied him. But Uncle Nicholas came nearer and nearer to them. Terror
pitiful plight, would be on a lower level to claim a share in the
pitting against his own borzois. "And suppose they outdo my Milka at
pity for her and loathing for the thing he had to do, "whether it is
pity for me. Why is it?"
pity that immediately overcame him. Princess Mary, evidently engrossed
pity the animals too. Eh, the rascal! Now you've curled up and got warm,
pity them. They are human beings too. Isn't it so, lads?"
pity's sake, leave this helpless youth who, after all, was the son of
pity, and when she wept her radiant eyes acquired an irresistible charm.
placarded everywhere:
place an inscription on all these establishments in large letters:
place and that he might now be lying, recovering or dying, alone among
place and took mistaken decisions; here was no Sonya with whom he ought,
place at headquarters and in Boris. In the army, Bonaparte and the
place because her provinces have been pillaged--they say the Holy
place by his will. And so the question whether he had or had not a
place by the dam of a small pond. It was past one o'clock. The sun,
place in his soul. Of late he had received so many new and very serious
place in history and without which we cannot imagine the modern history
place in the relative strength of the two armies--both in spirit and in
place of fodder, and sat down to dine round the caldrons from which
place of the Russian order of life that had been destroyed, Pierre
place of the luxury and comfort to which he was accustomed, to sleep
place the howitzers of the 3rd and 8th Corps, sixteen in all, on the
place was taken by a new and necessary performer.
place where Pierre sat.
place your money on the cards or I may get muddled in the reckoning."
place, and so on--as if anything more than A's or B's satisfaction
place, as he had felt under the parental roof. But here was none of
place.
place. The doctor was very much displeased about something and made a
placed his feet at right angles, and bade him lie down, saying that he
placed his hand on the gate as if to leave.
placed responsibilities upon him.
placed sideways, screening the light of the candle from him, and was
placed there to light up his face.
placed, and more free to one who does not know that the man was himself
places and met in certain habitual groups. A minority of those present
places and were silent, or, if they walked about and talked, attached
places where he could not possibly take part in a battle. As long as
places, sometimes several of them merging into one, sometimes one
places. As always happens the men, starting cheerfully, began to halt;
places. Then the strains of the count's household band were replaced by
placing of the guns and looked at the Kremlin through field glasses.
plague does not touch him. The cruelty of murdering prisoners is not
plain in Russia--and there the whole battle of the twenty-sixth of
plain occupied by the Prince d'Eckmuhl will open fire on the opposing
plain that at that moment there was in Natasha's heart no thought of
plain that he had had a lesson) and stopped behind the count. This
plain that nothing has happened and there is nothing to repent of, and
plain that she understood nothing and was so frightened that her
plain, affected, and dry. Natasha suddenly shrank into herself and
plain--were habitual subjects of jest to those about her. The general
plainly says that this method of explanation is fallacious, because in
plainly to the Emperor? Is it possible that on account of court and
plaintive moan of reproach was drowned by the threatening and angry roar
plaited, and she was transparently radiant with impulsive joy.
plaiting slippers out of cloth selvedges. He looked up at the opening
plaits coiling twice round her head, and a tawny tint in her complexion
plan (again one of Pfuel's) had been devised to catch Napoleon in a
plan for that evening. Sonya knocked at her door. Natasha did not let
plan long ago and now expounded it not so much to answer the questions
plan of a flanking movement.
plan perfectly worthless. Weyrother met all objections with a firm and
plan to Prince Andrew.
plan, and there was no intention of retiring farther. The Emperor
plan, evidently engrossed in his own ideas.
planed, and mended boots. He was always busy, and only at night allowed
planned by him alone. Nominally he is only an adjutant on Kutuzov's
planned in accord with his theory. He muttered something to himself
planning something and either deciding or had already decided something
plans from some given moment. A commander in chief is never dealing
plans of battles, dashing about in front of regiments, showering crosses
plans, destroyed the first army's energy and it retired.
plans. The happiness before him appeared so inconceivable that if only
planted.
plants grow from seeds producing two cotyledons, should insist that all
plastered only inside. It had bare deal floors and was furnished with
plate round and moving his wineglasses about with as much decision and
plates of raisins, walnuts, and almonds. The governesses were discussing
platform of the cannon, and reproached those others (whoever they might
play a rubber with Count Rostov as a most profitable source of income.
play, figures to pop out, and the hands to advance with regular motion
play. Involuntarily he felt a joyful agitation at the thought of the
played "Uncle" once more, running his fingers skillfully over the
played a part in his story, or whether it was all these things together,
played at war--that's what's vile! We play at magnanimity and all that
played her part in life, that what they now saw was not her whole self,
played the part of the lover, and he--the lover--assumed the role of the
played the piece over again. Anisya Fedorovna's smiling face reappeared
played the polonaise in vogue at that time on account of the words that
played. Natasha, smoothing her gown, went in with Sonya and sat down,
players, or peered at the now cold face of Dolokhov and tried to read
playful manner often employed by lively chatty people, and consisting
playing a Viennese waltz on the clavichord, while a fourth, lying on
playing in that monstrous crowd? They compromise him and throw on him
playing patience, and so--though by force of habit she greeted him
playing with the ball of worsted as a kitten should.
playing with the subject. Electricity produces heat, heat produces
playing. Natasha had been listening to those strains for some time and
pleasant and comforting. Pierre did not understand what his benefactor
pleasant and flattering to him.
pleasant composure and the same veiled look in his eyes with which he
pleasant face and resonant though not loud voice, attracted everyone's
pleasant feeling that there was something a la Louis XV in the sound of
pleasant impression on his mind, in her own home.
pleasant smell. I have the honor to be one of your wife's adorers. Is
pleasant smile Berg related how the Grand Duke had ridden up to him in
pleasant smile--his eyelids drooping more than half over his old eyes,
pleasant smiles.
pleasant things, ask you to dinner" ("That would not be bad as regards
pleasant with the invigorating freshness of the morning frost still in
pleasant, though slightly ironic, smile.
pleasantly and forget that war was impending.
pleasantly considering the probability of being promoted in a few days
pleasantly made to share in these merry reminiscences.
please don't thank me!"
please excuse me," he went on apologetically.
please you..." said Prince Andrew. But immediately, noticing the pained
please!"
please. That is all I ask. Monsieur Pierre, you say.... That's all I
please..." said a trembling, frightened voice behind him.
pleased Pierre very much and he often asked himself what would put an
pleased at the importance of the mission entrusted to him, went to
pleased faces, for they knew that under no other management could they
pleased him were wrong and that he must go to Petersburg and settle his
pleased him, and latterly he had persistently, and as it seemed to
pleased to have back a friend whose presence made life run more smoothly
pleased to hear it from him. Again he honored him by touching his ear.
pleased with himself that Pierre almost winked back as he looked merrily
pleased with.
pleased, all history would be a series of disconnected incidents.
pleased. There were very few resident landlords in the neighborhood
pleases to recognize Bonaparte as Emperor and to conclude an alliance
pleasing little blonde, the wife of one of the provincial officials.
pleasurable and exhilarating effect on Rostov than the previous sounds
pleasure a piece of bread with some tea, and the doctor noticed that his
pleasure and disappoint everyone's expectation. Prince Vasili, in the
pleasure at the sound of the singing and the sight of the dancing
pleasure in the deception, at any rate it remained unexposed and Helene
pleasure is there to be so caustique?"
pleasure of spending the evening with you."
pleasure on his face approached Countess Rostova.
pleasure suffused Prince Andrew's face at this recollection.
pleasure that I am at the farm or in the office from morning to night?
pleasure to herself and to all around her. "I have brought my work,"
pleasure.
pleasure. The enemy's guns were in his fancy not guns but pipes from
pleasures than allow himself to be seen in a shabby equipage or appear
plenty of room to avoid capture and there is the night when nothing can
plenty to do still."
plight of the French or because of it, they wished to punish the floor
plump white shoulders and neck, round which she wore a double string of
plump, clean-shaven, blackish cheeks and every moment expected the
plump, well-nourished body. The fourth was a peasant, a very handsome
plunder the city; then, hesitating whether to leave a garrison behind
plunder were stopped by the authorities and made to cart the corpses
plundering by the Russians, with which the reoccupation of the city
pneumonia," she would go on, deriving much comfort from the utterance of
pocket and that's quite simple and is no one else's business."
pocket of his riding breeches, with his eyebrows lifted and his mouth
pocket, on seeing a crowd bearing down upon him told his coachman to
pocketbook.
pockets had seized her by the neck.
pockmarked peasant woman with the little girl, and when the patrol
pockmarked peasant woman. "Lord have mercy, Lord have mercy!" he added
poetry, and philosophy were discussed. At these parties his feelings
point as before--Paris. The last backwash of the movement from the west
point beyond which his criticism might touch the sovereign himself.
point of view and study the laws of the movement of steam, of the
point of view.
point. "It's in charge of the queer fellow we saw without his boots. You
point. What the general was saying was even more clever and to
pointed boot then fashionable, touched the groin of the bobtailed bay
pointed out to his father the danger of staying at Bald Hills, so near
pointed to the assistant), "keep on here. Some five of us doctors have
pointed to the peasants--"asks you to come up to the house.... Won't
pointing me to a broad avenue and garden, and in the garden was a large
pointing out the French to the cavalry.
pointing to his forehead, remarked:
pointing to the flying soldiers; but at that instant, as if to punish
pointing to the right.
pointing to the soldiers. "The officers don't keep them in hand. And
poisoned the artificial tranquillity which he managed to obtain in
polemic with M. Fain to prove that this work of genius must be referred
police officers and even the police master himself stood at the porch.
police officers to guide the army to the Ryazan road. He writes that
police, after reporting that he had executed the instructions he had
police, and looking round he noticed Alpatych.
policy of their court; that I love and respect Alexander and that in
polished shining cannon that quivered on the gun carriages and with
politeness and to start conversation, they asked him a few questions
politeness modestly placed himself at the disposal of the circle in
politeness prevented his showing impatience, left the old woman with a
political and strategic. Each step of the retreat was accompanied by
political events.
political necessity, and it seems to me that Napoleon showed greatness
political news. It became particularly animated toward the end of the
political views that my father is reluctant to speak of going to
polyglot talk and to these surmises, plans, refutations, and shouts,
pond. He longed to get into that water, however dirty it might be, and
pondered a little in silence and then indicated the spots where two
pondered. A husband, a man, a strong dominant and strangely attractive
pondered. Sometimes he staked a large sum, but Dolokhov refused to
pondering over his vicious past, and with a rapturous sense of beginning
ponderous steps up to her sister-in-law.
poor, but for my own part at any rate, for the very reason that your
poor. Well then, this!" and he tore up the note, and by so doing caused
poorer brothers. I was a merchant, my dear brothers, and had much
popular choice of Kutuzov as commander in chief was received.
popular feeling, and had grown so used to it, that the necessity of
population of a large provincial town. Half the men fell out of the army
population plainly that the town would be abandoned.
porch he met two of the landed gentry, one of whom he knew. This man, an
porch to meet their master. A score of women serfs, old and young, as
porch took out a clean pocket handkerchief and tied a knot in it.
porch. His landlord, who in a waistcoat and a pointed cap, pitchfork in
porch. Prince Andrew got out of the carriage, helped his little wife to
porch?"
porter were all sitting in the cellar, listening. The roar of guns, the
porter, "I know Count Cyril Vladimirovich is very ill... that's why I
porter. He had no lambskin cap on his head, nor had he a loaded whip
portfolio so firmly that it was plain she would not let go easily.
portfolio under his arm really did appear.
portfolio were the only sounds audible, but it was evident that if
portfolio, and changed her grip.
portmanteau and my dressing gown. The Emperor proposes to give all
portmanteau into the vehicle, "we are to move on still farther. The
portmanteaus and not greeting anyone. "The young ladies'? There to the
portrait (evidently by the hand of the artist belonging to the estate)
portrait of the aunt's husband on the box lid.
portrait to be carried outside his tent, that the Old Guard, stationed
pose, crossing himself by shaking his hand in front of his chest
position among the Petersburg Freemasons. He arranged dining and funeral
position and acquaintances, tried to fathom the character of the control
position and his own, he decided that the time had come to propose.
position and prepare for an attack."
position as much as possible so as to be nearer to the soldiers and
position as soldiers, Pierre once more thought of the wounded men at
position at Borodino.
position impossible and therefore could not go to fight, fully convinced
position in society thanks to his intimacy with Countess Bezukhova,
position in the house was such that only by sacrifice could she show her
position j'ai des devoirs," * said Helene changing from Russian, in
position now, Peter Nikolaevich..."
position of that insignificant individual was such as could certainly
position of the Russian people. There were the same receptions and
position of the Shevardino Redoubt. That redoubt was quite senseless
position of the army reached him as he went along, and the appearance of
position of the troops behind the hill, he quite understood them and
position seems to them insoluble. But the wave they feel to be rising
position they had intended to occupy and took up a new position which
position to be attacked, but yourself to attack. Believe me in war the
position to know..."
position with his eyes shut. Pierre looked at him and had not time
position, did not say a word about the past, and no longer feared to
position, straightened himself, adjusted his feet, and leaned back again
position.
position.
position.
position. He kept closing his eyes and then again looking at the fire,
position. He made some notes on two points, intending to mention them to
position. Smiling unnaturally and muttering to himself, he first sat
position. Then there's this house, which must be built in order to
position. When anything particularly difficult or nasty had to be
position."
position; but innumerable circumstances and the reappearance of French
positions and maintaining a hellish fire under which the French army was
positions and withdrawn in his presence. Together with Tushin, stepping
positions they had lost ONE HALF of their army.
positions, moving his dirty thick big toes. Every time he looked at his
positively that Helene is as innocent before you as Christ was before
possess courtly tact, "that his excellency made it an express condition
possess power. This mirrorlike gaze and those delicate hands irritated
possessed him. The whole meaning of life--not for him alone but for the
possessed his soul. He remembered that he had now a new source of
possessed. Pierre was one of those who are only strong when they feel
possesses: the feeling which causes a man to perform actions which from
possession of him. He felt that the condition he was in could not
possession of the family, but the rejoicing was external and insincere.
possessions, the thirty peasant carts that had come in from their
possibility and rendered it not only difficult but impossible for the
possibility did not exist. It was impossible not to retreat a day's
possibility of anyone seeing her without being enchanted. The aunt
possibility of being what they were. And they with their simple, kind,
possibility of defending Moscow in a similar manner.) Count Rostopchin
possibility of love and happiness between Natasha and Pierre, and the
possibility of the existence of any laws for the whole of humanity.
possibility of, and passionately desired, the regeneration of the sinful
possibility... that possibility... is terrible. Tell me, can I hope?
possible and another that a Saxon should be shot, on whom a letter
possible from places where people were killing one another, to some
possible from the political and clever talk which everyone addressed
possible if there was danger.
possible must join hands as closely as they can to withstand the general
possible only when men abandoned the conception of the fixity of the
possible power. How does he use it?
possible way of dealing with it. The necessity of the conception of
possible what Kutuzov had not yet even dared to think of--the complete
possible, forget the misfortunes you have suffered, should entertain
possible--but his efforts were weak and clumsy and the door, pushed from
possible.
possible. God preserve us from that terrible misfortune!
possible. His conversation was always sprinkled with wittily original,
possible. Petya could not return unless his regiment did so or unless
possible. Sonya and her mother put themselves entirely in her hands. The
possible."
possibly could?
post he could--preferably that of adjutant to some important personage,
post station.
posted on a rather steep incline which dominated the French position.
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
posted, two men appeared on horse back. They were an aide-de-camp
posterity who view the thing that happened in all its magnitude and
postilion started the horses, the off pole horse tugged at his collar,
postilions, and scullions stood at the gate, staring at the wounded.
postmaster Klyucharev to be arrested and exiled for no particular
postmaster's book. Bazdeev had been one of the best-known Freemasons and
pouch, inside the bosom of his dressing gown and held the stem of his
powder and paint: he will not be wanted any more.
powder smoke and stopped in despair. Everything seemed lost. But at that
powders he had prescribed a fortnight previously.
power and Alexander's errors and duplicity.
power and strength, affirming the existence of a higher, nonhuman
power and therefore to have the possibility of bringing about the
power and will to select one sequence of thoughts or events on which to
power as an explanation of historical events is best demonstrated by
power based on itself and always consistently directing its nations
power in which he had so lately moved--and after several marches with
power of the beast that spoke great and blasphemous things had been
power only because they fulfill the will of the people which has been
power suppressed the ideas of the Revolution and the general temper of
power that moves peoples? To this, modern history laboriously replies
power to be the one absolute and real power, and that any other force
power to select the most foolish and ruinous of all the courses open
power was based on his virtue and genius. Lanfrey, a Republican, says it
power which they apparently do not recognize.
power, were commanders of genius.
power--existing immutably outside time--is, but to history's questions
power.
power. Chance puts the Duc d'Enghien in his hands and unexpectedly
power. During the hour Pierre watched them they all came flowing from
powerful process of thought and feeling must have been going on in
powerful quarters, gaining upon the wolf. Nearer and nearer... now she
practical woman that she was, had even managed by favor with army
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
praised. "We have had an explanation today."
pranced up and down in one place like a goat and shrieked piercingly.
prayed for those who hate us, she tried to think of her enemies and
prayed that the daily interview might pass off well.
prayer can move mountains, but one must have faith and not pray as
preached on the Cross."
prearranged sentence.
preceding it.
precious and dear as many persons are to me--father, sister, wife--those
precious stone, sparkled in the moonlight. A tree in the garden snapped
precious to be given to foreigners, who were for the most part enemies,
precisely when, or by whom, it was decided to move to Tarutino. Only
predestination and inevitability of his every action.
predestined from eternity, and that therefore he ought not to undertake
predestined goal, an innumerable sequence of inverse chances occur--from
predestined path are unsuccessful: he is not received into the Russian
predestined to do.
predetermined, and that wriggle as he might, he would be what all in
preening its plumage and became motionless.
pregnancies, and this was such a time.
preoccupation and absent-mindedness had not recognized Rostov and had
preoccupation with state affairs, himself visited the theaters that were
preoccupied air and at once began talking. He had just heard particulars
preoccupied and gloomy. From all this talk he saw only one thing: that
preoccupied him suddenly became illumined by a cold white light without
preoccupied manner. He beckoned to one of his white adjutants and asked
preoccupied that only in bed was he able to be by himself. He had to
preoccupied with personal interests imparted great confusion and
preoccupied, absent-minded, and massive figure was a very noticeable one
preoccupied, yet meekly Christian look which never left her face, Anna
preparations for departure, held aloof from her too.
preparations for it with unparalleled solemnity. This Kutuzov who before
preparations for war lay in the fact that Nicholas would not hear of
preparations made for the dinner; he saw the Russian and French colors
prepare an asylum for them in Russia!"
prepare her sister-in-law, and every time began to cry. Unobservant as
prepare him to take on himself the whole responsibility for what is
prepared by her. The smell and taste of it all had a smack of Anisya
prepared by him, had now been ruined by somebody, and that that somebody
prepared by innumerable so-called chances in his life: his education,
prepared for them.
prepared the surprise, having placed something on the chairs and covered
prepared to continue, but just then Anna Pavlovna, who had kept a
prepared to listen.
prepared to take the most resolute and desperate steps to punish his
prepared, an officer was summoned and sent to deliver them to Ermolov
prepared.
prepared. We have each of us two pistols.... But what's this?" he asked,
prepared..."
preparing for battle, each vainly trying to detect signs of cowardice
preparing something for them and concealing it.
preparing tea. He brought in a boiling samovar. When everything was
prescribed small doses of a certain drug to produce a certain effect;
presence and you stand by! What does this mean? You will answer for
presence gave her no pleasure was here and they met every week. Like
presence in Moscow--was suggested to the Emperor, and accepted by him,
presence in their house, despite her sincere pity for him and for
presence of French officers in Boris' lodging, dressed in uniforms he
presence they would have had to answer inopportune questions and to
presence will inspire me, and I shall speak to them as I always do:
presence with his whole being by the loss of his sense of freedom. She
presence, and were evidently anxious to display their courage before
presence.
presence.
presence. Yet sooner or later it had to be, and she went in. The sobs
presence."
presence; if she is willing, then he can stay on. He can stay and I'll
present Emperor--more than once in Paris, and tells me he never met a
present Sonya from whom he had resolved never to be parted again. He
present bivouac another fortnight there will not be a healthy man left
present circumstances something else is needed."
present en garcon (as he phrased it), was also there and, though not an
present from the prince--and carrying a stick as the prince did,
present himself at Bennigsen's quarters at six that evening.
present itself again. And this very absence of an aim gave him the
present la pluie et le beau temps. * He's too proud for anything. Takes
present. "'What pleasure is there to be' is not Russian!"
present. What had happened was that news (which afterwards proved to be
present..."
presented a more cheerful and animated aspect. This was because all who
presented a very sad and depressing spectacle.
presented he was as little able as his father to change his opinion. He
presented itself to her mind for the first time and she did not know how
presented itself to him, he said to himself:
presented itself to him--not in relation to any worldly matter or with
presented itself to his mind. He had long ago pictured to himself a
presented itself, unexpectedly proposed a perfectly new position
presented itself; and he forced himself to work day and night at Masonic
presented themselves to her so clearly and in such detail that they
presented to him in the form of his love for Natasha, and a last, though
presented to him thus with the simplicity of Columbus' egg. He was
presentiment that it would happen. What a good thing it would be!"
presenting an envelope.
presenting his fat shoulders.
presenting itself identically to two persons. Even those members
presently. I am delighted to meet a compatriot. Well, and what are we
presents itself in the form of an aimless and senseless expedition
presents itself to him at last. He firmly and clearly expresses his
preservation of my father's house in Moscow, or the glory of the Russian
preserving order looted Moscow or saved their own property from being
preside at that tribunal? He will get nothing for his pains! How could
president of the council of war. Weyrother evidently felt himself to be
pressed Prince Andrew's hand.
pressed Rostov's hand and burst into tears.
pressed against the wall of a charred house, listening to that noise
pressed him against the railings, and all he could do was to smile.
pressed him still harder with proofs of the impossibility and above all
pressed his heels against its sides and, feeling that his spectacles
pressed it that terrible evening four days before his death. And in her
pressed two fingers more and more rigidly to his cap, as if in this
pressing Pierre's hand, he went out.
pressing Prince Andrew's hand and looking into his face with a
pressing against one another to see him.
pressing round him. Pierre went up to the circle that had formed round
pressing the hands of Prince Andrew and Boris. "You know I should be
pressing the old man's hand went with him into the castle.
pressure lay his only hope of salvation.
pressure of the hand and the same quick, repeated bows. As soon as he
presumptuous lieutenant who had prevented his finishing what he had to
pretend not to doubt it. And he acted accordingly.
pretending to do something real. Prince Andrew gaily bore with his
pretending to sleep, the sounds his nose emitted during the reading that
pretense of helping, was in everyone's way.
pretense, and that the whole attention of that company was directed
pretext Belova's deafness.
pretext of sending papers to the Emperor, dispatched these Polish
pretext ready to account for it.
pretext would be Countess Mary. When her vocal organs needed exercise,
pretty and conscious of it, were standing by the clavichord, happy and
pretty and sweet, and evidently deeply in love with him, but he was at
pretty child, his son whom he held on his knee, but of himself. He
pretty face, and her unusually animated look which was fixed on him,
pretty face.
pretty girl who caught his eye; but scarcely had he embraced that
pretty young Polish lady. If the thought that things looked bad chanced
prevailed. She drew her brother's attention to the maid who was calling
prevent an enemy from advancing along the Smolensk road to Moscow.
prevented her from going on with it.
previous Sunday the old count had given his son two thousand rubles,
previous and of the impending battle. Some Cossacks on the prowl for
previous performance Semenova had fallen down on the stage.
previous remark. "It's because she was in love with that fat one in
previous traditions of war. The burning of towns and villages, the
previous wars. She did not realize the significance of this war, though
previously had listened to the discussion at the Austerlitz council of
previously selected, where as it was fought on a quite unexpected spot
previously sent; and a spy, a prisoner, and a general who has been
previously, is quite baseless, which again shows that Napoleon's cold on
previously.
previously. It was seething in its depths. Historic figures were not
prey, the hare moved and darted along the balk between the winter rye
price. The tone of the proclamation was not as jocose as in the former
priceless man, but he's sixty. Is he to go up for examination?"
pricked their ears at these shouts. Over there, where the shouting came
pricking its ears at the noise and looking at the lights. The shouting
pricking its ears at the sound of shots just as it had done on the
pride enough to see it? If she has no pride for herself she might at
pride," said the princess, following the train of her own thoughts
pride. "That lawsuit taught me much. When I want to see one of those big
pride. This icon of the Venerable Sergius, the servant of God and
prince again began speaking about his son, about the war, and about the
prince and planning something, and this disquieted and offended her.
prince had forbidden it, appeared on the threshold with a shawl round
prince had had a seizure paralyzing his right side.
prince had replied affectionately, and from that time had kept the
prince had retained for himself.
prince himself) would die before then, and he decided to conform to his
prince interrupted her.
prince never directly asked himself that question, knowing beforehand
prince sternly; "I'm afraid you write much nonsense. I'll read the
prince to get up, Tikhon came to call the young prince to his father.
prince was about to say something, but Helene interrupted him.
prince was at home, and showed him into a clean little anteroom.
prince was not very well and was taking no steps to secure his safety,
prince's cold and stiffened hand.
prince's knowledge. The longer she lived, the more experience and
prince's orders.
prince, but could not get it quite right.)
prince, one window frame was removed in each room as soon as the larks
prince, stepping on his heels, paced up and down his study and sent
prince, with spectacles on and a shade over his eyes, was sitting at his
prince.
prince. "Very, very glad to have seen you," repeated he, embracing
princess (as she did when he was mentioned) and even when he thought of
princess and Mademoiselle Bourienne had already received from Masha,
princess and Prince Vasili, recovering themselves, followed her. A few
princess anxious and inquiring, the nurse encouraging. Everyone in the
princess away by that scream... "Killed!"
princess felt this; they still thought that if a blue ribbon were placed
princess had been crying after dinner and had spoken of her forebodings
princess had caught a glimpse of the man she had known and loved, and it
princess on hearing the news.
princess suddenly, her pretty face all at once distorted by a tearful
princess told the count that she would be delighted, and only begged him
princess was a good match. It was very bitter for her. But despite
princess was not unwell, but had such an overpowering fear of the prince
princess went in with the drink she had prepared according to Lorrain's
princess were at home.
princess with a pleased smile, as to an intimate acquaintance.
princess' beautiful eyes with all their former calm radiance were
princess' face. She took it quickly and bent her head over it.
princess' health and then led Pierre along a stone passage. The first
princess' hints and the letter, but he feared now to look at Dolokhov,
princess' luggage from Bogucharovo, there had been a village meeting at
princess' order.
princess' part toward her future sister-in-law and a wish that he should
princess' room, a carriage containing Pierre (who had been sent for) and
princess, Alpatych had his own belongings taken out of the carts which
princess, a certain confusion and dissension had arisen among the crowd.
princess, and stared fixedly at her through his eyeglass.
princess, and they were both speaking in excited whispers.
princess, as if lost in a fog, had already staggered out of the study.
princess, asked her to speak out fully and confide her grief to him; but
princess, his cousin, at Moscow, concerning Dolokhov's intimacy with his
princess, ignoring his question. "Now I know! Yes; if I have a sin,
princess, kissing her soundly. "If I hadn't this headache I'd have
princess, kissing her. "I know you already through my sister-in-law's
princess, looking at Anna Mikhaylovna as at a stranger.
princess, now quite changed. "And what does she come worming herself in
princess, with the doctor, and with all the people he now met, which
princess, with the long waist and hair plastered down like a doll's,
princess.
princess.
princess. (In accordance with Lise's and Prince Andrew's wishes they had
princess. Pierre concluded that this also was essential, and after a
princesses Aline and Sophie sit whole days with me, and we, unhappy
princesses was coming to take her turn at watching. "Let us go."
princesses, sat in a corner knitting a stocking. Pierre had never been
princesses; and from there go on to the Rasgulyay--the coachman Ipatka
principally in the unnaturalness of his relation to the woman and in a
principle of eternal love revealed to him, the more he unconsciously
principle of love, the more he renounced life and the more completely
principles in harmony with the spirit of the times, undertake the
principles, I refer it to you."
printed on ordinary Russian paper) of General Rameau's, telling people
prison, and had a mother who could not see or understand it? And
prisoner enhanced his own importance as a Russian hero. The Italian
prisoner, the one next to Pierre, was led away--alone. Pierre did not
prisoner?" each was thinking. But the French officer was evidently more
prisoners and read out the sentence in Russian and in French.
prisoners and the French soldiers, in which Pierre had succeeded in
prisoners had been captured.
prisoners if they agree to be captured, just as it is only possible
prisoners if they surrender according to the rules of strategy and
prisoners in a stable, had gone off to pillage their own stores, several
prisoners taken in yesterday's action, was standing by the door after
prisoners were. This officer, probably someone on the staff, was holding
prisoners with that detachment, Dolokhov said:
prisoners, Petya had once more felt awkward and restless; but again he
prisoners, and Junot's baggage train--still constituted a separate and
prisoners, and that one of their comrades, a German soldier, had been
prisoners, but kill and be killed! He who has come to this as I have
prisoners, it was found that in the bustle of leaving Moscow one Russian
prisoners. From all sides came shouts of command, and from the left came
prisoners."
prisoners? It's chivalry! The French have destroyed my home and are on
private and intimate life of the house continued.
private room and, calling his adjutant, asked for some papers relating
private vehicles.
privilege of admiring her beautiful figure and shapely shoulders,
privilege."
privileges harmful to the service; that honor, l'honneur, is either a
probability of Chichagov, Kutuzov, and Wittgenstein effecting a junction
probably an ambuscade there.
probably been wounded in the cheek. His whole head was wrapped in rags
probably pass round to the right of the Moskva. But wherever it may be,
probably think it easy to gain victories!" he thought. His eyes narrowed
probably to strengthen the front line. The smoke of the first shot had
probably unforeseen and not heard of by Napoleon). So not one of
problems in higher mathematics, turning snuffboxes on a lathe, working
problems of motion which used to appear insoluble.
procedure was discussed at those meetings, and how sedulously and
proceed.
proceeded to his study.
proceeding as usual. Denisov, who had been losing at cards all night,
proceeding from the house.
process of analysis and enters on the new process of the integration
procession.
procession: the Emperor was passing from the palace to the Cathedral of
prochain--your Kiev peasants to whom you want to do good."
proclamation appeared about two months ago. The count was informed of
proclamation which he had dictated straight off without corrections. It
proclamation," said the adjutant. "The young man is in prison and I
proclamation."
proclamations were circulating in the villages, and that if the princess
procured a coachman's coat and cap for Pierre, and promised to get him
procured. After swallowing a little she had been so frightened that she
produce a conquest and is not even an invariable indication of conquest;
produce at the same intervals and hold for the same time, but which
produced an effect she glanced at Anna Pavlovna, at once adopted just
produced and a cellaret and half a bottle of rum, and having asked Mary
produced no less impression by slight exertions--the least effort
produced the chief beauty of the spectacle.
produced very brilliant results.
produces events, and treat it as their cause. In their exposition, an
produces other bodies. Mercury is a fluid, volatile, spiritual essence.
producing events. Gervinus, Schlosser, and others, for instance, at one
professedly reject that conception but inevitably have recourse to it at
profit. The first and chief object of our Order, the foundation on which
profited by their toil to lead a profligate life. That is what you have
profligacy. Illuminism is not a pure doctrine, just because it is
profound meaning in it of which she herself had no conception.
profoundly.
profundity of their plans, that he would answer with his phrases (which
progenitors, the writers of universal histories, for if historical
program his present accusers would have given him--of nationality,
program--or even admitting that some one general program of these
progress of affairs and approving and disapproving with full right to do
progress, looks for these conditions in the greatness, wealth, freedom,
progression could be determined mathematically. The French army melted
progression with a common ratio of one tenth, and have found the sum of
progression; and that crossing of the Berezina about which so much has
prohibited degrees of affinity. Despite all the terror of what had
project or other. Just look how he treats the ladies! There's one
project will speak for itself."
project. Ermolov, Dokhturov, and Raevski agreed with Bennigsen. Whether
projectiles that flew over him, did not see the enemy on the other side
projections, and slipping between the legs of the generals she darted
projects for peace, a secret peace concluded separately."
projects, and letters which contain hints of such a line of action.
prolong their banter and insistence. She flushed, her beautiful eyes
promenade, or a play. Her dresses were always of the latest fashion.
prominent chin, wore a gracious and majestic expression of imperial
prominent gray eyes. Then she shook her head and glanced up at the icons
prominent upper teeth, and wearing a black cloak and cap. This woman,
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
promise and could not bring herself to decide to do what was demanded
promise of rising in his diplomatic career. He still a young man but
promise to Prince Andrew was of no account, because before he gave it he
promised Bolkonski. He was glad I was free to refuse him."
promised in her heart to do better and to accomplish the impossible--in
promised not to forget him, distinguished him above the other adjutants,
promised the Rostovs to bring them, from Count Rostopchin whom he knew
promised? Nothing! And what little they have promised they will not
promoted to a sublieutenancy."
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
promotion, Nicholas said that he kissed his father's and mother's hands
promotion..."
promotions, and in this pursuit watched only the weathercock of imperial
prompt departure. Princess Mary listened without understanding him; she
prompted by vanity and pettiness.
promptings of the throng.
promptly all that related to the gist of the business was evaded. He
promptly pretended to be astonished and awe-struck, opened his eyes
pronounce Pitt's sentence, he saw a well-built and handsome young
pronounced some words. Tears, the cause of which she herself did not
pronouncing French with evident difficulty, and speaking even slower
pronouncing the phrase "knocked out" with ringing distinctness.
pronunciation which she could allow herself when conversing with a
proof of the fallibility of his theory in the disasters of that war. On
proofs of Nikolenka's virtues. How strange, how extraordinary, how
proper posts. Boris had been quartered, and had marched all the way,
proper, and regular motion. But amid these cares her anxiety about
proper.
proper.
property had been left, brought there from other houses, complained of
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
property is promptly punished. His Majesty the Emperor and King protects
property that had been stolen by the Emperor, kings, and dukes; but
property which he should have removed, was still in Moscow and it was no
property, not to us his direct heirs, but to Pierre."
property, when one person advised one thing and another something else.
property--and the countess' repeatedly expressed wish that Nicholas
property. 'And he went on to tell them all about it in due order. 'I
prophet's pride. "I always said he was the only man capable of defeating
propos of marriages: do you know that a while ago that universal auntie
proposal to move troops by night from the right to the left flank to
proposal, her refusal, and her explanation with Nicholas, Sonya twirled
proposal, the holiday tone of joyousness usual at such times took
proposals. Pfuel alone seemed to consider Napoleon a barbarian like
proposed that plan to Barclay de Tolly and now wished to propose it
proposed that they should play "Kings" with Mary Hendrikhovna. They drew
proposed to Sonya!"
proposing some scheme or other and has crawled into the enemy's picket
proposing, and today or tomorrow he would probably ask for an answer.
proposition to you in his pupil's--I mean, his son's--name. Do you
proprietor's goods and packing them on the carts, and Dron, liberated at
prospect of spending an evening with a poor invalid is not too terrible,
prospect was so splendid that she hardly believed it would come true,
prostrated himself before the Gates of the Temple. And really, the
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
protected himself from the danger of its repetition, first by not being
protecting a woman," and that "to protect a woman who was being insulted
protection and accepted his favor!" This idea horrified her, made her
protection in their eyes, evidently unable to understand or believe
protector and defender, she did not answer him, but after dinner called
protested Balashev, "but permit me to observe that I have the honor to
proud expression she had not seen on it before. He inquired about her
proud, or that certain writers wrote certain books.
proudly, and with sly merriment, the fear that had at first seized
prove: the one that the Convention and the other that the Empire was the
proved both by history and by observing contemporary events.
proved physically impossible.
proved that he did so," said Pierre without looking at Rostopchin, "and
provender which might have saved it from starvation, disintegrated and
proverb says," remarked Shinshin, moving his pipe to the other side of
proves that consciousness is not subject to reason.
provide himself with some books for the campaign, and had spent some
provided cunningly devised evidence of the foresight and genius of the
provided out of the produce of the estate.
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
province, obliged our army to turn still more to the south and to cross
provinces as I gave him Finland. Yes," he went on, "I promised and would
provinces.
provinces. Your army is grumbling."
provinces... and so on; but as soon as the war was touched on, or
provincial Marshal of the Nobility sent an official to Princess Mary
provincials, and the very people they had entertained in Moscow without
provincials," he would say.
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
provisions and guns--should consent to carry out the will of these weak
provisions, Rostov found a family consisting of an old Pole and his
provisions.
provisions."
provocatively happy." "And what nonsense all this is that I am saying!"
proximity to the head of the government may be. This inevitability alone
pseudo-healers, wise women, homeopaths, and allopaths. They satisfied
pseudo-orders during the battle were also no worse than formerly, but
pua' as on the first day of cweation... Who's that now? Send him to the
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
public good"--and he began thinking of his social duties to his family
public interest from being felt or even noticed. Most of the people at
public to appreciate his skill.
public tranquillity.
publican some skins from the factory and for this had had drink served
publican to the smith and back again as if considering whom he ought to
puddles!" said the esaul, screwing up his glittering eyes.
puhse?" he asked, turning to Rostov.
pulling him by the chain and trying to set him at the others.
pulling it or being pushed by it he did not know, but rushed along at
pulling the skirt straight and shifting the pins from one side of her
pulse, added: "You are not well, my dear fellow. Think what you are
punish. And then you will know the happiness of forgiving."
punished by an order to burn down his houses.
punished once about some plums? You were all dancing, and I sat sobbing
punished who had allowed himself to seize a fox hunted by someone else's
punished? But even if we admitted that Kutuzov, Chichagov, and others
punishes disobedience and crime. Strict measures have been taken to
punishes thee,' I shall say," thought he, imagining what he would say
punishment suddenly changed.
punishment that overtakes men for their sins, and especially of her own
punishments were to be admonitory and not corporal, and hospitals,
pupil's behalf. That's how it's to be understood! 'How understand
purchaser has turned up for the Moscow estate and for the house. If you
purchasers--but only soldiers, in uniforms and overcoats though without
pure, correct French many interesting details about the armies and the
purged of their presence."
purification and reformation of oneself for its reception, and (3) The
purified, thou wilt gain wisdom. Look at your life, my dear sir.
purple-faced general wait respectfully while Captain Prince Andrew, for
purport or significance. Such were Willarski and even the Grand Master
purpose she arranged a meeting between the young people at the bishop's
purpose, for his stomach will not digest the two dinners.
purpose," thought he.
purpose. Nicholas replied that he could not go back on his word, and his
purposely dropped a handkerchief in front of him and stood looking at
purposely trying to appear stupider than he really was.
purse and, drawing its rings aside with his small, white, turned-up
purse undah the pillow," he said, and went out to the quartermaster.
purse.
pursued their usual way of life, in which he took his part. He could
pursued. More than once he had driven them through the town with gypsies
pursuing the Russian rearguard he came upon the left flank of the
pursuing them. He could already see how these men, who looked so small
pursuits, hasten from one side of Europe to the other, plunder and
pushed back in the sitting room where the count and Marya Dmitrievna had
pushed it a few inches from the corner and then closer in again.
pushed off the road. The convoy formed up.
pushed on to Smolensk as to a promised land.
pushed the guns and wagons themselves. Whips cracked, hoofs slipped,
pushing away her daughter with pretended sternness, and turning to the
pushing back the crowd, Rostov kept his eyes on every movement of
pushing forward out of the wood. The count started and dropped the
pushing him at all.
put A in B's place and B in D's, or on the contrary to put D in A's
put a bridle on your senses, and seek blessedness, not in passion but
put a little dripping. The pleasant odor of greasy viands mingled with
put an end to disorder and to re-establish public security. A
put before him for signature a paper relating to the recovery of payment
put her hand gaily on the man's shoulder, smiling at Prince Andrew.
put her project into execution.
put him? Have they fed him? Haven't they hurt his feelings?" he thought.
put in an appearance there," said the prince. "My daughter is coming for
put it off. But in the spring of that year, he received a letter from
put off her departure, and for three weeks looked after Natasha as if
put off," said the prince, who, like a wound-up clock, by force of habit
put on the air of one who finds it impossible to reply to such nonsense,
put one arm around Pierre and the other around his daughter.)--"My dear
put our affairs in order while I am alive, that's all. And to do that,
put questions and gave brief replies about things they knew ought to
put them into the wing, the men's room, or the nurse's room, we must ask
put there to defend the position, but were in a concealed position as
put there, and two musket shots rang out from under the gate as soon as
put those who did not take an active part in the affairs of the lodges
put to him. He had a feeling that it was only out of condescension or a
put--which, in fact, his plan did not answer--as to avail himself of the
putrefaction and hospital air. On the stairs he met a Russian army
putting Natasha in he pressed her arm above the elbow. Agitated and
putting direct questions as to how many men there were in the battalion,
putting it up.
putting on his spectacles he began reading. Only now in the stillness of
putting the whole column on the alert, so he sent Tikhon Shcherbaty, a
puzzled smile. "I asked him whose subject he was, and he jabbered in his
puzzled tone.
qu'il n'y voit que du feu, et oublie celui qu'il devait faire faire sur
qualities of him who possesses it, it must evidently be looked for
qualities that had been a hindrance, if not actually harmful, to him in
qualities.
qualities. He was always hearing such words as: "With your remarkable
quanti.... You will agree that if you did not look after your estates
quantity of phenomena of which it is cognizant and that always appear
quarante-deux, * which was the term allowed to the beast that "spoke
quarreled about--I don't even remember!"
quarreled and even fought with other companies for them. Before they had
quarreled with Helene, mon cher? You are under a delusion," said
quarte or en tierce according to all the rules, and to make an adroit
quarter of his army he would certainly lose Moscow. For Kutuzov this was
quartermaster and without any provocation called him a thief, threatened
quartermaster appeared with an order to move on to the little town
quartermaster of the regiment and his commander had ordered him to
quartermaster's presence.
quarters and a speedy return to our country. Behave as you did at
quarters at Mikhaylovna on the Smolensk road:
quarters near Braunau, where they hoped to receive boots and clothes and
quarters of Moscow) the whole mass of prisoners suddenly started to one
quarters torches and candles were burning and no one slept. The old
quarters were, he believed, not far off.
quarters, turned round to the soldiers standing at the entrance, and in
quarters?' They were pointed out. 'Please to wait.' 'I've widden twenty
queen, but the king waved his arm severely, and men and women with bare
queerly dressed men and women who moved, spoke, and sang so strangely in
querulousness, which generally culminated in a burst of rage, and she
question a Russian prisoner captured by the cavalry. Followed by
question again presented itself whether she was not guilty, whether she
question arose in every soul: "For what, for whom, must I kill and be
question as to how she felt.
question for ethics.
question for her to refuse him. And therefore Nicholas' first feeling
question for him now was: "Have I really allowed Napoleon to reach
question for whose sake he came (though no one spoke of it) was soon
question has no meaning for a Russian." (He lurched his heavy body
question he knew was in his wife's mind.
question him. The man announced that the Tsar had been driven in a
question is again a twofold one: firstly..."
question is dealt with, that for history this question does not refer
question of the dowry, nor spoken to his wife about it. At one time the
question of what causes historic events another answer presents itself,
question presented itself to her: did she love him?
question that presents itself when examining each historical event. How
question that tormented him.
question to Davout.
question to metaphysical heights, pass on to definitions of space, time,
question whether the camp was advantageous or disadvantageous remained
question which match would be the more advantageous. Whether it was
question, and beg you to choose a good moment to hand him the letter
question, are like plasterers set to plaster one side of the walls of
question, did not reply, but lighting a short French pipe which he took
question, the more subject to inevitability and the less free do our
question--one so important that he took no notice of what went on around
question.
question. "Will Papa be back soon?"
question. All the contradictions and obscurities of history and the
question. Time has gone by which I could not detain, the arm I then
questioned Balashev about the Russian capital, not merely as an
questioned Prince Andrew about the details of his interview with the
questioning him about political affairs and news. He seemed to listen
questioning him about the matter in hand. Denisov told him of the
questioning look.
questioningly at Anna Mikhaylovna to see what he was to do next. Anna
questions about his journey and seemed greatly interested in the state
questions by giving the names of his regiment and of his commanding
questions from all sides. The whole moving mass began pressing closer
questions on which he wished to hear the opinion of the gentlemen
questions present themselves: Why did Kutuzov during the retreat not do
questions put to him. He was bespattered with mud and had a pitiful,
questions that might be put to him and the answers he would give. He
questions they put to him, but did not consider who was listening to his
questions. He seemed grieved that Pierre had no parents, especially that
questions: Where was he going? How was he wounded? Was it serious? And
quicker.... I wished to be at peace.... And what will become of me? What
quickly and began to pace the room.
quickly as possible.
quickly changing his attitude.
quickly forward to meet Alexander and held out his hand to him, and how
quickly he went up to Wolzogen.
quickly repacking, deciding that the inferior Russian carpets and
quickly roused himself with a feeling of joy, as if learning afresh that
quickly to her own room to make out the problem in peace. The old man
quickly turned away, a scarcely perceptible smile flitting over his
quickly with a harsh German accent, looking to both sides and advancing
quickly! Now I know that not because of her alone, nor of myself alone,
quickly!" and she again had difficulty in repressing her sobs.
quickly, went out of the shed, and began to walk about.
quickly.
quickly. Hence we have a secondary aim, that of preparing our members as
quickness of temper, and Rostov replied:
quiet for a moment. Suddenly she sat up with unaccustomed swiftness,
quiet voice:
quiet, long, easy yet resolute lope.
quietest of men walked away disapprovingly or expressed disagreement
quietly and humorously how he had known that doll Mimi when she was
quietly and said in a whisper: "Please walk in."
quietly dropping melted wax into snow and looking at the shadows the wax
quietly in her armchair, though hoping to be offered another cup of tea.
quietly without alarming them and then, after joining Dolokhov who was
quietly, smoothly, and confidently began playing in very slow time, not
quilt for his shoulders, she imagined a horrible body there, and stood
quite abominable!" said Prince Andrew, and he went off to the house
quite at random on one word and the murmur on another. This reading,
quite certain. Ah! it is very dreadful..."
quite change the whole war and make it less cruel. As it is we have
quite contrary to Christian simplicity. Let us rather read the Epistles
quite covered by an apron. On the box beside the driver sat a venerable
quite crestfallen.
quite different atmosphere, careless, lighthearted, and self-satisfied.
quite different from his own. The naval officer spoke in a particularly
quite differently, but..." Boris shrugged his shoulders, "his Serene
quite forgetting the part he had intended to play. "He is an unfortunate
quite heard.
quite lately she never cared seriously for anyone. Now you know, Count,"
quite little that used to be so with me. Do you remember when I was
quite natural, but on the other hand all her previous thoughts of her
quite out of keeping with his features, that seemed to deride his own
quite well known to everybody.
quitrent, Alpatych thought no difficulty would be made about complying
quitrents. Of what is she thinking? Why is she so happy?" Prince Andrew
quivered as he began speaking.
quivered.
quivering faster than before and his face seemed petrified in its stern
quivering with emotion, his questions and his eager restless expression,
quoique etranger, russe de coeur et d'ame, * as he said of himself.
radiant face.
radiant look which caused the plainness of her face to be forgotten.
radiantly happy all that saint's day, suddenly changed: her eyes became
radiantly on her beautiful face. Pierre gazed at her with rapturous,
rag, and handed it to Pierre.
rage and strength which she knew and had herself experienced after his
rags, with pale cheeks, compressed lips, and knitted brows, held on to
railings. He looked back laughing to the Cossack who stood a few
raillery for which he so often reproached himself in his diary.
rain and gazed anxiously before him. His thin face with its short, thick
rain, entered Rostov's shelter.
rain, he repeated: "Now then, now then, go on! Pelt harder!"
raise him. But as soon as he thought of what he should say, he felt that
raise... happens to everybody! Yes, who has not done it?"
raised above his head, he did not cease to complain to Kutuzov and to
raised and arms folded on his stomach. On the other side sat Count
raised elbows was lifting the infant over the rail of his cot.
raised her hand to Prince Andrew's shoulder. They were the second couple
raised her in her own esteem and in that of others, and so made her more
raised his cap to Natasha) "but as for counting skins and what one
raised his eyebrows, abruptly touched his horse with his left foot, and
raised his hand to his white Horse Guard's cap with a red band and no
raised his saber and struck the Frenchman with it.
raised to the highest pitch.
raised. He remained stubbornly silent, gazing at Weyrother's face, and
raised. The Allies defeated Napoleon, entered Paris, forced Napoleon to
raising him.
raising his arm, and fell on his chest. Several officers ran up to him.
raising his eyes at the opening of the door and the sound of footsteps.
raising his soft foot backwards, bowing his perspiring head, smiling
raising his voice at the card table, and the samovar and the tea cakes;
raising his voice, said to Pierre, as though continuing an interrupted
raising his voice.
raising worthy men from the dust and attaching them to our Brotherhood.
raisins, fine ones; you know, seedless ones. We have a new sutler and
rake, and every now and then he glanced ironically at Pierre, whose
ram did not happen accidentally, and will no longer need the conceptions
ran after him with the crowd.
ran ahead on tiptoe and knocked at a door.
ran away from her and she came galloping after him. He dined with me on
ran back again with his men.
ran barefoot to her own room.
ran downstairs and looked over from the halfway landing.
ran forward on each such occasion, fearing to miss a single word of
ran from the fires, thrust their pipes into their boots, their bags
ran into Ferapontov's yard before Alpatych's eyes. Alpatych went out
ran rapidly over the wide space, but he only saw that the hitherto
ran to catch up his line and, falling into step with a hop, looked back
ran with all his might toward the bushes. He did not now run with the
ran, and bowed to the ground.
ran:
rank (for he did nothing), that Prince Vasili had procured for him,
rank of cornet. He received, however, no appointment to Kutuzov's staff
rank of lieutenant; but as it is I receive two hundred and thirty," said
ranks were returning from the attack. Rostov got out of their way,
ranks, and it ceased altogether every time the thud of a successful
ranks," said the captain softly.
ranks.
ranks. Suddenly one shot after another rang out from the French, smoke
ranks; Anatole was in the army somewhere in the provinces; Prince Andrew
rapid retreat. Austrian troops that had escaped capture at Ulm and
rapid steps to the village.
rapidity that he had not time to finish arranging the surprise.
rapidity. He again vividly recalled the details of the battle, no longer
rapidly and indistinctly. "You thought!... Rascals! Blackguards!... I'll
rapidly become the fashion. He was enormously tall, handsome, amiable
rapidly began:
rapidly from an approaching thundercloud, so, as if in opposition to
rapidly moving hands, and he could clearly see the thoughtful profile
rapidly.... She glanced at him.
rapturous exclamations were heard from all sides.
rapturously--"that's a different thing. I know no one kinder, more
rare moments when he was at home, would take Pierre's hand in passing
rare women with whom a man's honor is safe; but, O God, what would I
rarely done of late. It was a grand farewell dinner, as he and Denisov
rarely left her and which made her plain, sickly face yet plainer. She
ras..." he did not finish.
rascality...."
rat") he said, rubbing his forehead and whole face with both hands.
rate be understood all the sooner that things cannot go on like this.
rate he glanced at the refractory arm, at Pierre's terror-stricken face,
rate its merit most highly. In an indifferent case we recognize in it
rate there was no one more active and experienced than Bennigsen: "and
rather as a joke), a pike and an ax, which latter he used as a wolf uses
rather moist and glittered more than usual, and as he sat in his saddle,
rather mysterious power.
rather of death, as the saying is. 'Albanians!' and 'devils!' and 'To
rather round shoulders and glanced at Novosiltsev who was near him, as
rather short, as if surprised that anyone should not know him.
rather than of what the generals were disputing about.
rather than the trend of the conversation--"and that's a great sin.
rather than to the left, might deprive him of all this happiness, newly
ratify it; but it is only a trick. March on, destroy the Russian
ratiocination any farther, when actions are clearly contrary to all
rattle on the bridge as if nuts were being spilt, and the hussar nearest
ravine, he even saw the hounds, and was expecting a fox to show itself
ravine, was a small village and a landowner's house with a broken roof.
ravine. Petya rode beside Denisov, the pulsation of his body constantly
ravish quite..." The Emperor passed on to the drawing room, the crowd
rays of the sun beat down vertically and a fresh soft wind played with
rays!" and she smiled amiably at Pierre. "We were just talking of you,"
razed to the ground, proved quite useless. The mining of the Kremlin
re-erect against you that barrier which it was criminal and blind of
re-establish order and relieve your condition. But to achieve this
re-formed, and then moved with a hum of talk into the largest hall and
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
reach some decision, first followed him and then ran downstairs.
reach ten, I have no right to assume that the movement of the bells is
reach that eternal, quiet haven, where there is neither sorrow nor
reached Bagration, the weighty tread of the mass of men marching in step
reached Moscow and there came to a standstill. For five weeks after that
reached Petersburg simultaneously with the Emperor's return--was
reached Petersburg with the official announcement of that event. This
reached him, turned back, and finally--like any wild beast--ran back
reached the Tsar. After a while the Tsar's decree came: to set the
reached the bushes. Behind these were some Russian sharpshooters.
reached the front, several bullets sped over them, and they halted in
reached the utmost limit.
reached through his. But instead of being greeted with pleasure as she
reached to his very heels, and, stumbling in it, ran out into the porch
reached. Wheels creak on their axles as the cogs engage one another and
reaches the moving vessel, and suddenly the administrator, instead
reaching at last the place where there is no more sorrow or sighing, but
reaching its goal. It fled like a wounded animal and it was impossible
reaction. All the well-known people of that period, from Alexander and
reaction."
reactions? To these questions there are and can be no answers. Equally
read and which acts so irresistibly on a Russian heart.
read and write by the deacon, like your father and me. Now tell me,
read any papers, I made it up myself.' 'If that's so, you're a traitor
read awhile and then put out his candle, but relit it. It was hot in the
read in his face what preoccupied his own mind.
read only to forget, if but for a moment, what he had too long been
read the dispatch. Hardly had he done so before he lowered his legs in
read to them. In these voluminous notes Toll suggested another scheme,
readily and rapidly like a man who has not talked for a long time. His
readily as they did hers. "What can I do, where can I go?" thought she,
readily let him go and gave him a mission to Barclay de Tolly.
readiness for relentless hatred in case of such refusal.
readiness to fall in love and an expectation of happiness.
readiness to give anything asked of him (he received the allowance
readiness to respond superficially to every idea without probing it
reading his paper and specially drew Rostov's attention to the stinging
reading it. He glanced through it, then read it again, and then again,
reading many historical works cannot help doubting whether this new
reading the letter. He went on tiptoe to the nursery door and opened it.
reading--the one who had met Anna Mikhaylovna. The two younger ones were
reading. She reads to him in the evenings and reads splendidly."
reading. The books he read were chiefly historical, and on these he
reading. Then Miloradovich looked round significantly at the other
reading..." He showed her the broadsheet. "Count Rostopchin writes that
reading:
readjusted his hat, and pulling himself together drew himself up and,
ready and to drive her forty miles to the village of Kamenka, where an
ready for his new role.
ready for the general?" he added, with a slight inclination of his head
ready in his mind, of all he knew and had seen. But the Emperor smiled
ready money. "Or at least twenty thousand, Count," he added, "and then a
ready so soon?"
ready to cry because it was not she who was dancing that first turn of
ready to drop, and so said the grown-up young men and women who came to
ready to embrace something, were rounded, his pleasant smile and his
ready to go all lengths and was prepared to sacrifice everything. He now
ready to put on speed when required.
ready to throw herself into all the pleasures of life as before; but at
ready to use its strength in case their movement stopped.
ready, but Pierre learned that it was being constructed by the Emperor's
ready, but they still delayed and all were silent.
ready, the stranger opened his eyes, moved to the table, filled a
ready," said Platon, smiling and unfolding the shirt he had sewn.
real power, and that all the others were violations of power.
real strength of the colony, still exists; and similarly, though in
real victory, destroying the spell of the invincibility of the French,
real.... Now then, Natasha, now then, dearest! Now then, darling! How
reality Lavrushka, having got drunk the day before and left his master
reality again presented itself. He got up without saying a word and went
reality and delirium in which something particular was happening. In
reality in all Napoleon's activity we never find anything resembling an
reality, and even more so because it was different.
reality, like the retreat from Fili, it did not suggest itself to anyone
realize because the fear was so much the stronger feeling. The prince
realize how near death his father was), and from that distorted mouth
realize it his efforts are fruitless.
realized at once that his day was over, that his part was played,
realized that something dreadful had happened to his regiment, and the
realized what had happened, namely the loss of our position on the left
realizing the situation. The foremost Frenchman, the one with the hooked
realizing to whom she was speaking. Her maternal instinct told her that
really because she disliked anyone interfering in what touched her love
really did.
really found it. When he sat with his elbows on the dusty writing table
really given, but that Prince Bagration tried to make it appear that
really going in the darkness, and that we shall arrive and suddenly find
really that seems the best plan. With her elder sister I was stricter."
really this dress does not suit you. I prefer you in your little gray
really useful, as in fact they were to the whole Rostov family. Their
really was suffering at that moment. When the captain went out and he
really! And she is not at all so plain, either."
really, that evening, Sonya was brighter, more animated, and prettier
really.... It was all very simple and horrible."
reappeared brighter still from behind the top of the cloud, tearing its
reappeared.
rear they returned immediately and hastily. At first Prince Andrew,
rearguard and have an eye on the order of retreat, "which is also very
rearguard by the commander in chief, was sitting on the trail of a gun
reason and to prepare him for his terrible part. And when he is ready so
reason but by something else. There was within him a deep unexpressed
reason for not carrying out his intention to enter the army lay in the
reason for rejoicing, they looked at each other with joyful delight and
reason for slackening the pace and delaying presented itself to Kutuzov.
reason she called it Urope as if that were a specially refined French
reason to capture a king or a duke--it seemed that now--when any battle
reason, ran back and disappeared from the outskirts, and Russian
reason.
reasonable thing left to do is to conclude peace as soon as possible,
reasonable to them all.
reasonableness. If the old man came round it would be all the better to
reasonably, and then said he wanted a bolster placed under him as he was
reasonably, the more unreasonable and incomprehensible do they become to
reasoning contained in the Mason's words, or believed as a child
reasoning. With an affectation of respect which evidently struck
reasons of state, was in favor of peace.
reasons that convinced him that Metivier was a spy. Though these reasons
reasons, the number depending on the endless diversity of points
reasons. The fact is that other positions they had passed were stronger,
reassured he was that everything would be as it should. "He will not
reawakening. He was afraid of any want of clearness, any weakness, in
rebuke everybody, and, with an air of not wishing to speak to anyone,
rebuking her for her fall.
recalcitrant cavalry colonel, his own dignity as a general, and above
recall it with pleasure someday... Napoleon or I," said the Emperor,
recall your achievements this day with pride. Let it be said of each of
recalled Petya's words. And the Cossacks looked round in surprise at the
recalled all this as childishness he had left immeasurably behind.
recalled did not arouse the same poetic feeling as they experienced. She
recalled his exertions and solicitations, and the history of his project
recalled his labors on the Legal Code, and how painstakingly he had
recalled that impulse to unsolicited and inexplicable frankness which
recaptured by other French troops, and Davout was alive and only
recaptured by the French and shot.
receding line of candles reflected in the glasses and expecting (from
receipt, he left at the end of November, without taking leave of any of
receive a lasting reward for his virtue. But in these great endeavors we
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
receive impressions that might weaken it.
receive that intriguer as her daughter.
receive the guests and the visitors.
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
receive them, but feared lest the prince might at any moment indulge in
received a letter from my benefactor in which he wrote about "conjugal
received all Petersburg, proud of her unapproachability and beauty. So
received as a savior."
received by the Emperor. Had you heard?"
received from Paris, and advised Natasha to have one like it.
received from the chancellor. I asked him for you, and you have been
received from the commander in chief of Moscow, via Yaroslavl, the sad
received him tete-a-tete at his own house and talked to him long and
received horseflesh for their meat ration.
received leaflets from them that passed from hand to hand, and did not
received no clear explanation of why it had been necessary for him to
received no communication from you, yet on the first of September I
received pleasant recognitions corresponding to their various grades,
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
received was shown him. A strange lady, the one who had been talking to
received what was due from the Ryazan estate and will keep it; you won't
received with pleasure by all her visitors. The greatest attention
received, could not help donning a Polish uniform and yielding to the
received, informed the count that an immense crowd had collected in the
received--assumed the position natural to it.
received. A thanksgiving service was arranged, Kutuzov was awarded
receiving Boris' letter he rode with a fellow officer to Olmutz, dined
receiving any explanation.
receiving it. This gratitude reminded him of how much more he might do
receiving no one, and instead of the celebrated Petersburg doctors who
recently arrived from Russia, both Guards and regiments of the line;
recently been away driving a government transport, had returned with
reception produced, Davout raised his head and coldly asked what he
reception room if he wished to see him. Boris thanked him and went to
receptions) now hardly let a day go by without having an evening party
reciprocated this antipathy, but it was overpowered by his contempt
recite them!" said he, evidently preparing to laugh.
reckoning the Guards (who did nothing during the whole war but pillage)
recognition of the fact that it was not the sun but the earth that moves
recognition of the possibility of everyone thinking, feeling, and seeing
recognize how erroneous is the specialist historians' view of the force
recognize in this big, stout man in a peasant coat the vigorous person
recognized as legitimate; so that he is now Count Bezukhov and possessor
recognized at once.
recognized him and stopped to listen to what he was saying. Dolokhov had
recognized him at once by his peculiar figure, which distinguished him
recognized his strength and their own weakness, and frankly said so.
recognized in civilian dress, came to Tilsit and went to the lodging
recognized several acquaintances among these notables, but did not
recognized the Tsar and watched his approach. When he was within twenty
recognized the shorter and younger man in the white uniform: it was
recognized.
recognizes (and can but recognize) as free.
recognizes his high vocation and will be true to it. That is the one
recognizing him as a gentleman, they all avoided him, more especially as
recognizing the voice of his young prince.
recollection of her interview with Princess Mary and the old prince,
recollection of him. "If he had told me he was drunk and did not see...
recollection of his dispute with his brother-in-law was unpleasant and
recollection of their discussion, "he wanted to convince me that it is
recollections." Prince Vasili sighed. "Yes, yes, my boy. And my valet
recommend Boris to him as adjutant! Then I shall be at rest, and
recommended for honors and he may get a ribbon. Our Bogdanich knows how
reconciliation was being made, but he definitely instructed Balashev to
reconnoiter personally, and twice to the Emperors, Russian and Austrian,
reconstruction of which Prince Andrew had a vague idea, and Speranski
recorded in the annals of all the law courts of the world, but which
recourse to chance for an explanation of those small events which made
recovered her looks and is brighter. She sang a song. How easily some
recovered, and Rostov became very friendly with him during his
recruit as white as though there was no blood in his thin face, looked
recruiting."
recruitment so as to avoid active service. The old prince and his son
recruits to our regiments; the fine weather; the long rest the Russian
recruits were being enrolled in the villages, and from the seat of
rectify a mistake he had made by sending someone else there first.
recur to her mind and were as if belonging to a remote past.
recurred to her as to how she would order her life now, after that.
recurred to him, and a disagreeable shiver ran down his back. But this
red Rugay who, his arched back spattered with mud and clanking the ring
red and frightened face, whipping up his skinny horse. Several officers
red borzoi. Natasha saw and felt the agitation the two elderly men and
red campfires were growing paler and dying down. High up in the light
red hands; he did not know, as the saying is, how to enter a drawing
red lips gently inhaled the smoke, letting it escape from his handsome
red, got up and sat down again, struggling with himself to do what was
red-faced peasant in the forties, with thick lips, a broad knob of a
red-spotted bitch on Ilagin's leash, slender but with muscles like
red. Several battalions of soldiers, in their shirt sleeves despite
red..."
red.... How can I explain it to you?"
redistribution.
redoubt was only taken at the end of the battle by the cavalry (a thing
redoubt while the divisions of Morand and Gerard were to advance
reduced to tears.
reduced to the ranks, took a French officer prisoner in my presence and
reeling.
refer only to the victory and not to the lunch, M. de Beausset ventured
refer to Anatole and flushed at the thought of him--"did you love that
reference to its effect on others, but simply in relation to himself, to
referred to Anatole as a "pupil") "for the sake of my beautiful eyes.
referred to as a renegade French subject), Michaud, Toll, Count Stein
referred to in that drawing room as "a man of great merit" (un homme de
referred to when she said: "This suddenly happened," had occurred two
referred to--in their simplicity failing to understand the question of
referring to her favorite hound.
referring to the Saxony china dishes.
refined French in which our grandfathers not only spoke but thought, and
refined expression on the faces of those present he was always expecting
refined ways, and the state of dove-like purity she was now in (she wore
reflected.
reflection of what had to happen.
reflection--as if considering in how far the thing was possible--replied
reflections of real life, went on in its old way and made it hard,
reflections on his success in Petersburg. At that moment it seemed to
reflections. And experience tells us that power is not merely a word but
reflections. Better die a thousand times than risk receiving an unkind
reform of the army rules and regulations.
reforms were being pushed forward with the greatest energy. That same
reforms, simply because he was the son of his father. The feminine
refrained from touching it. Pierre again covered his eyes and thought he
refreshed by inhaling the aromatic autumn air, when even the nights
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
refusal and felt uncomfortable at the thought of how they would meet.
refuse Iogel and asked Sonya to dance. Denisov sat down by the old
refuse her, angrily asking her not to interfere in what was not her
refuse the wounded who asked for a lift.
refuse to accompany you."
refuse to help the peasants in need, she only feared to make some
refused to yield to the charm of spring or notice either the spring or
refused without the least difficulty or effort, and was afterwards
refusing to let her see them off. The diplomatist preserved a mournful
refute him someone would have to prove to him that there is no devil,
regard to this project of marriage for me, I will tell you, dear sweet
regarded all these little adjutants on the staff of whom the newcomer
regarded fire--namely, as something existing absolutely. But for
regarded from her standpoint.
regarded himself as a participant and which he was unable to arrest.
regarded it, had no meaning as a separate thing. It had meaning only as
regarded the refined sadness that united her son to the wealthy Julie
regarded the whole business of the war not with his intelligence or his
regarding him with a smile of approbation.
regarding this period of the campaign the historians, who attributed
regardless of her grief-stricken face joked with her. But when he had
regardless of the difference of the aims set for the common action, the
regards himself personally, both in mind and body, as irresistibly
regeneration.
regime had weakened and a patriotic and anti-French tendency prevailed
regiment I'd... Ah well, I'll show that in action, and for me the honor
regiment and was able to find pleasure in that life.
regiment could not be found without selling one of the estates. In
regiment had been broken up. All he knew was that at the commencement
regiment in Poland, a Polish landowner of small means had forced him to
regiment in the hollow and news that immense masses of the French were
regiment is not a bad one, eh?"
regiment of the line and was being at once transferred to the Guards
regiment was much surprised at the commander in chief's order to throw
regiment was stationed at Tver he had taken him from Tver in the
regiment with whom Boris was to travel to join the army, and about
regiment would cost him eight hundred thousand rubles, and that Bezukhov
regiment, and Bogdanich knows it. Oh, we do prize it, old fellow! And
regiment, and addressing the company in general asked whether they knew
regiment, but the whole brigade--gave Rostov a dinner to which the
regiment, devoted himself entirely to the pleasures and interests of
regiment, or in general of that other free life which was going on
regiment, the welfare of the men and the necessity of receiving
regiment, they listen intently, look about, and eagerly ask concerning
regiment, to Timokhin and the like--people quite new to him, belonging
regiment.
regiment. Another time, general attention was attracted by a small brown
regiment. The men soon accepted Pierre into their family, adopted him,
regiment; the other, all the rest. And the rest was no concern of
regimental commander cooling down a little. "Leave indeed.... One says
regimental commander hung his head, silently shrugged his shoulders, and
regimental commander on horseback and some ten men of his company,
regimental commander was nicknamed King of Hearts).
regimental commander, for in spite of repeated demands boots had not
regimental wagons and horses which were standing in a group was busy
regiments and two squadrons of hussars. Denisov, as was his wont, rode
regiments with their arms piled and the soldiers, only partly dressed,
regiments, both cavalry and infantry, were by no means ready for the
regret at being prevented from taking part in the coming battle, but
regret her words. But she went on hurriedly:
regret, and disillusionment. It seemed to him that this was not
regret. Drawing rooms, gossip, balls, vanity, and triviality--these are
regrettable delusion."
regretted that he had died so young, leaving a pregnant wife with his
regretted that the lad should have heard him. He had, however, to give
regular life, with diverse branches of commerce and craftsmanship, with
regular order.
regular tread and halted eight paces from the post. Pierre turned away
regularity in his household was carried to the highest point of
regularly and quietly. It was evidently not so much his sufferings that
regulate his life and that of the whole family exactly as he chose. At
rehearsing, and began telling him how he had already been in a battle
reign would have begun.
rein in, and turning back drew up at the crossing of the old Konyusheny
reinforcement.
reinforcements when they already have half the army directed against a
reinforcements. He swore on his honor that the Russians were lost if the
reins and started of his own accord.
reinstate another omitted condition of every command proceeding not from
reinstated."
reject him. Naturally neither Natasha nor her parents wished to hear of
rejected, the valuable ones really did all go into the two cases. Only
rejoinders he made to his enemies. His hospital companions, who had
rejoined Karataev and the gray-blue bandy-legged dog that had chosen
relate to a whole series of events occurring over a period of years or
related to Napoleon's orders to deal with four points--four different
related to her meeting with Rostov.
related to the will of one or of several men who have decreed it.
relating an anecdote, and Speranski was laughing in advance at what
relating to Nikolenka, did not venture to ask any questions at dinner,
relating to the court.
relation between those taking part in it is always the same.
relation between those who command and those who execute, we find that
relation of people to one another is seen in every combination of men
relation of the forces of nature to inevitability, or of the essence of
relation of the people to their rulers.
relation to Nicholas that Nicholas had been to Denisov seven years
relation to Rostov. His cold, polite manner did not express his feeling
relation to the external world and the greater or lesser clearness
relation, but I never doubted it. The good he has done to everybody
relations had been given to understand that the fate of the young girl
relations with Mademoiselle Bourienne. His looks and cold tone to his
relations with Nicholas in Voronezh she was shy about doing so. Making
relations with all the Rostovs which had made her almost a member of the
relations with the Polish girl might be, began to upbraid him for his
relations, and of Princess Mary's.
relations, is the will of the people also transferred to their
relations, was repugnant to him. The other way out--his mother's
relax, shouted with his mouth wide open and passed on.
relays.
release me!" thought he. Pressing his lips together he made that effort
released, the clock began to whirr and the chimes to play. Despite all
reliable information about that sitting, concerning which various rumors
relief. He would give me advice."
religion, and he utilized the law of gravitation as a weapon against
religion--and these were the favorite subjects of the prince's attacks
religion.
relinquish them.
relinquishing that role and abandoning Moscow without any heroic display
relish Zdrzhinski's conversation. "My stockings and shirt... and the
reluctance to the duty imposed by his position, raised his head
reluctant to be left alone with his friend, asked them to stay and have
reluctantly, and remained silent.
reluctantly, but gradually with more and more animation, and from habit
relying on reason only? What art thou? You are young, you are rich, you
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
remain here, while I myself go away leaving them to the mercy of the
remain in Moscow?" asked Princess Mary and immediately blushed, noticing
remain silent when heaven knows who permits herself to interfere, making
remained Russian. Well, I don't esteem you the less for it."
remained alone with him for a long time.
remained constantly at her mother's side, sleeping on a lounge chair
remained in the caleche, but at Mytishchi the wounded man himself asked
remained intact and that during Napoleon's occupation the inhabitants
remained on the farther side of the bridge facing the enemy, who could
remained there about another half-hour.
remained three weeks at Peterhof, receiving Speranski every day and no
remained what he had seemed that first night: an unfathomable, rounded,
remained with the army to keep the commander in chief under observation
remained, and this not by any fault of his own. He felt that it was not
remained, they were worse than beggars and nothing more could be taken
remained. The prisoners were more burdensome to the escort than even the
remaining alone in the little room, he walked up and down for a long
remaining in Moscow, and only awaited the termination of Denisov's
remains of sheds, chairs, tables, wheels, tubs, and everything that they
remains of supper. A footman, thinking no one saw him, was drinking on
remains unanswered, and to the former power of monarchs and to the
remains.
remark on that occasion. The foreigners were deported to Nizhni by boat,
remark on the same day in different circles. But he was so busy for
remark to him, pointing to the gallant Apsherons.
remarkable resemblance to the preceding movement from west to east.
remarkable skill in appearing silently dignified in society.
remarked that besides these changes it would be necessary to go into the
remarked that diversions planned over great distances do not yield the
remarked. "Well, sit down: let's have a talk."
remarked:
remarked:
remarked: "How quiet you young people are!"
remarking, "Nowadays good wine rides in a carriage and pair," passed it
remarks at him, though without looking at him.
remarks came out clever and apt. Now everything Pierre said was
remarks he rose. "If you'll allow me to leave my Natasha in your
remarks were leading to and during one of these conversations induced
remarks, recalling the doctor's uneasiness and his wife's delight, now
remedy for its pain, and the hope of relief and the expression of its
remedy, for the peasants of the district burned their hay rather than
remember Nikolenka. Him--I just shut my eyes and remember, but Boris...
remember everything?" said Natasha, with an expressive gesture,
remember her gave him pleasure, and when his comrades, hearing of his
remember how she must behave at a ball, and tried to assume the majestic
remember putting it there."
remember something.
remember the recent days of patriotic elation and ardor, hard to believe
remember, he posed as a sort of Marat at one of my soirees. And how has
remember--yet they sat at tea round the samovar in the drawing room from
remember. Even now I don't know whether there really was a Negro, or if
remember. When I was in Kiev, Crazy Cyril says to me (he's one of God's
remember...."
remembered Anatole who had done her so much harm--and though he did not
remembered Denisov with his changed expression, his submission, and the
remembered Prince Andrew, prayed for him, and asked God to forgive her
remembered everything, he nodded his head and reopened his eyes.
remembered everything. "The Egyptians believed that our souls have lived
remembered her conversation at the window, and with an expression of
remembered him quite well. Then Anatole came up to her. She still could
remembered it three months before, when the count had sent him to
remembered that all these delightful associations must be broken off...
remembered that he would have to die, he said to himself: "Well, what of
remembered that in French there is some peculiar way of addressing a
remembered that, two days before, that man had burned his shirt while
remembered the Masonic vow in which each Brother promised to devote
remembered the expression Dolokhov's face assumed in his moments of
remembered the general plan sent him from Petersburg) "they have
remembered the light falling through that crack once before and Sonya
remembering Suvorov, said that what one had to do was not to reason,
remembering his intention he grew dizzy and felt so faint that he leaned
remembering; but since that... it's only been tormenting folk."
remembers me," said Prince Andrew with a low and courteous bow quite
remind him of his promise, and then thanked him for his love. His looks
reminded her of their first encounter in the Otradnoe avenue, and how
reminiscences, though no such reminiscences really exist--just as none
reminiscences.
remnant of his former clothing), a pair of soldier's trousers which by
remnant, especially after the Berezina, on which (in consequence of the
remorse and illness. The only good is the absence of those evils. To
remorse, humiliations, sufferings, outbursts of pride, fear, and
remorselessly pursued the young heir who had voluntarily undertaken the
remounts, but that letter did not set the countess at ease. Knowing that
removed every night, and half the inhabitants had left the city
removed the leg bands by deft circular motions of his arm following
removed to Bogucharovo. Seventy quarters of grain had also been carted
removed, this was only done on the demand of officials to whom the count
removing his hand from his hat and galloped back to where men were being
render account only to God and to my conscience," she concluded, laying
rendered, and I supplied them with a doctor, a hospital, and an asylum
rendering the execution of the last command possible.
rending and exulting over the dying beast.
renewed, but Princess Mary saw by his face that he knew and thought of
renounced your former convictions--do you believe in God?"
reopened in the warm climate, which obliged him to defer his return till
repaired. Tradesmen began trading in booths. Cookshops and taverns were
repairing their footgear, some smoking pipes, and some stripping
repeat his question.
repeat them personally to Napoleon.
repeat them, but Platon could never recall what he had said a moment
repeat what they had already told her many times: that so-and-so was
repeated a hundred times. The balalayka was retuned several times and
repeated from the opening words of the manifesto:
repeated one and the same thing a hundred times, remarked to his
repeated the field marshal's address, begun solemnly and then changing
repeated the same thing twice.
repeated their reflections several times. Now this same room was dimly
repeated to everyone without exception or variation, and with the same
repeated, accentuating the u: "I think, however, now that he lays down
repeated, but still he patted Pierre affectionately on the shoulder, and
repeatedly glanced at Natasha, gay and laughing among the younger
repeatedly, as if a strong vinaigrette had been held to his nose; and he
repeating a lesson to himself. "Secondly," he continued after a short
repeating in a low voice the same words several times over.
repeating the same words several times. She could not understand them,
repeating the terms of the bet, addressing himself particularly to
repeating the terms of the wager to him in English.
repeating. Rostov listened and made out the word. It was "drink, drink,
repeating: "Sublime! Grand! Napoleon le Grand!" Du sublime au ridicule
repellent. Yet in this very repugnance to all his circumstances Pierre
repetition of the German general's demand that he should join forces
replace Natasha but could not. They saw that she alone was able to
replace some chessmen that were falling. He was about to embrace his
replaced by a feeling of horror at what lay there before her. "No, he
replaced by a naive and silent feeling of admiration. Napoleon, after
replacing their purses and pocketbooks, entered the ballroom. First came
replacing them by a new conception, and the logic of the situation has
replied Anna Pavlovna.
replied Marya Dmitrievna's deep voice, which easily carried the whole
replied Michaud in a decided tone, but glancing at the Emperor he was
replied by asking him to go, but to fix a definite date for his return.
replied de Beausset.
replied that he was of age, that Prince Andrew was marrying without his
replied the irate colonel. "If you vere in the cavalry..."
replied to Princess Mary, so that nothing definite could be got from his
replied, "and it is that He would be merciful to him and would allow his
replied, and the four simply looked at one another. She lingered in the
replied, wiping away her tears.
replied.
replied: "Because you are alive and thinking of the living, while I..."
replied: "Yes, yes, I agree," and with a beaming, childlike smile, his
replies of a man who, watching the movements of a herd of cattle and
replies, nor how they would understand them. He looked at their faces
reply that Louis XIV's activity, contrary to the program, reacted on
reply to his look, and went still faster along the passage.
reply to history's essential question.
reply to the Wurttemberg hussar in German. When he had understood what
reply to the former question, but by her image. When he listened to, or
reply to which all the rest will be incomprehensible--is: what is the
reply--which he would not have received, for the princess was unable to
reply.
reply. It seemed as if those smoke clouds sometimes ran and sometimes
reply: "I will tell you what to do, and what I do. Dans le doute, mon
replying to the Austrian.
replying.
report he had prepared for the Emperor.
report of a signaling gun followed, and the troops, who were already
report to "the old gentleman" the position of affairs on the left flank
report--which consisted chiefly of a criticism of the position at
reported by the division commanders, Ostermann and Sedmoretzki, and
reported the incident to a general on the staff. The state of things on
reporting matters to the higher command, to attack and seize that
reporting something.
reports Napoleon gave his orders, which had either been executed before
reports one after another, and a third.
reprehensible, looked round with a blush. It seemed to him that everyone
representative but one of the great century, and that it is his own
representative of authority as well as, and even better than, at other
representative of the Russian nation, "and to prove to Your Majesty by
represented all that was left of that whole regiment. Impelled by the
represented as a brilliant victory over the French, and so the
represented as a great deed. The most suitable fete the Germans can
represented by e, the very letter elided from the article le before the
represented her father and her brother gave her courage, and she boldly
represented the love adventures of the soul with its beloved. And on
repress a smile.
reprimanded on account of the blue greatcoat.
reprimanding and reproaching him. Tushin gave no orders, and,
reproached and disputed with each other.
reproached her for yielding to a man without being married. Mademoiselle
reproached her in his heart and tried to despise her, but he now felt so
reproached the commanders in chief for every step they retired. He could
reproached them for doing so; now expelled all the French residents from
reproaches and angry words.
reproachful tone of a man who has repeated the same thing more than
reproachfully to a cannon ball that struck a cannon wheel and a man's
reproachfully to the man who had spoken of frozen feet.
reproachfully, with a deep sigh, as her daughter ran away.
reproachfully.
reproved Bezukhov for his vehemence and said it was not love of virtue
repugnance, and closing his eyes quickly fell back on the carriage seat.
repulsed by hell," and that he had seen a child smiling at lightning
repulsed, he had lost more than half his men. He said the attack
repulsive than any other, because he imagines that he knows the
repurchasing Otradnoe before long, and added: "Another ten years of life
reputation--expected to discover in him the perfection of human
request he took the first part of the Civil Code that was being drawn up
request on behalf of his master.
request to her to prepare his father for it had not been carried out; in
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
requests to be told the whole truth, expressed ill-will on the
require it. We'll go into the accounts later."
required by an officer.
required to retain the brilliant position the French held at that time.
rescript again and again, but as soon as he uttered 'Sergey' he sobbed,
rescue the tall lad only increased the fury of the crowd. It was a long
rescue. Pierre had managed to start a conversation with the abbe about
rescued her... Can you guess?"
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
resemble the activity we imagine to ourselves when we sit at ease in
resemble two leaves, are deviations from the theory.
resembled Natasha. He was preparing to enter the university, but he and
resembled his father's, affected Pierre so much that when he had kissed
resembles an imitation of the French military code and from the Articles
resentment and revenge in their soul yields to a feeling of contempt and
reserve and Nicholas Rostov spent that day in a dull and wretched mood.
reserve gun carriage, the wounded were carried away, and the four guns
reserve tomorrow," he thought. "I'll ask leave to go to the front, this
reserved because in the depth of my soul I feel too near to him already,
reserved for them. A bald general with a St. George's Cross on his neck
resigning the command of the army. And not only did he love power to
resist it?" those eyes seemed to be asking.
resolute and triumphant steps between the French soldiers.
resolute steps toward the crowd. And the nearer he drew to it the more
resolution just arrived at.
resolution not to betray herself and not show her agitation, she sent
resolution that caused Marya Dmitrievna to look at her more intently and
resolution. Can it be that I have none?"
resolutions, as a lover forgets in the presence of his mistress.
resolve when he had last visited Bald Hills, though he had spoken of it
resolved to answer his father-in-law. Moreover, the words of the Masonic
resolved to go away next day and leave a letter informing her of his
resolved to wait till she should see Nicholas, not in order to set him
resounded in their imagination, and hindered their gazing into those
resounded on the planks of the bridge, and the squadron, officers in
resource was one he very frequently employed.) He would transfer a
resources I have for entertaining a woman used to the best society.
respect by his boundless devotion to an idea. Besides this, the remarks
respect on the greater or lesser lapse of time between the performance
respect, Pfuel evoked pity in Prince Andrew. From the tone in which
respect, he had decided that it would be a good thing to set fire to the
respected him and jestingly called him "the Minister." During the
respectful attitude of the younger men to the old man in his dotage was
respectful form, making it impossible for him to ask wherein he was
respectfully that the prince gave him a searching glance.
respectfully to her, and seated herself in an armchair beside the
respectfully touching Pierre's elbow said something to him and pointed
respectfully when the Military Governor, having stayed about half an
respectfully.
respond in kind."
responsibility and vice versa.
responsibility himself.
responsibility, very judiciously wished to receive.
responsibility. These temporary aims are like the broom fixed in front
responsibility?"
responsible," she remarked, turning to the author: "I have neither the
rest in a darkened room, the pretext would be the retelling of the same
rest of the French army they might easily be destroyed. The soldiers and
rest of the evening.
rest of you. Let me live like a man and think of my soul and of God."
rest until they have gained their end, and are prepared if necessary
rest. Life in the regiment, during this campaign, was all the pleasanter
rested longer on the slim Natasha. She looked at her and gave her alone
rested on Prince Andrew's face.
restful in its hopelessness: that it was not for him to begin anything
resting against the other which was doubled under him. He screwed up his
resting his head on his elbow lay silent beside the campfire, looking at
resting; curiosity as to what the French army, so long lost sight of,
restive under him, and plunged into the water, heading for the deepest
restless and hastened to rejoin her. Together they felt more in harmony
restlessness confirmed her opinion.
restore the daughter to her mother and go to save someone else. Pierre
restrain her mother from unreasoning despair. For three weeks Natasha
restrain himself and with the virulence of which only one who loves
restrain his laughter.
restrain the Russian army from useless engagements.
restrain within the bounds of decorum the excitement and mirth that
restrained Boris. His leave was expiring. He spent every day and whole
restraining her angry tears.
restraining his tears of pity for the Emperor, he rode on in utter
restricted--seemed to him such an easy matter that he forgot that a
result of the battle to be fought in a few days.
result of their recent personal conflict with him.
result of this, he galloped up to the wolf just when she had been
result, but unthinkable to keep an army even from complete
result? That I shall be the laughingstock of all Moscow, that everyone
resulted from a mistake he made and looks for that mistake in the
resulting from deviations in practice from the theory only proved to him
results now lie before us.
results of the ill-directed will of one or more individuals, that is,
resumed her duties as hostess and continued to listen and watch, ready
resumed its former cold, artificial expression. She returned to the
resumed their flight, abandoning their comrades who were farther behind.
resumed, to the accompaniment of unreasoning, merry, childlike laughter.
retain in some degree of purity the liquid I receive."
retained a love of idleness, but the curse weighs on the race not only
retained its own peculiarities and made concessions to the others. Every
retained; but without refuting them it would seem impossible to continue
retainers, shouted authoritatively that the superfluous ones should take
retaken by the Russians and burned, in the very skirmish at which Pierre
retire--an irresistible curiosity kept him there.
retired it's because there's work for them to do farther back."
retired, thus arriving at the very result which caused his destruction.
retirement to Drissa was a most shameful reverse and an unbroken series
retreat and leave the pickets."
retreat during the finest period of summer and with sufficient supplies
retreat fled in the opposite direction.
retreat from Borodino to Fili.
retreat on the left by the French. However inconvenient the position, it
retreat!"
retreat, retaining in our hands an important part of the provinces now
retreat, the burning of Moscow, the capture of marauders, the seizure of
retreated as a disorderly crowd. One soldier, in his fear, uttered the
retreated. In the highest army circles from midday on the nineteenth, a
retreating against their will. A few minutes after the Emperor had
retreating forces.
retreating straight back from the invaders, deviated from that direct
retreating to our frontier--which do today.'
retreating troops were filling it. Why should that cause the masses to
retreating troops, with many different feelings.
retreating upon the Kiev grenadiers. Prince Bagration bowed his head in
retreats after battles, the blow dealt at Borodino and the renewed
return his smile when saying good-by, if I was able to let it come to
return the holy image.
return to Petersburg from abroad.
return with evident joy. On one of his foraging expeditions, in
return--at that moment she was more repulsive to him than ever--entered
returned from Vienna, two diplomatists, the old aunt, a young man
returned from a long journey on which he had spent dozens of years, had
returned from them dragging sheep, fowls, hay, and bulging sacks. At
returned home just before dinner. As soon as he entered he noticed and
returned to the drawing room and to the count's study.
returned to the house convinced that Moscow would not be defended, he
returned to their owners that day.
returned), and, forcing open a loosely closed latch, set the damask
returned, Count Orlov-Denisov, excited both by the abandoned attempt and
returning from the advanced detachment, rode up to Murat and reported
returning spoke of a brilliant victory, of the occupation of the town of
returning to the town. The commander in chief made a sign that the
returns bringing our appointment as commander in chief, and our first
returns let us get away... and please don't..."
revealed to me. Adonai is the name of the creator of the world. Elohim
revealed, holy oil trickles from the cheeks of our blessed Mother, the
revelation.
revelry in the tavern and supposing it to have been broken into, wished
revenue from the Penza estates which he had already mentally apportioned
reverence and was beyond question.
reversed. From behind them came the sound of church singing.
review, they say, the Emperor did not once deign to address him."
reviewed by the Emperor and other high commanders. Then came an order
reviews were constantly held and rewards distributed. The Emperor
revoir!"--and she left the hall.
revolution, which has become more terrible than ever in the person of
revolves quietly is one of the most essential parts of the machine, and
reward him if he does right."
rewarded and Denisov punished and unpardoned. He caught himself
rewards comes to complain, and the inhabitants of the district pray to
rewards were promised, and the men received a double ration of vodka.
rhapsodies about valor, devotion, and so forth, must reluctantly admit
rhythmically. Without moving from where he stood he began speaking in
ribbon round the left arm.
ribbon worn across the shoulder, and the mayor of the city will wear
ribbons.
rich and deserted city resulted in fires and looting and the destruction
rich educated people who knew quite well that Vienna and Berlin had
rich old man. But before leaving home and undertaking these new affairs,
rich youths, officers and cadets, who had galloped past him on their
richest of the officers now that he had received his money, bought it.
rid himself of them he closed his eyes.
ridden about two miles and had passed the last of the Russian troops, he
ridden past. "In that 'extend' were my father, son, and sister, at
ridden to the outskirts of the forest Petya had considered he must carry
ridden up to him.
ride up.... Shall we both course it?" answered Nicholas, seeing in Erza
ride--to try a new horse Ilyin had bought and to find out whether there
rider, whose figure seemed familiar to Rostov and involuntarily riveted
ridicule. Speranski related how at the Council that morning a deaf
ridicule...
ridiculed sarcastically and very cleverly, though with much caution.
ridiculous to give some to the drummer boy.
ridiculous, and she moved on almost fainting from excitement and trying
ridiculous, and unpleasantly sarcastic, but yet he inspired involuntary
riding alone with three hussars into that mysterious and dangerous misty
riding and commanding so vast an army, so I have passed on the command
riding away, say to Czartoryski: "What a terrible thing war is: what a
riding breeches, who were swarming near the bridge, and then at what was
riding from the village on a handsome sleek gray horse, accompanied
riding in company such as this... what could be better?" (he again
riding over it trained a gun on him and fired several shots. The
riding round the wolf, crying "ulyulyu!" shouting and preparing to
riding up to Captain Timokhin who was walking in front. (The regimental
riding whip.
right above the Volga," said the courier.
right across the skull. Having said this he glanced at Natasha. She
right and high up in the sky was the sickle of the waning moon and
right and what's good must be judged by one who knows all, but not by
right charm. He catches him and catches him--no good! He turns into
right flank too extended," he went on. "That's all nonsense, there's
right hand, then falling on one knee he twirled her round him, and again
right hand, which was lying palm downwards, a wax taper had been thrust
right have you, monseigneur, to demand an account of my attachments and
right light.... In my opinion perpetual peace is possible but--I do not
right of the road.
right on the other side."
right or wrong is he who says that Napoleon went to Moscow because he
right or wrong to remarry while one had a husband living they did not
right side of the field fully satisfied his expectations. Nowhere
right through it--set off with Ilyin in the lessening rain and the
right to do it. And so it turns out."
right to do, seeing that whatever unit history observes must always be
right to fire when they liked as they approached the barrier. Dolokhov
right to left--maintained their extended position from the village of
right up to the road, six Cossacks were posted to report if any fresh
right wing are heard. The sharpshooters of Morand's division and of
right!" And his head once more sank to his horse's neck. All at once it
right, Denisov stopped.
right, drew up at an entrance, and Rostov saw overhead the old familiar
right, flew round again in a circle. Natasha guessed what he meant to
right, in the unlifting smoke the guns boomed, and out of the mysterious
right, shouting and firing were again heard. Flashes of shot gleamed in
right, wrote to Kutuzov the first words that occurred to him, though
right," Pierre concluded, and followed Anna Mikhaylovna. She hurriedly
right.
right. An aide-de-camp approached with gliding steps and offered him a
right. Use the hatchet!... What--still alive?"
righteousness of the prayer that was being read on bended knees. She
righteousness, and let it preserve us, Thy chosen Israel! Bless his
rightful king," she concluded, trying to be amiable to the royalist
rightly supposes that matters have already gone too far. I think it will
rights in proportion to the severity of the reverse, and if its army
rights of the conquering nation have increased to the detriment of the
rights, the relations of husband and wife and their freedom and rights,
rights. Helene was faced by a new problem--how to preserve her intimacy
rimes, which were in vogue at the Karagins'. Only a few of these young
ring, and Zherkov, uneasily glancing at them all, and Prince Andrew,
ring.
ring.
ringing bells; but on a long journey Alpatych liked to have them. His
ringing laughter. "And do you know," she suddenly said, "I know that I
ringing, deliberate voice. "I ask an opportunity to atone for my fault
riot, but as his highest excellence said..."
riot?
rise, and stillness reigned over the village and the house.
rise, but could not do so on account of his weakness and weight. His
risen and was moving through the crowd toward the actress.
risen from the table and was pacing the room, Natasha following him with
rising and falling regularly, and with bated breath and glittering,
rising and going up to the man in the nightcap who lay covered by a
rising full moon, and that vast red ball swayed strangely in the gray
rising in his soul and turned quickly away. Involuntarily recalling his
rising to his eyes. The little fellow, giving Pierre no time to betray
rising up in her for the whole household, because they were always the
risked his skin and his life twenty times a year, and in their service
rite which everyone expected of him, and that he was therefore bound
river flowed was formed by the rising ground only half a mile away.
river we burn the bridges to separate ourselves from our enemy, who at
river, all began to sparkle in the glad light--Pierre felt a new joy and
river, and Zubova, and in the Kremlin.... Just look! There's not half of
river--and on the right a porch. There were people at the entrance:
riverbanks and in Borodino. A white church could be seen through the
rivers for everybody, that the seas should be common to all, and that
road came priests in their vestments--one little old man in a hood with
road from Moscow to Vyazma without any battle?" But drawing from his
road through Poltava, which Charles XII chose." Balashev involuntarily
road wide enough?" said he, turning to a man behind him who was not
road, and began riding up the hill at a gallop toward the point where
road, did not once wake up on the way to Moscow, but lay at the bottom
road, the highroad along which the troops marched, there was no such
road. As he approached Smolensk he heard the sounds of distant firing,
road. Bagration's exhausted and hungry detachment, which alone covered
road. The higher the sun rose the higher rose that cloud of dust, and
roads of Poland, without himself knowing why or whither.
roar of guns sounded more distinct outside. An adjutant accompanied by a
roar of many voices shouting "Hurrah!" to the new commander in chief.
roar that set the windows rattling.
roared out at once: "Oo-oo-oo-oo! That's it. All together! Heave away,
roaring and snapping and rising louder and louder, and then words of
robust he ordered about those weaker than himself. The soldier
rocked and hushed her baby and when anyone came into the cellar asked
rode an officer of the suite, the prince's personal adjutant, Zherkov,
rode away from the mound and disappeared.
rode behind him. Barclay was riding almost beside him, and a crowd of
rode down the street at a gallop. Beside himself with enthusiasm, Rostov
rode in angry agitation toward him, firmly grasping his whip and fully
rode side by side in front, at full gallop. One in a black uniform with
rode through the streets to comfort the inhabitants, and, despite his
rode toward Balashev at a gallop, his plumes flowing and his gems and
rode up to the camp he thought how he would impress Boris and all his
rods, would have done, for he had nothing that either the sergeant major
role of appearing to command, calmly and with dignity.
roll, had supper, and settled down round the fires for the night--some
rolled back. Rostov looked at the young soldier and a cold chill ran
rolled-up check kerchief in her hand. While still a few steps from
rolling them up. Marya Dmitrievna always spoke in Russian.
romance. Nicholas Rostov! She was surrounded, and they wanted to kill
romantic friendship between a man and a woman of which she had known
roof glittered with dew, to the right was a leafy tree with brilliantly
roof lit up by the sun? No one knows, but one wants to know. You fear
roofs and had become terribly thin, though still covered with tufts of
room adjoining the count's reception room. It was one of those sumptuous
room and began to say something in French. The Governor's face expressed
room and still less how to leave one; that is, how to say something
room at nine in the morning.
room from which the sound of voices was heard.
room hearing the sound of the peasants' voices that reached her from
room leading his hostess by the hand but not keeping time to the
room of the house, which had been left with all it contained, were
room startled her. In the room were her nurse and other women. They all
room that Count Rostov had called, the princess showed no confusion,
room to write to his father, to whom he wrote every day. In the corridor
room while he was picking up his tricks, glanced again at Natasha.
room with a look of alarm. Between twelve and two o'clock, as the
room with parcels under their arms.
room with rapid steps. Now he seemed to see her in the early days of
room with the inkstand in her hand.
room without a word. But at the door he stopped and then retraced his
room, almost all the company had assembled, and the conversation, guided
room, and his valet was buttoning on to the back of his breeches a
room, and seeming not to notice the chairs was dashing straight at them,
room, grew silent and gazed with eyes full of curiosity or expectancy at
room, looked at Princess Mary in bewildered surprise. Herself a
room, something flew out from a side door like a tornado and began
room, the inside shutters of which were closed. He was cross with the
room, they still heard the laughter and merry voices trying to persuade
room, when Rostov was shown in. She could not grasp who he was and why
room, where you will be ranged side by side with a court lackey and an
room.
room.
room.
room.
room.
room.
room.
room.
room.
room.
room. All were silent.
room. Denisov silently watched Lavrushka's movements, and when the
room. It was clear that he thought it necessary to interest himself in
room. No one spoke and the only sounds heard were the clatter of knives
room. She gave it to him and, unpleasant as it was to her to do so,
room. The old man already knew everything. He was standing close to
room. The prince stood still; his lively glittering eyes from under
room.... Nicholas had been prepared for resistance, but had not at all
rooms with him to show him where to set up the bed for that night.
rooted custom..." or, with a smile: "But we want the wolves to be fed
ropes and a crowd of hussars surrounded them.
ropes were scattered about. The peasants and house serfs carrying out
rose above the other sounds, did not cease for a moment. The mistress
rose again in Rostov's soul in all its old force. In the uniform of
rose and fell.
rose and took their leave. The visitor's daughter was already smoothing
rose and with her heavy tread went up to the table. She took a sheet of
rose before him the Danube at bright noonday: reeds, the Russian
rose higher and higher in her throat as she more and more clearly
rose in alarm on seeing it.
rose to his mind, and going over the pictures of that love in his
rose when they entered, smiling not altogether comfortably.
rose, and recalled de Beausset and the officer on duty. He ordered the
rose, by a glance inviting Pierre, who sat opposite, to listen to what
rose, walked to and fro, put on a warm overcoat and a hat, and went
rose.
rosy, was sitting in an easy chair with her work in her hands, talking
rough draft of his answer to it. He became animated when he began
round Bogucharovo were, it was rumored, in touch with the French,
round Marya Dmitrievna, now on his toes, now on his heels; until,
round Sonya and Natasha as the air does before a thunderstorm. Sonya and
round an open window. Three others were romping with a young bear, one
round and frowned. She was finishing her last prayer: "Can it be that
round and notices here a spindle that has stopped or there one that
round at Bilibin with a smile.
round at Sonya and seated herself on the sofa beside Natasha.
round at the sound.
round at them all with crafty eyes.
round at what was going on behind him. From thirty years' experience
round face of a Rostov, entered the yard.
round hat, he wandered about the town, staring at the French and their
round his son's neck, and without a word he began to sob like a child.
round hole in the canvas to represent the moon, shades were raised over
round it, might not be deprived of the pleasure of seeing the King of
round more frequently toward her, and broke off in what he was saying.
round smiling face, taking a casket from a housemaid. "You know it has
round something where the ball had fallen, and an old trooper on the
round table in the clean quarters allotted to them, playing chess.
round the company. He noticed the change in the little princess' dress,
round the corner of the house between two dragoons. He had a long thin
round the two corners of the mouth; this, together with the resolute,
round the whole position."
round toward the drawing-room door. It opened and Nicholas came in.
round, drew close to Balashev's face, and, gesticulating rapidly and
round-faced peasant gravely, pointing with a significant wink at the
round-shouldered Captain Tushin, stumbling over the tail of the gun
round-shouldered man in the undress uniform of a civilian official, with
round. Prince Andrew and the battalion were already within twenty paces
round. Well, what else do you want?..."
roundabout way Princess Mary was obliged to take through Lipetsk,
roused by activity, expected the best results from the new campaign,
rows of faces so alike yet so different, holding its breath while the
rows of statues in niches) and looking significantly at the lady's old
rows of stretchers went past, when some troops retreated, and when great
rubbed his forehead as if to rid himself of all interest in what he
rubbers he watched her and his friend.
rubbish, larvae, and corpses, others back to the heap, or why they
rubles I don't know what to do with, and she stands in her tattered
rubles a year? And," he went on after a pause, "what will it be in five
rubles of their money had passed through his hands. In their service he
rubles' worth of things in the house. I don't consent, my dear, I don't!
rudely painted figures that once seemed splendid and mysterious.
rug and began reading to him from a manuscript book an explanation of
ruin Russia."
ruin of Russia (as Rostopchin regarded it) would fall upon his doting
ruined houses and the streets. The Cossacks carried off what they could
ruined or not?"
ruined!"
ruins of Moscow. All that he now witnessed scarcely made an impression
rule. In proportion to the defeat of the Austrian army Austria loses
rule.... Just the same as now--I ask you, Count--who will be heads of
ruled over.
ruler, was Pugachev a representative of the will of the people? If not,
rulers of France turns to his advantage. His attempts to avoid his
rulers under conditions which they regard as known. (With this method
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
rumbling beneath the archway. Beside Petya stood a peasant woman, a
ruminated. "Not I, of course. I had everything ready. I had Moscow
rumored, the allowance of forage money to captains of companies would be
rumors were current in the town. Some said that no one was to be allowed
rumors, assuring everyone that nothing had happened except that his
run after."
run away. And next day, Count Ilya Rostov--though he had not yet quite
run out to her, and remained in her hiding place, watching--as under an
run to the gate and hit the cow on the head. The only thing to be said
running away from home. In imagination she already pictured herself by
running away from some danger, and, making long, quick strides with his
running away, and looked at the messenger. Bolkhovitinov was bespattered
running away?"
running behind the cart and fumbling in the back of it.
running in confused crowds across his path.
running on too long and am at the end of my second sheet. Good-by,
running resolutely toward him.
running up the avenue with frightened faces.
running, out to the porch carrying candles.
running--that Natasha whom she had liked so little at their meeting in
rupture with her. "If only it were possible for me to see her once more!
rural joys and peace such as he had never known before, and which now
rural police having come to Bogucharovo urged the same thing, saying
rush through the whole suite of rooms without drawing breath, and then
rush to his heart. "But where and how will my Toulon present itself?"
rushed forward and descended the staircase.
rushed forward and picked it up.
rushed out apparently beside herself with delight.
rushing backwards and forwards near it, and he saw two of them and a
rustle and tramp of the French troops already beginning to move to take
rye cakes made with buttermilk, honey in the comb, still mead and
saber for me? It's got bl..." (Petya feared to tell a lie, and the saber
saber had tasted flesh and he had fallen exhausted, and so on. And so he
saber!" he shouted, actually drawing his saber from its scabbard and
saber. Only ten paces divided them. Dolokhov lowered his head to the
sacrament of unction, and in his house there was the bustle and thrill
sacrament. The dying man lay as lifeless and immovable as before. Around
sacred all-embracing teaching is clear to me. Human sciences dissect
sacred duty to fulfill that person's wishes. Do you wish to enter the
sacrifice anything for you--even my feelings."
sacrifice for; the fact of sacrificing in itself afforded him a new and
sacrifice his own happiness to his father's caprice, and spoke of how he
sacrifice my feelings and my honor for money? I wonder how Mamma could
sacrifice my feelings for my family's welfare," he said to himself,
sacrificed everything for his sake!" she cried. "It's splendid! Fine! I
sacrificed myself. But only the base, the vile succeed! I know who has
sacrifices I know how to appreciate."
sacrifices herself for you, she suffers, and this is her reward! What
sacrificing everything. He was not occupied with the question of what to
sacrilege. That marriage lacked the dual significance it should have
sad and depressed. It was all so strange, so unlike what he had hoped.
sad expression in his eyes. The brighter Prince Andrew's lot appeared to
sad, refined face, that radiant look, those gentle graceful gestures,
sad, very sad. But remember, my dear fellow, that I am a father to you,
saddle girths were too slack, reproved him, and mounted. Petya put his
saddle. On all sides, the hussars were busy with the dragoons; one was
saddlecloth. On approaching Alexander he raised his hat, and as he did
sadness to joy, and how their moods depend solely on who happens to be
sadness, and this occurred every time she mentioned her illustrious
sadness, or self-reproach, that she purposely deceived herself as
safest, and though he would have been glad to be of service to Denisov.
safety, Daniel set his chestnut galloping, not at the wolf but straight
saffron-yellow whites moved restlessly near the lower eyelids.
said Bagration to Rostov, "are the enemy's skirmishers still there?"
said Bolkhovitinov, unable to see in the dark who was speaking but
said Countess Mary. "He is such an exceptional boy. I am afraid I
said Dolokhov. "It will be necessary to go there. We can't start the
said Natasha, with momentary vexation.
said Natasha. "Mamma, if you'll let me, I'll stay!"
said Nicholas, also not listening to anyone and regardless of whether he
said Nicholas. "And I will prove it to you."
said Nicholas. "Yes, Pierre always was a dreamer and always will be,"
said Paulucci, as the Emperor mounted the steps and noticing Prince
said Pierre, and he pointed to the sky.
said Pierre, giving his hand to the Swiss tutor, and he turned to young
said Pierre, regretfully and with an effort, feeling it essential to
said Pierre, unexpectedly blushing.
said Pierre. "I should like to start from the Moskva River and ride
said Prince Andrew banteringly yet tenderly.
said Prince Andrew, and he snorted several times.
said Prince Andrew, following every movement of his father's face with
said Prince Andrew.
said Prince Vasili, arranging his lace frill, and in tone and manner,
said Princess Mary.
said Princess Mary.
said a corporal, chaffing a thin little soldier who bent under the
said all he longed to say, and not Tikhon but I might have heard and
said an adjutant who had come from the batteries that were firing at
said an old priest to a lady who had taken a seat beside him and was
said at Tilsit."
said at the time and before anyone else" (she insisted on her priority)
said before he had time to consider what he was saying.
said by various people.
said gaily.
said he had seen Ermolov ride past with some other generals, others said
said he quietly and quickly.
said he to himself. And for the first time for a very long while he
said he with a sense of shame and wishing to change the subject. "I
said he, standing before Princess Mary and turning red, but not taking
said he.
said he. "Let us wait until evening. The doctors are expecting a
said his prayers, dressed, and, with an unpleasant consciousness of
said in Moscow society. He seemed to be condescending to his companion.
said in a loud voice, evidently wishing to be heard by all:
said in a tone of indifferent politeness:
said it was nonsense for he had just come from the Rostovs'. He asked
said more. "To search far," he said, turning back the skirt of his coat
said one of the nursemaids to Prince Andrew who was sitting on a child's
said one sergeant major.
said she in French, displaying her bag and addressing all present.
said she, repeating words Pierre had once uttered.
said she.
said she. "One hears such improbable wonders about you."
said that God, to reward or punish his people, gave Napoleon power and
said that Helene was here and that she implored me to hear her; that she
said that Rostopchin had expelled all Frenchmen and even all foreigners
said that if Pierre absolutely insisted on passing for a Russian let it
said that the Russians need only make one more slight effort and the
said that the colonel wished the officer to be brought to him, Ramballe
said that the festering might take a normal course. Then fever set in,
said that, if only the French made one more slight effort, it would
said the assistant hurriedly. "Let us go, your honor."
said the butler's assistant.
said the doctor with evident satisfaction. "Prussian doctors have been
said the officer and rode off.
said the officer, addressing the esaul while Denisov was reading
said the old count.
said the old man, and showed Pierre a globe. This globe was alive--a
said the old prince angrily. "What an idea! I'm ready for it tomorrow!
said the old prince to Prince Vasili.
said the old princess.
said the old soldier dismally to a comrade, "you'll forget to scratch
said the valet.
said the valet.
said the woman.
said then but only spoke now: "I love thee!... thee! I love, love..."
said things he did not even wish to be believed.
said this laughed. Everyone turned toward him.
said this some time after she had finished singing. While that untrained
said through her tears that there was nothing to prevent her marrying,
said to destroy him and retain their power.
said to her mother, who conscious that they had been on the brink of
said to herself. Little Andrew, her eldest boy, imitating his mother,
said to him and still did not see what was before his eyes, but he now
said to himself, reflecting that he was not the only man unfortunate
said to me, "the chief duty of a true Mason, as I have told you, lies in
said to one of his adjutants, and then turned to the Duke of Wurttemberg
said with sudden seriousness--"I am going away and heaven knows what may
said, "Very good!" in a tone that seemed to imply that everything that
said, 'The monks cheat,' and as soon as he'd said it he went blind. And
said, exchanging glances with his young companion. "Anyhow his Serene
said, in a careless and even rude voice, that it happens to everyone!
said, indicating an old man with a profusion of silver-gray curly hair,
said, introducing broken French into his own German, that he was the
said, not looking at Pierre and with a slight tremor of his lower jaw,
said, trying to smile, but her tears still flowed and sobs still choked
said, turning to an officer who wished to cut himself a piece of mutton.
said.
said.
said.
said.
said.
said. "Perhaps you are right for yourself," he added after a short
said. These reasons were the treachery of the Austrians, a defective
said:
said: "Nothing but misfortune can come of marrying Sonya. Muddles,
said: "That's bad! Go on, go on."
said: "Then I will go to my rooms. You will let me know when I can see
said: 'What they have brought us to!' and had a sob in it when he said
said: even if he had to go on dying, to die continually before my eyes,
sailing as if unveiling the stars. Sometimes it looked as if the clouds
sailing in from another room as soon as the guests began to arrive;
saint's shrine to another, free from envy, earthly love, or desire, and
saints. "I'd pray awhile to one, ponder awhile, then go on to another.
sake an exception was being made and that his presence made them all
sake let me in to her!" she pleaded, but Marya Dmitrievna unlocked
sake that the latter might say something he would afterwards regret.
sake!'"
sake, eh?" said the peasants, smiling joyfully at him.
sake. His means increased rapidly; serfs from neighboring estates came
sake. I was bound to act that way.... The mob, the traitor... the public
sake."
sake... I can't walk. For God's sake!"
sake...!" said he.
sallow-faced, short, stout woman, the Empress Mother, with her smile
salt by its fiery nature it arouses a desire in the latter by means
salt of mirth, and they were not even aware that such a thing existed.
salute and unable to repress the smile of delight induced by his ride
saluting, and this sound rapidly came nearer along the whole extended
same Kutuzov who in August had been chosen commander in chief
same air, and then with a third and a fourth; and they all blended into
same applies to historical events. Why war and revolution occur we do
same coalescence into a group of enormous dimensions; the same adhesion
same commanders. The sailor rarely cares to know the latitude in which
same conditions and with the same character he will do the same thing as
same conditions, feels that without this irrational conception (which
same expression, which seemed to say that he had a right to suppose so.
same fate.
same feeling; sharing with the young folk of the Rostovs' household a
same feelings. All their faces were now shining with that latent warmth
same for their language which I cannot support to hear spoken.... We in
same gloomy expression, but suddenly turned to Pierre with a smile. For
same inquisitive, challenging, and rather mocking eyes still looked at
same instant he was dazzled by a great flash of flame, and immediately a
same kind hiding in the shadow of the house on both sides. But neither
same look fell on Pierre, and that funny lively little girl's look made
same mind he began explaining the advantages and disadvantages of the
same not to send them?"
same now?" thought he. "And what will be there, and what has there been
same order in which they had entered but with redder faces, the guests
same place on the Poklonny Hill awaiting the deputation. His speech to
same places. He nodded approval.
same speed, but they kept increasing their pace, so that some of the
same stillness reigned there, and inside there was the same furniture,
same surroundings in which it used to be so easy to live. I'm pretty,
same system of using letters as numbers and adding them up, to find an
same time been giving careful instructions to the servants for the
same time felt shy.
same time he like the soldiers realized all the hardship of this march,
same time more seriously than did Count Bezukhov. Natasha unconsciously
same time the everyday interests in a boston card party, Peter the cook,
same time, a large proportion of human error comes from the arbitrary
same time, aglow with excitement, recalled every detail of yesterday's
same time, and said:
same to me when my son's fate is at stake." The princess rose. "It's now
same understood life wrongly, as according to Vera all men did. Berg,
same vague irony Prince Andrew had noticed in the Minister of War's
same voice as in the regiment, but Rostov noticed sadly that under this
same way as the day before, yet she was quite different. Had she been
same way does the force of free will form the content of history.
same way in his own soul.
same way little by little he came to understand the news he had been
same way!" thought Natasha, feeling with horror a sense of repulsion
same way, he feels as certainly convinced as before the experiment
same, I will pay him a hundred imperials. Do you understand?"
same.
same. "Off, in God's name!" said Efim, putting on his hat. "Start!" The
same. You'll be all right anywhere. But look here: give up visiting
samovar ready!... You've grown plumper and prettier," she remarked,
sank back in his chair.
sank in. To make quite sure of the firmness of the ground, he put
sank into meditation.
sarcastic glance toward the militia officer.
sarcastic smile. "I am Boris, son of Princess Anna Mikhaylovna
sarcastically that the Commission had existed for a hundred and fifty
sat an old, unshaven, gray-bearded soldier as thin as a skeleton, with a
sat at the end of the table. "Yes, that is he! It is my benefactor.
sat down again in her former position. Twice she turned and looked at
sat down at her writing table, on which stood miniature portraits and
sat down looking silently at Pierre. As soon as she entered, Pierre's
sat in an armchair in her dressing jacket and nightcap and Katie, sleepy
sat in her room dry-eyed, taking no interest in anything and only saying
sat on the log and was not even looking at what they were doing. When
sat waiting for something, and again soldiers straggling from their
sat weary but resolute at the samovar--and questioned Pierre. The
sat with two colonels and other Frenchmen with scarves on their arms.
satchels, sabretaches, open portmanteaus, and dirty boots. Two freshly
satellites--the senior clerk, a countinghouse clerk, a scullery maid,
satisfaction at the sight of all this movement in their drawing room,
satisfaction before the large mirror.
satisfaction in an uncomplaining endurance of his position. He tried
satisfaction of his regimental commander?"
satisfaction that the engagement had been broken off. Looking at them
satisfaction.
satisfactory only as long as there is but one historian to each event.
satisfied himself that there was nobody else in the room, addressed
satisfied the need seen in its most elementary form in a child, when it
satisfied with the party. She replied in her usual simple manner that
satisfied...."
sauerkraut and the young girls are "too blonde."
sausage-shaped whiskers and showing under his square-set cap the hair
sausages and a bottle of wine.
save their belongings. It was felt that everything would suddenly break
saved your life, and I save your honor!" Having repeated these words the
saving me from that maniac.... You see, I have bullets enough in my
saving power he has of transferring his attention from one thing
saw French cannon and French troops on the Pratzen Heights just where he
saw a closed door. Below, under the staircase, was a door leading to the
saw a large open box filled with something. It was a coffin with bones
saw and noticed everything, arranged that she and Madame Schoss should
saw by her face that she was glad both at what had happened and at the
saw everyone as in a dream. When I am taken up by a thought, all else is
saw everywhere the unfamiliar faces of various military men of different
saw for the first time peasant militiamen in their white shirts and with
saw him before her with the expression that was on his face as he lay
saw his smile, which said nothing, unless perhaps, "Opinions are
saw in that same army order that he, Bolkonski" (she whispered the name
saw my ancient capital abandoned without a battle? Did you not notice
saw nothing but the hussars running all around him, their spurs catching
saw rather short man. Having evidently come from the light into the
saw some wagons approaching with fifteen hussars on their skinny horses
saw the cupolas and crosses of the New Convent of the Virgin still dark
saw the face, gestures, and tender smile of that bold handsome man when
saw the great mass of Muscovites who had donned uniform and were talking
saw with his own eyes brick buildings erected or in course of erection,
saw, near a kitchen garden with a ditch round it, two men on horseback
saw--covered to the waist by a bright green quilt--the familiar,
say about the soul going to the sky... we know there is no sky but only
say all this there," remarked Dolgorukov.
say and as if she were saying it to someone else, with whom joking was
say in a frightened whisper. "Catch hold from underneath. Here!"
say in what the peculiarity of the horse and rider lay, yet at first
say it. These two things can be done together," he added.
say more in the presence of a stranger.
say more to the frightened and shamefaced count, he lashed the heaving
say nothing to me about his sister? Does he think me a scoundrel, or an
say plainly that that was the result of Napoleon's will. Speaking so,
say so. It will be as I said at the beginning of the campaign, it won't
say something but could not. Her brother had guessed right: the little
say something more, but at that moment Prince Vasili and his daughter
say that the Frenchman who had brought the letter from the countess
say that the theater of war is Poland and the enemy will never get
say that there are only two sources of human vice--idleness and
say to him.
say to the adjutant that Boris felt uncomfortable. He turned away and
say when it was decided to abandon Moscow, so it is impossible to say
say you nearly ruined your life and only found happiness when you
say, all that could be got out of them.
say, in Nicholas' house. The young Countess Bezukhova was not often seen
say, that Mary is not to blame, but those to blame--the one to blame--is
say.
say. "I am quite out of horses. Let me have what you can to go to the
say. "You had not noticed that I am a woman? Yes, I am a woman who
say. Besides this, in his behavior to women Anatole had a manner
say. But Natasha was not satisfied with her own words: she felt that
say. She lowered her eyes.
say. She saw her husband, but did not realize the significance of his
say. There was only one circumstance concerning which no one could be at
say: "Well, one more day and my grain and the peasants' will all be
say: "What can one do with our Russian peasants?" and imagined that he
say: 'Go and find out what's there.' There are many stories of his
saying he was not such a fool as to slave at the front when he could
saying something affable to him.
saying something, immediately seized the old man by his legs and the old
saying that Napoleon felt the danger of extending his line, that he
saying that he dare not even mention the matter to the count. Pity these
saying that the Russian ladies are not equal to the French? One has to
saying that your regiment would be sure to be better than Mamonov's."
saying to a general who stood beside him, not taking his eye from the
saying!"
saying, "June," and continued, kissing, "July, August," on the other
saying, Prince Vasili is the next heir through his wife, but the count
saying, and sat plunged in thought. Five minutes later, gently swaying
saying," said some of the mob pointing to the tall youth.
saying.
saying.
saying.
saying.
saying.
saying.
saying. "Have you seen Lazarev?"
saying. "I have been an atheist," answered Pierre.
saying. He screwed up his eyes with a dissatisfied look as he gazed
saying: "They will swell up with Russian cabbage, burst with our
sayings and doings of their commander, the Grand Duke, and told stories
says plainly: I am free and am therefore not subject to the law.
says senseless things that should have ruined him. But the once proud
says that the bee gathers pollen dust to feed the young bees and rear
says that the movement of the wheels is the cause refutes himself, for
says that this occurred because Kutuzov and Tormasov and Chichagov, and
says we have got the French army between two fires; Michaud says that
says we ought not to think. But I can't help it. Besides, when I was in
says, 'go up to ours and they are all rotten and maggoty. So,' he says,
says," voices in the crowd were heard saying.
says..."
says: 'Go and give a weceipt to the commissioner, but your affair will
scale as under the old prince.
scanning the brilliant tiers of boxes opposite. A sensation she had not
scapegrace. That is all I have been able to find out about him.
scarcely discernible figures was Napoleon. At last those mounted men
scarcely move, trotted with much effort to the column presented
scarcely moving their legs, and dead ones that have not been cleared
scarcely perceptible smile. "He thinks there's no government! How can
scare away the beast, Daniel'll give it you!"
scarred and puffy face.
scattered fragments of the army he left behind.
scattered his forces in large detachments, and with Napoleon and his
scene of action. General events involuntarily group themselves around
scenes they had witnessed during the campaign, and avoided all talk of
scenes. This last consideration moved him.
scented myself."
schoolboy, looked round, trying by a smile to win Simon's sympathy for
science explaining the whole creation and man's place in it. To receive
science of history, whose aim is to enable nations and humanity to know
science of the order: with questions of the threefold designation of
science says that the more troops the greater the strength. Les gros
science, poetry, music, love, friendship, hatred, and passions--went on
sciences of physics, history, chemistry, and the like, into which
sciences, the seven virtues, the seven vices, and the seven gifts of the
sciences. Instead of first defining the conceptions of freedom and
scintillating and twinkling in the sunshine. But I shall spare her. On
scorched and shed its grain. The marshes dried up. The cattle lowed from
scoundrel admitted? She was the cause of it all. With her, he said, he
scoundrel is again at our heels!"
scoundrel, but our ladies crawl after him on their knees. I went to
scoundrel? Is that how you look at it? We don't see it like that. And
scoundrels!"
scoundrels."
scouting--was not available. Besides, as a result of the frequent
scowling brows above dull greenish-hazel eyes and an overhanging red
scowling, he gave Nicholas just such a look as he had given Pierre at
scratching Milka behind the ears.
scratching his hindquarters and, cocking his ears, got up with quivering
screamed with delight and tears fell from her eyes. But this only
screamed:
screams came.
screams kept repeating:
screams of those that were being trampled on and of those who tried to
screams squeals, and waving of whips that caused even the shaft horses
screams, continued.
screen before the choir on the left side, and a feeling, new to her, of
screened by blue spectacles of conventionality. So it seemed to Rostov.
screwed up his eyes, and looked intently at him.
screwing up his eyes and shaking with suppressed laughter, and unable
scrutinizing Anatole closely and intently.
scrutinizingly at her. She asked herself in perplexity: "What does he
scrutiny.
scuttle. He hardly crosses the river to our side before we recross to
sea of history remains calm the ruler-administrator in his frail bark,
sealing wax and quill pens his hands came upon on his uncle's table.
searching for an example, then with a clear, naive look at Bennigsen he
searching for and finding possibilities of unloading this or that and
searching for potatoes, but found few even of these.
searching for the papers he glanced at her several times.
searching look at Pierre.
seat beside her.
seat indicated to him beside the fair Helene and listened to the general
seat to pull up.
seat.
seat.
seat. As they drove along he shuddered and exclaimed several times so
seated herself in the drawing room to await the abductors.
seated without looking at one another.
seated, the carriage steps were folded and pulled up, the door was shut,
seclusion.
second army--tried to postpone joining up and coming under Barclay's
second at Smolensk"--he showed a scar on his cheek--"and this leg which
second broadsheet stated that our headquarters were at Vyazma, that
second gun's crew was "uncle"; Tushin looked at him more often than
second had called on him, and, having closed the door behind him and
second of September.
second time and therefore treated both his superiors and the men with
second, Bonaparte. But as it turns out, just at that moment a third
second, and after dinner he discussed the arrangements for the duel with
seconds collected his thoughts. Then the Russian ambassador took him by
seconds. Whether or no the Emperor understood what was going on in
secret, and should you find that you do not love me, or should you come
secretaries of the embassy, and even ambassadors, confided diplomatic
secretary rather than commander in the army. My removal from the army
secretary to the embassy, Bolkonski was already acquainted. Bilibin
secretly married (as Pierre knew), and should be so in love with him as
secretly regretting this, saw only the dark side.
secrets to her, so that in a way Helene was a power. Pierre, who knew
secrets.
sect or party, or an inventor, impresses us less when we know how or by
section of the committee for the revision of the laws. At Speranski's
section scattered through the village arranging quarters for the staff
secured his second boot and was slapping one boot against the other.
securing that peace was really Kutuzov's; this Chichagov was the first
security of all; it was purely pacific and conservative.
sedate, and the naivete of his youthful egotism was so obvious, that he
seduced, and to whom her poor mother (sa pauvre mere) appeared, and
seducer when she loved him?" he thought. "God could not have put into
see Bennigsen a few days previously and had entreated him to use
see Princess Mary the day before and had there met--"Whom do you think?
see a long way in the deserted street and it seemed more like morning
see her there, but he had failed to recognize her because the change in
see him at all."
see him at the same time as an adjutant who informed the count that the
see his face. Anna Mikhaylovna left him, and when she returned he was
see it. But you also say that our oath of allegiance is a conditional
see or understand Him and may not see or understand his own vileness and
see that advance was evidently ruinous to him.
see that they are living better than before. The yard full of cattle,
see that they had been observed. He was sorry for the pretty frightened
see the city and, hearing that everything had been abandoned, rushed
see the expression of a higher spiritual life (that was why he did not
see the lesser light. The bandage was taken off his eyes and, by the
see the true light, and that he, Pierre, ought to aid, enlighten, and
see those who, judging by the sound of hoofs and voices, had ridden up
see you."
see your face here again, you villain!"
see yours is already an officer in the Guards, while my Nicholas is
see! Continual maneuvers, continual advances!" thought he. "What for?
see! Do you remember at Braunau he commanded an army for three weeks
see!"
see, one likes education and well-bred people.' It is for your sake I
see. How was he maimed? What was left of him? Was he like that incessant
see. I saw so many of those peasant carts in your yard. Please let me
see."
see." The old prince snorted. "Let her marry, it's all the same to me!"
seeing Prince Andrew stopped, hesitating on the threshold. He went into
seeing blood and hearing cries and groans hurried on, still entangled in
seeing eye to scrutinize the messenger more carefully, as if wishing to
seeing her guilty expression, put his other arm around her and kissed
seeing that the elder visitor was not listening, he turned to the young
seeing the baggage trains that impeded the army, he was (Thiers says)
seeing the favor the Emperor showed the prisoners, they now hastened to
seeing the fright of that small and frail but proud man when covered by
seeing the shell fly past and fall into the ranks of the supports.
seeing these people, took any notice of them. "It seems to be all
seeing three yards under a man is considered an attribute of wizards.
seeking and vacillating, who had not yet found in Freemasonry a straight
seem long ago since we first met at Bogucharovo, but how much water
seem most likely to interest him--the impending danger. During the
seem odd if I ask?" Petya thought. "Well, never mind!" and immediately,
seem that not much consideration was needed to reach this conclusion,
seem to a savage to guide the vessel--acted like a child who, holding a
seem very bad, and every learned militarist criticizes them with looks
seem.
seemed about to cry, but this did not last long.
seemed as though not the trumpeters were playing, but as if the army
seemed confused and blushed as if not knowing what to say.
seemed disconcerted and embarrassed. He was talking to the countess,
seemed familiar to Princess Mary was saying something.
seemed grotesque and amazing to Natasha. She could not follow the opera
seemed incongruous and false. It made him afraid.
seemed like a lifeless body, but as soon as he came up it became alive,
seemed like someone's breathing. He listened intently to the ebb and
seemed loaded with a whole houseful of effects. A fine brindled cow with
seemed now present, now past, and now future.
seemed ready to lift its tail, jump down on its soft paws, and begin
seemed so difficult out in the world, but so possible in the regiment.
seemed so simple and clear in Speranski's exposition that Prince Andrew
seemed that the ball the hussars were giving in honor of the Polish
seemed to Pierre that this comet fully responded to what was passing in
seemed to Pierre to constitute perfect happiness; and the choice
seemed to Pierre.
seemed to Princess Mary.
seemed to awake as from a dream. He ordered the militiamen to be called
seemed to be filled! And it is all so simple, pale, and crude in the
seemed to be seeking something, and soldiers dragging doors, benches,
seemed to descend evenly and imperceptibly toward the earth, the air
seemed to express a secret understanding between him and them. And when
seemed to flash as she whirled round. Natasha gazed at them and was
seemed to give way within him at this news. Dolokhov was a suitable and
seemed to groan at the terrible impact.
seemed to have changed roles since the campaign of 1805. The old man,
seemed to have shriveled or melted; his features had grown smaller.
seemed to her to be an effort, it seemed so natural for him to be kind
seemed to him all the interests that engrossed Napoleon, so mean did his
seemed to him as though one of the soldiers near him hit him on the head
seemed to him insincere; he did not know how to judge all these affairs
seemed to him meaningless and even ridiculous. His anger with his wife
seemed to him something pathetic and touching in all this.
seemed to him that he ought to have an explanation with Natasha and tell
seemed to him that he was being fired at. "What? What? What?... Cut them
seemed to him that it was a very long time ago, almost a day, since he
seemed to him valuable or useful. The aim of each man when he left
seemed to him. But even then, at moments of weakness as he had accounted
seemed to inhale not air but the strength of eternal youth and gladness.
seemed to know that this maiden was nothing else than a representation
seemed to me to have an excellent heart, and that is the quality I value
seemed to members of the English Parliament that the cause of the war
seemed to promise to explain that necessity to him when he came on
seemed to reign over the town, broken only by the rustle of footsteps,
seemed to say as she caught sight of herself. "Well, and very nice too!
seemed to say by the smile that replaced the threatened tears, as she
seemed to say, as with a scarcely perceptible smile he looked at
seemed to wish, but to be unable, to diminish its effect.
seemed unnatural to Prince Andrew.
seemed very gay. Rostov was talking merrily to his two friends, one of
seemed), but by the question how to tell the Emperor--without putting
seemed, obliged to live in the count's house. Such were Dimmler the
seeming to grow suddenly smaller, and respectfully received the blessing
seemingly increased in inverse proportion to the square of the distance
seems as if there were something in them, but there's nothing, nothing,
seems as much alive as other hives.
seems less heavy."
seems that while he was abroad this young man was allowed to do as he
seems to me."
seems to say to the older generation, "We are prepared to respect and
seems to us not merely to move of itself but to govern the ship's
seen Duport?"
seen Fraulein Mathilde."
seen at Smolensk the state in which Russian towns were left to him, and
seen at the gate was sitting on a green garden seat, plaiting a bast
seen before, there was the same general expression of refined, inner,
seen before--human eyes fixed upon her--and turning her head a little
seen her ecstasy, and how he caught it for having stayed away so long.
seen her, and all his doubts vanished--not because she had answered
seen him three times! Natasha, I don't believe you, you're joking! In
seen how he said it! I know he did not mean to say it, but it came out
seen in its entirety when it had been accomplished and belonged to the
seen in the Austrian campaign, he had come to the conclusion that in
seen on him before. She went up to him and with a swift, flexible,
seen such horrors or so many slain in such a small area. The roar of
seen the day before in the arms of her nurse's daughter--at her own
seen to throw away their cartridges and their arms. In such a state
seen were exactly what she had seen in the mirror.
seen were tattered and frightened people who tried to hide when they saw
seen what she described.
seen, but I have seen, how good men brought up in those traditions of
seen.
seen.
seen.
seen. And the excited, alien face of that man, his bayonet hanging down,
seen. Prince Andrew stopped and began examining the position.
seen. The lines of that mouth were remarkably finely curved. The middle
sees," said Gerasim. "Will you step into the study?" Pierre nodded. "As
seized Napoleon. He knew that none of the words now uttered by Napoleon
seized a biscuit, and as if fearing to be too late, again shouted
seized all the private carts in Moscow and on one hundred and thirty-six
seized by an unreasoning panic--it occurred to him that the child was
seized by an unreasoning springtime feeling of joy and renewal. All the
seized him at the thought of that dreadful step. A thousand times during
seized the countess' hands and kissed a knuckle of the little finger,
seized young Nicholas and he awoke.
seizes pwovisions to feed his soldiers, but by him who takes them to
seizing the most opportune moment for making use of people.
seizing the soldier by his round shoulders and throwing him aside.
seizing the transports, Major Denisov, being drunk, went to the chief
seizure of the Duke of Oldenburg's territory, and the Russian Note,
seldom experienced, came upon her. She feared to look round, it seemed
seldom listened; now he was seldom carried away in conversation and
select a place for the crossing.
select him--an old man in disfavor--to be their representative in the
self-abasement.
self-assurance that he felt he would be unable to withstand it now, but
self-complacency than his did.) "Well, he stormed at me, as the saying
self-confidence remains dumb on a first introduction and betrays a
self-confidence secure him military fame. Innumerable so called chances
self-confidence was of no avail in relation to the one question before
self-confidence, while his body was thin and weak. His eyes, nose, and
self-confident limitations of this man raise him to the head of the
self-confident smile. "What I can't understand," he went on, "is that
self-confident, familiar tone. "Here is my second son; please love and
self-confident.
self-confident? I believe all this--and suddenly Princess Mary will tell
self-derision genuinely Russian. Bilibin wrote that the obligation of
self-knowledge and self-perfecting. Besides this he advised me for
self-possession mingled at that moment in Rostov's soul.
self-purification. Only to this aim can we always strive independently
self-reproach, and hopes reawoke.
self-sacrifice and so on; but in the army which retired beyond Moscow
self-sacrifice, had been dispersed like dust by contact with the first
self-sacrificing spirit too," she said to herself. "Yes, he is poor now
self-satisfaction and enthusiasm, Natasha with a quiet, happy smile.
self-satisfaction in his face and bearing. Though it was impossible to
self-satisfaction; but she forced Boris to say all that is said on such
self-satisfied Bonaparte, with his small white hand, who was now an
self-satisfied, youthful, and constant smile of animation, and by the
self-will, "he is wicked and heartless. There now, I like your Denisov
self. And to attain this end, we have the light called conscience that
selfish, ascribe common sense to themselves alone.
selling any of his wife's property, and having received a small
selling their cattle and moving in whole families toward the southeast.
seminarists, and gentry were mingled, had gone early that morning to
seminude women in the boxes, especially at Helene in the next box,
senator, and in general with whatever speech he had last heard.
send for a friend, now some expensive article of food for herself, or
send his orderly staff officer, and later Prince Andrew also, to order
send police officers to guide the troops through the town, as the army
send." And changing the subject, Kutuzov began to speak of the Turkish
senility by a tendency to fall asleep, forgetfulness of quite recent
sensation of fear and respect which the old man inspired in all around
sensation of those terrible whistling sounds and of the corpses around
sense and frank plainness of speech. Marya Dmitrievna was known to the
sense in it for either the French or the Russians. Its immediate result
sense of awe and veneration such as he had experienced in his boyhood at
sense of joy or relief, he gazed at what was taking place. The fifth man
sense of relief at having performed a vexatious duty and did not return
sense of superiority over her good, conscientious husband, who all the
sense of the necessity of undertaking something and sacrificing
sense of the terrible contrast between something infinitely great and
sense. Come here, come here!"
senseless and its attainment quite impossible.
senseless and unattainable.
senseless cry, "Cut off!" that is so terrible in battle, and that word
senseless life of ours!" thought Nicholas. "All this misery, and money,
senseless, he understood and was not surprised at it.
sensibility of a lady who faints when she sees a calf being killed: she
sensibility, and not listening to what he was saying I began picturing
sensible and logical considerations showing it to be essential for him
sent Dolokhov the whole forty-three thousand rubles and received his
sent a letter to Princess Mary yesterday. And Uncle is away...." To tell
sent an official to Austria to seek for traces of his son, he ordered a
sent an order for him to report at headquarters.
sent by wounded officers came to the Rostovs' and wounded men dragged
sent for Balashev and read him his letter to Napoleon, ordered him to
sent for Pierre and said to him: "My dear fellow, if you are going to
sent for a senior officer. Getting out of his caleche, he waited with
sent for me.... I am sorry for him as a man, but what can one do?"
sent him a blank sheet of paper in an envelope.
sent in good time to Moscow for a doctor and were expecting him at any
sent to Forminsk to attack Broussier.
sent to Moscow. The story told about him at Count Rostov's was true.
sent to Voronezh to buy remounts for his division, not only without
sentence as from the attempts the vice-King made to execute the orders
sentences. "The whole company can bear witness. I beg you will remember
sentiment for him the more, and unconsciously to strengthen it.
sentiment of esteem and special regard I have long entertained for your
sentiment, that of fear for his young and happy life, possessed his
sentimentality, old wives' tales, or is she right?" he asked himself.
sentiments," he seemed to be saying, "so much the worse for you!"
sentinel within her and forbade her every joy. Besides, she had lost all
sentinel, who without saying a word paced morosely up and down it, then
sentinels and officers, and have abused and beaten them."
separated from the rest by a trench, everyone experienced a common and
separated into two packs, that somewhere a wolf was being chased, and
separated...."
separating the living from the dead--lay between them. All were
separation! Though I tell myself that half my life and half my happiness
separation...."
serenely and steadily at Rostov, seemed to be veiled by something, as if
serf carpenters out of their own birchwood. The house was spacious
serf.
serfs had something served to them in the ballroom.
serfs to the Three Hills quarter of Moscow to fight Napoleon, and that
serfs, or himself, only one ought to know the state of affairs in
serfs. The only thing that made Princess Mary anxious about him was that
sergeant in charge of the cannon which was to give the signal to fire
sergeant major who came upon the men who were hauling their burden.
sergeant of Poniatowski's corps, who explained in Polish that he had
sergeant was an impostor, that he had lied, and that the whole Russian
sergeant was carrying in a wooden bowl to an officer who sat on a log
series of commands is also generalized into a single expression of will.
series of continuous events and examine it apart from others, though
series of events, and corresponding with this generalization the whole
series of shifting events and so he never can at any moment consider the
series of victories, and quite wrongly considered victorious by Russian
serious and weighty matter, and the fact that A had been appointed
serious faces of those around, remembered all he had already gone
serious talk."
seriously.
seriousness (for which Princess Mary was specially grateful to him) into
servant.
servant."
servants worked, and they all wore holiday dress and went to church. At
servants' quarters.
servants, and a rosy girl with a large plait of black hair, smiling as
servants. Marya Dmitrievna, with her spectacles hanging down on her nose
servants. The footman who had gone to announce them was stopped by
serve a second term appears as much a cause as Napoleon's refusal to
serve her and be a splendid minister; but as soon as she is in danger
serve her as before and obey her in everything.
served first. After dinner, when the footman handed coffee and from
served in the 1805 campaign, had been recruiting up to strength in
served it so well that it would often gracefully lift a hind leg and run
served on one of the committees.) Returned home for dinner and dined
served there as you do. I remember you at Austerlitz.... I remember,
service at the palace church in honor of the Emperor's birthday, Prince
service he had run over pedestrians and upset vehicles in the streets
service of Bonaparte, as we used to call him? Yet here I am in Moscow
service to place himself very advantageously. He was aide-de-camp to a
service was being held in the churches as usual. Alpatych went to the
service, and he at once understood his role, letting his hostess make
service, and the appointment he seeks in Turkey comes to nothing. During
service, as often happens, turned in his favor. After the affair at
service, related to people in the service. It seemed that in this
service," said the prince disdainfully. "Why his son is coming I don't
service.
service. A little behind them stood the two younger princesses holding
service. More than once they had beaten him, and more than once they
service."
services, his request would be granted?..."
serving as a private. But the command of the extreme left flank had been
serving modestly in an obscure regiment, spending comparatively little,
set down to his credit, and again the enemy's fleet twice lets him slip
set fire to the Schon Grabern village, delayed the French advance. The
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
set his foot on the wolf's neck. A stick was thrust between her jaws
set off in search of Prince Andrew.
set off to rejoin the army, not knowing where he would find it and
set off. Ferapontov's whole household came out too, following Alpatych
set to work I shall do it as no one else could, but now I can jest, and
set to work at this new task with pleasure and zeal. It no longer seemed
sets, leading such a life that the Countess Helene thought it necessary
setting fire to Schon Grabern.
setting it on fire and the French batteries were now firing at them, no
setting the borzois on the hare. The tranquil Ilagin, Nicholas, Natasha,
setting, on a finely wrought silver chain.
settle with all the villains, you'll see! And you said the French...
settled by Napoleon's visit to a mosque, no results were achieved.
settled down beside her under the quilt, spread out her arms, and
settled down comfortably beside the fire.
settled down in the sitting room, "does it ever happen to you to feel
settled himself in the saddle, and, feeling that he was ready, looked
settled into three groups. One, chiefly masculine, had formed round the
settled long ago.
settled, and I ought to have been off long ago. Here is something I have
settled," thought Nicholas. "All is over between us, but I won't leave
settled. He came because of Sonya. And Sonya, though she would never
seven virtues, corresponding to the seven steps of Solomon's temple,
seventeen of the forty men of the guns' crews had been disabled, but the
seventy-year-old magnates, uniformed and besashed almost all of whom
several French soldiers in a variety of clothing. Pierre took no notice
several conversations. At one end of the table, the old chamberlain was
several dead men. One ball after another passed over as he approached
several gatherings of which she was usually ornament, and was said to be
several instances.
several looters. But of all these various suspected characters, Pierre
several of them were not separated from one another but merged into a
several other less noteworthy persons.
several other trains of vehicles similar to the Rostovs', and as they
several overturned carts, and frightened and laughing faces among the
several persons whom he did not know, giving him a whispered description
several soldiers fell, and a second lieutenant who was holding the
several thousand rubles.
several times that morning had tried to set to work, but her heart was
several times up and down the room, his fat shoulders twitching.
severe gaze straight on Pierre's face.
severe with her and to forbid it... goodness knows what they might be up
severely, now seemed to him to consist of excellent, simple, and kindly
severely, saying that he ought to be shot. General Bagovut, a fighting
severely. "You don't know what you are doing."
severely. "You don't wish to apologize, but, man, it's not only to him
severity changed, and he drew Pierre's hand downwards, made him sit
severity. The dance grew livelier and livelier. The other couples could
shade of the nearest house, on a bench which one Cossack had run
shading his eyes with his small hand.
shadows round his eyes, alone sat in his place barefoot and not dressed.
shadows, without perspective, without distinction of outline. All life
shaggy cap, shouted to the approaching Balashev to halt. Balashev did
shaggy caps on their heads, and an escort of hussars and Uhlans and a
shaggy old dog with a hanging jowl, famous for having tackled a big wolf
shake one another's hand.... The Emperor Napoleon burns with impatience
shaking hands with Dolgorukov and Bilibin.
shaking her little shriveled finger at him.
shaking him.
shaking with sobs and throbbing against the window frame. Natasha knew
shako and a blue cloak, swarthy, sunburned, and with a hooked nose. Then
shako, carefully loosened the gathers of its lining and drew them tight
shall always live I must have lived before, lived for a whole eternity."
shall always remember that in this world one must expect no reward, that
shall be killed, perhaps not even by a Frenchman but by one of our own
shall be late."
shall certainly adopt an innovation and call him simply Bonaparte!"
shall do my duty. I will come and spend the night. He must not be left
shall get to a place twenty-five miles off where I shall rest and
shall grudge nothing to help you. I am myself going away because it
shall have beaten back the enemies of our Fatherland, or till the last
shall have to go down, and you have not smartened yourself up at all!"
shall have to suffer, so today I'll go and rest."
shall never again be as happy and tranquil as I am now."
shall never know the whole chain since it is endless, and so again we
shall receive my letter to the Emperor."
shall receive my letter," Balashev felt convinced that Napoleon would
shall reproach my wife with anything, and I cannot reproach myself
shall too, if only..."
shall we meet again? I am going abroad. We have had a good time--now
shall withdraw the left flank under its cover, and retreat to the dip by
shame and anger choking him, had already leapt from his horse and run to
shame and arrested in his presence, fully alive now to the impropriety
shame and sorrow, but wanted now to play with him as a cat does with a
shame on his breast.
shamefaced feeling with which men pray at moments of great excitement
shamefaced, and only much later were they able to regain their former
shan't get away before evening. Look, look there.... Why, that must be
shan't say it! You talk about our position, the left flank weak and the
share and a husband his. I have my position in the service, she has
share increased the husband's diminished.
share it. He was awakened by Likhachev's kindly voice.
shared their opinion, but for that very reason he could not understand
shared with all her heart in the prayer for the spirit of righteousness,
sharp, but toward evening the sky became overcast and it began to thaw.
sharpshooters in front of our columns. The colonel at the head of the
sharpshooters showed themselves in the copse. It was Timokhin's company,
sharpshooters with discharged muskets, standing in the center of the
shattered was once more stirring in his soul with a new beauty and on
shawl had been adjusted he kept his arm around her for a long time, as
she are rare here," he thought, as Natasha, readjusting a rose that was
she asked herself what distressed her, she had to admit that it was her
she asked.
she attached no importance herself, and in the rough copies of which the
she became still more animated and chattered away giving him greetings
she began to smile and talk. He asked about mutual acquaintances, and
she bowed very low and made the sign of the cross, saying to herself
she ceased to ask questions or to speak at all, evidently disbelieving
she changed her position so that his left eye could see her face he
she chose, but they were not to be admitted to him. She had decided to
she clasped her mother she always managed to do it without hurting her
she could not be his wife, that he had no means, and they would never
she could not get on without medical treatment, so they kept her in the
she could not help watching. As they were leaving the theater Anatole
she could not jump up and run out. The baby again opened his eyes and
she covered her face with her hands.
she did not even recognize her own daughters, or her late husband's,
she did not in the least understand but to which she attributed great
she did not remember what she had said, and that she had no trouble
she doubts the means we have of gaining them. That is the actual phrase
she feel able to think clearly and calmly of Prince Andrew and Anatole,
she felt guilty.
she felt herself surrounded on all sides by the acrid scent of old age
she foresaw. She drew her wool down through the canvas and, scarcely
she found them on my table and said she'd show them to Mamma, and that
she glanced into it. "There, that's me!" the expression of her face
she had been a sick child. The last weeks passed in her mother's bedroom
she had been the day before; but that day as he looked at her Pierre
she had been unable to close her eyes on account of his moaning, and at
she had been unable to sleep that moonlight night, and told her how he
she had corresponded for the last five years, was in Moscow, but proved
she had demands on her time which could be satisfied only by renouncing
she had entered. She knew it to be necessary, and though it was hard for
she had feared, order her to be carried away by force but only told her
she had first entered the room--the smile of a perfectly beautiful
she had just vacated. "You have made the place warm, I must say," he
she had learned it) she talked with her partner, fanning herself and
she had never been able to be quite frank, had now become unpleasant to
she had sacrificed so much. She could not refrain from weeping at these
she had seen her guests out.
she had seen.
she had seized him, rolled over like a ball. The hare arched his
she had worn at her first Petersburg ball.
she hardly heard his voice through the closed doors.
she heard his groans and muttering, the creak of his bed, and the steps
she heard his voice a vivid glow kindled in her face, lighting up both
she knew had the peculiar property of conducing to cheerfulness in the
she knew let her have the keys of the catacombs, and how she, taking
she knew so well), on the lock of gray hair that escaped from under the
she laughed; at the other could be heard the story of the misfortunes of
she listened to what was going on behind the door and, hearing him
she loved him she need only say the word yes, and no human power could
she loves him! She probably opened the letter without knowing who it was
she mentioned Napoleon and some other exalted personages), that she had
she might to hide it, and perturbed as she evidently was each time her
she moved toward Anna Pavlovna. Helene was so lovely that not only
she must not say this and that it would be useless to do so. She only
she needs one of her own kin. But in your Club they have been making him
she not only left her hair as it was, but did not even look in her
she only repeated that she begged him to forget what she had said, that
she ought not to have asked it. He smiled, looking at her, and said he
she ought to have said to Natasha, but she had been unable to say it
she prayed for the members of her own family, her father and mother and
she received on Sundays.
she remained alone with him for a moment. Prince Andrew surprised her by
she rose to go to her own room.
she said timidly after a moment's silence, "I have a great favor to ask
she said to Pierre, "even our dear cousin Boris, who, between ourselves,
she said with the facility in lying natural to a society woman. "We were
she said, convulsively pressing her hands and setting her teeth with a
she said, turning to her brother, as if asking him: "What is it moves me
she said. "And I will go and tell her it is no use expecting him! And
she sang.
she saw before her his smooth handsome forehead, his mustache, and his
she seemed hardly able to bear. Though the diplomatists still firmly
she sent for her husband and, when he came, tried briefly and coldly to
she should be in the way and tried to find excuses for leaving them
she should not speak French so much. It's not the time for it now."
she should rouse the dozing baby.
she spoke she noticed with fear and joy that he gazed attentively and
she spoke she raised her eyes with a sigh, and her gesture conveyed a
she stood still in the middle of the room and sang a musical phrase that
she suddenly came into his mind as she was at the moments when he had
she termed Bennigsen. She saw that they grew spiteful when they spoke to
she took the money from under the handkerchief.
she tried to follow with understanding. When she understood them her
she used to have quarrels with the too indulgent count, that son who had
she used to run when playing at tag, ran through the ballroom to the
she used to say. Often seeing the success she had with young and old men
she was always imagining that. It always seemed to her that everyone
she was dancing with a grown-up man, who had been abroad. She was
she was herself in such high spirits at that moment, so far from sorrow,
she was holding in her reticule.) "So you promise?"
she was not afraid of him and no one else ought to be. After a few
she was not even grateful to him for it; nothing good on Pierre's part
she was so tired of talking of what did not interest her, and her
she was to do with these people. On leaving them, Anna Pavlovna again
she was very stupid, sometimes attended, with a strange feeling of
she was with Sonya. Sonya had cried and begged to be forgiven and now,
she was with them. Natasha grew pale, in a panic of expectation, when
she was, Natasha, who knew how sensitive her mother was to anything
she well? My quarters are at your service."
she went on, with a horror and disgust she could hardly conceal.
she went on: "Nowadays everyone finds fault. A Gospel Society! Well, and
she went up to her husband and kissed him on the forehead.
she were blossoming under the praise of this dear Countess Bezukhova who
she would be pleased to give--with her characteristic Russian patriotism
she would do anything and was prepared for anything, but gave no actual
she would say. She said: "This can't go on--it won't. You will get
she wrote a letter to her husband--who, as she imagined, loved her very
she'll be a singer, a second Salomoni! We have engaged an Italian to
she'll come here and all will be explained, or else, my dear boy, let me
she, bowing as she saw him out.
she, turning to the young man who, having come quite close, was gazing
she, uttering the word with peculiar assurance and unconcern, "I know
she, who till then had not shown any alarm, said that she would die of
sheaf of rye. Tomorrow after dinner I shall take the Iberian icon of
sheaves of flame (now red and now like golden fish scales creeping along
shed followed by an adjutant and the regimental paymaster.
shed was laid, with a bullet in his stomach, on "Matvevna's" carriage.
shed with Pierre, was dying, and Pierre told the corporal that something
shed, and on returning stopped by the door to play with a little
sheet he held in his hand.
sheet spread over the hay on the side nearest the door.
shelter. An officer of their regiment, with long mustaches extending
shelters with merry chatter and laughter; around the fires sat others,
shifting the baby he gave him to the nurse.
shining eyes and experienced a sense of comfort. "But isn't it all the
shining eyes, not interrupting or questioning him, but believing with
shining eyes. With a movement full of dignity and grace she half rose
shining with emotion, "that my dynasty should cease to reign on the
shirt unfastened in front. "Wait a bit, you fellows.... Here is Petya!
shirt, lay down on his back, putting his arms under his head. He was
shirt.
shirts for them.
shivering from the freshness of the early dawn and excited by what he
shock. He stood in full view of the audience, well aware that he was
shod in a Tartar boot embroidered with silver, and the firm pressure
shoe.
shoes he had suffered just as he did now when he walked with bare feet
shoes mistrustfully, as at an alien. Not far from him walked a fat major
shoes) and listening to the regular tap of the heel and creak of the toe
shoes.
shone in all their faces. Evidently in the back rooms, from which they
shone into the open window, lighting up the room and part of the morocco
shone strangely. Now that the terrible din of the guns had ceased a hush
shone with such gaiety and youth, such innocent youth, that it suggested
shook her head disapprovingly and angrily at every solemn expression
shook himself as if waking up, and his face assumed the look it had had
shook the air, then a fourth and a fifth boomed solemnly near by on the
shoot them) was not merely incomprehensible but revolting. And the
shoot," he said with an unnaturally gentle smile.
shopkeeper with red pimples on his cheeks near the nose, and a calm,
shopkeeper, two seminary students, a peasant, and a house serf, besides
shopman.
shops, bakers' signboards, street lamps, and sleighs!" thought Rostov,
shops, to government offices, to the post office, and to the Governor's.
short hair. This young man was dressed in a threadbare blue cloth coat
short interval followed her. Anna Mikhaylovna was standing beside the
short on his heels, stood so a second, stamped on the spot clanking his
short-sightedness of men who seek enjoyment and happiness here on earth:
shortsighted delight at the misery of others, and doubts and torments
shortsighted eyes. Turning from Princess Mary he went up and kissed
shot and the cry of "stretchers!" was heard. Most of the time, by their
shot by the marshal's own order because a silver spoon belonging to the
shots came.
should I say that? Either to a Power indefinable, incomprehensible,
should abandon his diffidence and openly announce that he would place
should annihilate him, but then feels that his arm drops powerless and
should ask the Emperor--most respectfully ask His Majesty--to let us
should awaken terrible memories in the Emperor Alexander's mind....
should be done about him. The corporal replied that Pierre need not
should be dragged to the lockup by his hair'? (How silly!) 'And honor
should be forgiven, but I didn't say I could forgive her. I can't."
should be humane, should love, or pity, or think of what is just
should be if I could now say: 'Lord, have mercy on me!'... But to whom
should be kept separate from the rest, had long since been abandoned.
should be performed. In her view the aim of every religion was merely
should be trying to entertain her and pretending to admire her nephew,
should fascinate her husband as much as she did before he became her
should hardly be able to climb onto a horse."
should have arrived at unconditioned freedom beyond space, time, and
should have at their head a man who could justify to himself and to them
should have made a flank march to such and such a place, Tormasov to
should have to stand and guard equally cold and hungry Russians who
should it react just on Louis XVI? And what is the time limit for such
should let that fine fellow Bonaparte lose--he'd knock all this nonsense
should like them to meet here."
should long before have joined Orlov-Denisov. Excited and vexed by the
should make peace after all our sacrifices and such insane retreats! You
should make too good a target for the French, besides I am afraid I
should marry Princess Bolkonskaya, together with his silence and
should not exchange. When my opponent has sixteen men and I have
should not justify your confidence and the honor you have done me in
should not think so."
should or should not do, but the standard was quite firm and definite in
should perhaps have done the same thing in his place," thought Pierre.
should return to Moscow to the house on the Vozdvizhenka Street, which
should spend the night in his little village of Mikhaylovna.
should take part in an argument between the general and the colonel on
shoulder and left the room without snuffing the candles or saying why he
shoulder, and said that he was very grateful, but that it was impossible
shoulder, and with parental authority superintended the setting out of
shoulder, saying something to him in a friendly manner, and Kutuzov with
shoulder, their bayonets interlocking, moved over the bridge in a dense
shoulder. "Well, does no one speak French in this establishment?" he
shoulders and dropped his eyes as if startled by something extraordinary
shoulders and eyes, almost closing the latter, sighed, and moved away
shoulders and glanced at Nicholas.
shoulders and struck an attitude.
shoulders raised. His lips are firmly closed, his eyes glitter, and a
shoulders shuddered as if a cold shiver had run down them, how his left
shoulders, and chest and stomach involuntarily protruding, had that
shoulders, and noisy stalls brilliant with uniforms, glittered before
shoulders, looked at themselves in the brilliantly lighted mirrors which
shoulders, tried to impress on the soldiers the fact that Ramballe was
shoulders, turned out his toes, tapped gently with his foot, and, by
shoulders.
shoulders. "Women, my dear fellow; women!"
shoulders. Anna Mikhaylovna with just the same movement raised her
shoulders. He was looking through a field glass down the highroad before
shouldn't we get the gypsy singers as well? You military men like that
shout: "Blackguards!... Throw the snow back on the road!" did not lift
shouted "Hurrah!" and "Vive l'Empereur!" Napoleon said something to
shouted Rostopchin. "Cut him down. I command it."
shouted and talked at the same time, so that Count Rostov had not time
shouted at him. It seemed to Petya that at the moment the shot was
shouted at the militiamen who stood hesitating before the man whose leg
shouted by an officer who was urging his thoroughbred to full speed.
shouted hoarsely.
shouted something breathlessly with emphatic intonations and gestures.
shouted something--probably something funny--but they could not make out
shouted the regimental commander, thrusting forward his jaw and pointing
shouted to the musicians to play faster. Faster, faster, and faster;
shouted, "and then I shall reserve the right to state my opinion also.
shouted, not looking Boris in the face.
shouted, though there was no one to bind him but Lavrushka and Alpatych.
shouted, when the sleigh was only three houses from his door. It seemed
shouted.
shouted. Still I remained silent. And what do you think, Count? The
shouting and lashing their horses, kept crossing from side to side. The
shouting and loading him with gross abuse. Another man, Captain Brozin,
shouting and singing loudly; yet through their shouting the voice of his
shouting together came up from the slope. For a moment Denisov and the
shouting.
shouting. "And I saw with my own eyes how Lazarchuk bwought some fwom
shouting: "Duport! Duport! Duport!" Natasha no longer thought this
shouts behind him: "Get on! Get on!" when it was impossible to go any
shouts, 'We are lost!' or who shouts, 'Hurrah!' And only in the ranks
shouts, laughter, and voices of the mummers.
shove with his knee. This was followed by a burst of laughter.
show an interest in the general conversation by smiling, but in spite
show him the way.
show sympathy with his loss, yet this reminder of Austerlitz was both
show, by disregarding the orders, that she did not believe in medical
showed a bag--"a hundred flints. I bought them very cheap. Please take
showed her.
showed itself.
showed me a letter in which the parade of the French in Vienna was fully
showed one common expression of conflict, irritation, and excitement,
showed that he only understood the meaning of his words after he had
showed that his father's foibles did not prevent his son from loving and
showed that, in spite of all his love and respect for his father, he was
showed to the soldiers by pressing nails into the walls of the hut; his
shower shells on the Russian fleches and redoubts. This could not be
showered the fine dry snow on the faces of those in the sleigh--beside
showing him the memorandum. "Is that right?"
showing sympathy with them. Yet Pierre's cunning consisted simply in
showing that despite these losses his income would not be diminished but
showing the creases where it had been folded and thick gold epaulettes
showing the necessity of first paying off the loans from the Land Bank,
showing the spot where it burst.
showing under his open shirt, he stood in a majestic pose in the light
shown her during dinner by Boris Drubetskoy, who was visiting them for
shown in every detail on the maps, and Bonaparte, evidently weakened,
shown it sooner, but he lets it go on for months. And then to call him
shown itself during her father's illness. She wished to pray but did not
shown such unaffected familiarity in intercourse with everybody both
shown to the best room, which Dolokhov had taken for that evening. Some
shows him to us.
shrieking were heard from different sides.
shrill, harsh voice. "The road is not swept for the princess my
shrine of the Mother of God and to Madame Suppert-Roguet, who was so
shrine of the saint. And now I'm from Kolyazin, master, where a great
shrines, riches, or houses--it was still the Moscow it had been in
shrinking, he tried to pass unnoticed between the rows of reproachful
shrubbery. (This shrubbery was a well-known haven of refuge for culprits
shrugged his and raised his hand to the kerchief, as if wishing to take
shudder of disgust.
shudder, blush, and feel such a rush of anger and pride as she had never
shutters and bearing a bootmaker's signboard, stood a score of thin,
shutters the moonlight, as if it had long been watching for this, burst
shy, went on carefully executing her steps. Denisov did not take
shyly.
shyness that surprised him for an instant.
sick man showed impatience. He made an effort to look at the servant who
sick man was given something to drink, there was a stir around him, then
sick man was turned on to his side with his face to the wall. He sighed.
sick man with the noiseless step of one in full vigor of life, with his
sick, and famine is everywhere. Twice the marauders even attack our
sick, and the wounded.
sickness meant. Every night before lying down, he said: "Lord, lay me
sickness, toil and rest, and its intellectual interests in thought,
side and at first did not play. Dolokhov kept glancing at him.
side and exclamations of horror and disgust were heard.
side and looked round with a frown. Along the road from Pratzen galloped
side and then to the other watched the smokers with evident pleasure
side and very becoming to his handsome face. Having looked in a mirror,
side by side. Natasha, muffled up in shawls which did not hide her eager
side had been attempting a reconciliation), and he also went up to the
side horses who pulled harder--ever increasing their gallop--that one
side of the Kolocha to the left of the highroad, Napoleon shifted the
side of the activity of a leader expresses the nation's life, we have
side of the pavement. He sprang out before the sleigh stopped, and ran
side of the question and you will see that your duty, on the contrary,
side of the question for a solution of the whole problem.
side of the road, and without recognizing it he looked with admiration
side of the table was a small carpet with various figures worked upon
side to side and gazed at the ruins of Moscow, loudly announcing his
side to side, and all the faces bore the same swaggeringly resolute
side to side, moving his ears as if asking: "Isn't it time to begin
side) and transferred it to the plain between Utitsa, Semenovsk, and
side, had drawn nearer to the young woman and taking his hands from his
side, so close to our own forces that Napoleon with the naked eye could
side. Prince Vasili was not having any supper: he went round the table
side. The soldiers' faces were more and more clearly visible. Rostov,
side. Though the condition and numbers of the French army were unknown
sides and the torturing pain in his thigh, stomach, and back distracted
sides and, holding his gloves in his hand and walking with an effort
sides had fallen in, another was on fire, and bright flames issued from
sides of the herd." So say the third class of historians who regard all
sides, crushing human bodies, and that terrible work which was not done
sides, like the roar of the sea, were heard the rattle of wheels, the
sides, the frightened baby began to cry, and people crowded silently
sides. Everyone crowded to the window, the Englishman in front. Pierre
sides. He acknowledged no acquaintances but saw in all these men only
sides. The countess rose and went into the ballroom.
sideways at Princess Mary from a little distance. "You have a maroon
sideways down the steps to the level of the street, took in his hand the
sidled out of the room.
sigh.
sighed and embraced Dolokhov.
sighed and pressed on the bench with both hands to raise himself.
sighed as she looked at them; Sonya was always getting frightened lest
sighed deeply, his whole chest heaving, and was silent for a while. "I
sighed sadly as she offered some wine to the old lady next to her and
sighed, and her deep eyes expressed a quiet sadness as though she
sighed, and went on her short, bare feet along the path. Pierre felt
sighed, looking toward the door of the room where Prince Andrew was,
sighed. "I have loved you like a son from the first. Trust yourself to
sighing deeply he took Rook, his horse, which stood resting one foot,
sighing..." thought Princess Mary.
sight of his master from the garden path, arched his back and, rushing
sight of his superiors, he did not notice the staff of the banner and
sight of tears and was ready to cry himself.
sight of these blue French dragoons pursuing our Uhlans. Nearer and
sight. I suffer for my own sins,' and he wept bitter tears. Well,
sighted the hare--and not without agitation he looked round and whistled
sign of assent and approval. He rode off at a walk to the right and sent
sign papers, to present himself at government offices, the purpose of
sign that they fully understood one another.
signed. The Emperors exchanged decorations: Alexander received the Cross
significance for them of the glow they were watching. Sighs were heard,
significance of his actions which were too contrary to goodness and
significance of that immense and wealthy city being given over to
significance of the burning of Moscow, and looked at the fires with
significance of the presence of the Emperor and of all these people,
significance of this factor, can we hope to define the unknown.
significance of which is determined at a particular moment which arrives
significance--that ideal, destined to guide this man and his associates,
significance. Just then he was only anxious to get away as quickly as
significance. That evening she expected several important personages who
significant command to come to her on Tuesday.
significantly.
signs of agitation and confusion which appeared on Balashev's face.
signs to the footmen, and anxiously glancing from the clock to the door
silence as he left the drawing room. He pictured the vanity of his
silence at Princess Anna Mikhaylovna. After her talk with Pierre, Anna
silence brooding over the house and within it held her fast.
silence inconvenient, let him talk, but I don't want to," he seemed to
silence, and then the same joke was repeated.
silence, asked him how he liked Moscow. She asked the question and
silence. There was nothing fresh to be seen from the line, for from
silenced and their arguments confuted by such conclusive evidence of the
silent and seemed confused. The prince asked her about her father, and
silent and turned to look at the pale tear-worn Anna Mikhaylovna as she
silent as he passed by, and moved to make way for him. At first Pierre
silent prayer. Every morning she came in like that, and every morning
silent, and I recollected myself only when it was too late. My God, I
silent, morose, and with tear-stained face, everybody pretended not to
silent, still looking derisively at him and evidently not listening to
silent.
silent.
silent.
silent. Kutuzov slightly shook his head and not taking his penetrating
silent. The glow spread, rising and falling, farther and farther still.
silently at one another from time to time.
silently doing something to this man's other, gory leg. When he had
silently led them to the edge of the forest.
silently, with the languid interest of sick children, at the envoy
silently--fearing to speak because at every word he felt ready to weep
silk stockings and white satin shoes with ribbons were already on; the
silk trousers over his stout legs, and holding a plume and a dagger,
sill.
sill. "Listen!" cried he, standing there and addressing those in the
silver and china, moving tables, and unfolding damask table linen, he
silver plate, two Turkish pistols and a saber--a present from his
silver ruble were fetched and they all played games together.
similar in that they had both lived and both died and in the love he
similar moan of surprise and horror ran through the crowd. "O Lord!"
similar shakos was a Russian hussar. He was being held by the arms and
similar state of perplexity with regard to every question concerning his
similar to his own is perishing before his eyes. But when it is a
similar to that which female Magdalenes have, based on the same hope of
simple and natural. "And she is such a grande dame, so kind, and
simple and obvious law would suffice and we should have finished our
simple and solemn mystery of death that had been accomplished in their
simple fellow."
simple note with an order from Kutuzov, and received at night, breaking
simple ones. My whole idea is that if vicious people are united and
simple speech, mechanical to them but to her so full of deep meaning,
simple thought occurred to him: "What does it matter to me or to Bitski
simple, while what they proposed was so complicated and clever, that
simple," she thought as she got into her carriage.
simple. The immense house on the old stone foundations was of wood,
simplest and most familiar. As a general on duty on Kutuzov's staff,
simplest and most ordinary of men, and said the simplest and most
simplicity.
simply Theodore Vasilyevich my course of action would have been quite
simply and cordially. The whole family, whom he had formerly judged
simply dressed hair (two immense plaits twice round her lovely head like
simply dull. Besides, I was very busy."
simply enjoyed their pleasure and tried to fit in with it.
simply looking at him.
simply to get somewhere. "We shall get somewhere or other!" And they did
simply to open your heart to someone--not now, but when your mind is
simply to petition the Emperor for pardon. They say great rewards will
simply, and raising his eyebrows with an absent-minded smile conveyed
simply, and truly carrying out the great work which saved Russia. But
simultaneously attacked and outflanked by superior French forces under
simultaneously from the front.
simultaneously. The gate was again hidden by smoke.
sin, for you acted without evil intention. If now you married again
since Karataev had begun to grow weaker it had cost him an effort to
since gained him the reputation of being a wizard, and that the power of
since he himself was so firmly convinced that it was good, indeed
since his return that they had talked alone and about their love.
since our misfortune..." she began, but could not go on.
since the beginning of the war.
since the death of Joseph Bazdeev was now even gloomier.
since the nursing mothers were no longer sent to work on his land, they
since the time when he thought his son had been killed, he did not think
since we acted together at the Rumyantsovs' theatricals. I expect he has
since, and all looked with curiosity at a fiancee who was making one of
sincere that he could not but listen.
sincerely believed it to be, and that everyone else was to blame.
sincerely delighted with Natasha and wished to give her a good time.
sincerity, and with the naive and firm conviction women have that dress
sinfulness?" He paused again. "Who art thou? Thou dreamest that thou art
sing. As soon as she began to laugh, or tried to sing by herself, tears
sing."
singers.
singing some incoherent song, and approached the officers.
singing songs...."
singing the air the actress was singing, then she wished to touch with
singing the service for the twentieth time that day, began lazily and
singing, and solemnly and jerkily flourished above their heads his white
single day of that time! But it was gone forever. Her presentiment at
single historic personage.
single muscle of the count's face stirred. Once more Pierre looked
sink over his plate. "He is old and feeble, and I dare to condemn
sinking heart, wretched as she always was now when she found herself
sinking heart--watching the bridge and the hussars in the bright evening
sins to answer for without that and that is why he has been banished.
sins, and she prayed to God to forgive them all, and her too, and to
sire, because we are not on parade and not on the Empress' Field," said
sire, mon cousin, prince d'Eckmuhl, roi de Naples, and so on. But these
sister had hung round his neck with such emotion and reverence, "it
sister with the mole.
sister's room his wife was already awake and her merry voice, hurrying
sister's, but while in her case everything was lit up by a joyous,
sister, Catiche, with a vicious and determined look steadily fixed on
sister--that there is no reason for them not to like me..."
sister-in-law as soon as the Rostovs arrived and to try to accustom the
sister-in-law's dress.
sister. "Why isn't she dull and ashamed?"
sisters are not heiresses! If you don't believe me, then believe
sit down by me." But Natasha stayed by her mother and glanced round as
sit down, but fell. The other, a short sturdy soldier with a shawl
sitting and dropped onto it, covering his face with his hand. Pierre
sitting at the table in a Persian dressing gown, writing. Another,
sitting at the table on which a plan was spread out.
sitting beside the soldier, wagging its tail.
sitting by her sister at the tea table, and reluctantly, without looking
sitting close to Nicholas who was copying out some verses for her, the
sitting down beside him she began to speak about his father; but he
sitting down, began at once, irritably (as if Boris were to blame
sitting down. "A person of very high standing in our Brotherhood has
sitting in a conspicuous place and talking to him like a grown-up lady.
sitting motionless before the glass, looking at her face, and saw in the
sitting on the sofa, but through the big windows the silvery light of
sitting on them. Some were walking about the rooms in hospital dressing
sitting room, some in the library.
sitting room.
sitting up in bed and speaking softly.
sitting.
sitting. The curtains were drawn, and a single candle was burning on the
situated as she was, while still wearing deep mourning, such matchmaking
situated," said Prince Andrew.
situation did not grow more serious but on the contrary became even
situation it occurred to him that it was he who was destined to lead it
situation of Moscow, and military questions generally. Though they had
situation to be intolerable and went to have an explanation with his
situation, and the expression on his face was invariably reflected on
situation. He walked along the meadow, dragging his feet, rustling the
six miles away, or whether they were near by in that sea of mist, no one
six thousand. We have ten thousand carts, but we need other things as
sixteen," said Dolokhov with cold irony, "but it's time for you to drop
sixteen.
sixty-three hands. He asked one, 'From whom did you get it?' 'From
skill. The large group, in which were Prince Vasili and the generals,
skill?" he concluded.
skillful tactics and aims of Napoleon and his army from the time it
skillfully changed the subject. He asked him to tell them how and where
skillfully made watch, dares to say that, as he does not understand
skin, please think of me.... Perhaps I may prove useful to your Serene
skirt.
skittish between the shafts--he dressed up in clothes as variegated
skittles," said he in conclusion.
sky hung the full moon. Forests and fields beyond the camp, unseen
sky presented itself to his eyes. Almost in the center of it, above the
sky with clouds that had risen and were floating still higher, and
sky. A red glow as of a conflagration spread above the horizon from the
sky. There was no wind, and the men choked in that motionless
slackened, she felt her tears dry up and her sobs ceased. She suddenly
slackness which had shown itself even in his eyes was now replaced by an
slain reckoned up, new officers appointed to replace those who had been
slamming down the pack of cards, put it aside and began rapidly adding
slanting lines that filled the air like the cobwebs that float about in
slaughter one another, triumph and are plunged in despair, and for some
slaughter one another; all the faces expressed hesitation, and the
slaughter which could be of no avail either to the French or the
slaughtered.
slave,' as you call yourself! But how do you do? I see I have frightened
sleek cavalry passed, before a carriage drawn by six gray horses rattled
sleep and several times went to the door and listened, wishing to enter
sleep beside his companions.
sleep is more important than anything," whispered Princess Mary with a
sleep? Only look how glorious it is! Ah, how glorious! Do wake up,
sleepiness that kept coming over him. An enormous space, with our army's
sleeping at all, she watched him and, terrible to say, often watched
sleeping before a battle."
sleeping castle. The same old stateliness, the same cleanliness, the
sleepless activity after his previous apathy, could not bring herself to
sleepless nights he did just what he reproached those younger generals
sleepless nights or the hardest tasks had he shown the least fatigue,
sleepy. The punch was finished and there was still nothing to do. He
sleeve and, saying that she wanted to have a talk with him, led him to
sleeve of his dressing gown. "Looking for Vasili Dmitrich Denisov? My
sleeves and puffing heavily.
sleeves of his fur cloak threw it on and got into his sleigh.
sleeves still higher. Pierre approached, looking at her in a childlike
sleeves with her usual threatening gesture and glancing sternly round,
sleeves!" said Anna Mikhaylovna, pointing to Nicholas as he went out.
sleeves, those hands which he loved and hated, held him in their power.
sleigh.
slender supple figure and felt her stirring so close to him and smiling
slender, delicate arm, high above the elbow on that part that is covered
slight noise at the door to attract his attention, but Pierre did not
slight smile he began to examine his nails.
slight smile. He fancied he saw something pathetically innocent in that
slightest decent pretext, such pretexts did not always occur. Their
slightest tone of which was familiar to his wife. As she listened to it
slightly bowed his head. The Emperor re-entered the ballroom and
slightly bruised. On the basis of these necessarily untrustworthy
slightly contemptuous smile, he said: "Yes, there are many stories now
slightly harmful pills in the little gilt box had to be administered?
slightly open, as if to say, "Yes, yes, I am putting my purse in my
slightly puckered his lips when Anisya Fedorovna entered. On the tray
slip and spoke French should pay fines to the Committee of Voluntary
slipped a gold coin into his hand and always returned to the patient
slipped behind the others.
slippery, and sodden, like the ground and the fallen leaves that strewed
slipping on her bodice, settled herself beside him.
slipping one little foot against the other, pushed off her slippers and
slipping past him into the Bazaar passage. "Stop, you rascals!"
slope by the pond, where no one could see her. She did not know how
slowly and steadily without hurry. At daybreak, however, those nearing
slowly moved, another was set in motion, and a third, and wheels began
slowly, not taking his eyes off his wife.
smacked his lips.
small bells, their runners squeaking and whistling over the frozen snow,
small but distinctly visible enemy column was moving down the hill,
small chiffonier and a dressing table. You know how dear Vera wanted a
small debts. He could see no way out of this situation. The idea of
small detachments defeat larger ones, obscurely admits the existence
small old man, with powdered wig, small withered hands, and bushy gray
small reception, and just see how badly I am dressed." And she spread
small talk, instead of turning on the weather and mutual acquaintances,
small top boots. And Natasha felt that this costume, the very one she
small trap straight to a spot reserved for him.
small, beardless old man who looked like a footman. That old man
small, insignificant creature compared with what was passing now between
smaller number a less direct share, in the collective action for which
smaller unit as the subject of observation--as criticism has every
smallest detail for the purpose they had to fulfill, than Napoleon and
smallest speck for the image of a man or of a coffin, she saw nothing.
smart and well kept.
smartly dressed cavalrymen on good horses, passing the prisoners at a
smash something. Pushing away the footmen he tugged at the frame, but
smashed, and no supports at all."
smashed, and the shouting grew louder. They drank to Bekleshev,
smeared with something!"
smeared with soot for fun nor these women hurrying away nor the burned
smell of stable yards, delightful to Pierre at that moment. He could see
smile and said: "Poor fellows, they don't know that I am leaving them
smile and the freedom of Pierre's remarks. Only Count Rostov was pleased
smile and with tears in her eyes, occasionally shaking her head. She
smile at the young pilgrim.
smile of his which seemed to say, "Ah! This is what I like!"
smile of kindliness puckered the soldier's lips as he put these
smile on his lips and face, but his eyes were dull and lifeless and in
smile on his lips change.
smile on his lips, was evidently preparing to make fun of anything that
smile on his lips.
smile on his lips. "What a pity I've missed Uncle! What a nice old
smile that never left his face. Jauntily shifting the position of his
smile that usually brightened her face. Pierre knew that everyone was
smile under which he wished to hide his embarrassment, "to be able to
smile was unlike the half-smile of other people. When he smiled,
smile what I had learned and gained in the Prussian and Scottish lodges.
smile which caused Princess Mary to turn pale. "He's worrying very much
smile, "as it is not convenient in the presence of...?" He pointed to
smile, "so she won't come down. It is natural in her state."
smile, "we heard that you have family troubles and that the countess,
smile, ambling lightly up to the count's niece. "I have come, and am at
smile, and Helene smiled too.
smile, and engaged the smiling Julie in a confidential conversation
smile, as if flattered at being made the subject of Zherkov's joke, and
smile, as though she too knew that Count Rostov deserved this censure,
smile, bowed respectfully. In spite of her exceptional stoutness, which
smile, her traveling hood, and a stray lock of her hair... and there
smile, said to him:
smile," says Thiers. After riding a few paces in silence, Napoleon
smile.
smile.
smile.
smile.
smile.
smile.
smile.
smile: "I meant merely to say what I said."
smiled again and clutched Prince Vasili's arm more tightly.
smiled and looked at her mother. "Not to marry, but just so," she added.
smiled and said he could not judge of the advantage or disadvantage of
smiled at him unnaturally. He did not ask about the regiment, nor about
smiled at him with the egotism of joy.
smiled at me yesterday and asked me to come again, and I love her, and
smiled ironically.) "But even if he also took up a position in the
smiled seriously at the merry fellow, while the merry fellow struck a
smiled, and rested his foot against the orchestra screen.
smiled, and with dimples in her rosy cheeks followed him into the room.
smiled.
smiles.
smiling face, moved after Willarski with uncertain, timid steps.
smiling happily.
smiling joyfully; and snatching the shawl from the footman, whom he
smiling over the fan.
smiling radiantly and applauding the players. The young people had
smiling shyly in his uncomfortable position, evidently wishing to adopt
smiling tenderly.
smiling, handsome face and moist eyes. Nesvitski could hardly keep from
smiling, plumped down on the floor. The countess was crying.
smiling.
smiling. "Though she's a lady, she's very fond of hunting."
smiling. Vera was playing chess with Shinshin in the drawing room. The
smilingly raising a finger at him, she left the room.
smilingly talking to a partner on his arm and looked at Natasha as one
smoke but not moving back from the fire. "And you, Jackdaw, go and fetch
smoke of the campfires the day before; but despite the incessant firing
smoke of the campfires, and all that was around him changed and seemed
smoke saw ranks of men in uniforms of a color unfamiliar to him. They
smoke spasmodically and screwing up his eyes. This was an old bachelor,
smoke their pipes, or to strike a light, and they tried to prevent their
smoke was thickest.
smoke, and an officer catching sight of Bagration rushed shouting after
smoke. The excited faces of the soldiers were blackened with it. Some
smoke.'"
smoking a pipe, and little one-armed Tushin still listened, shaking his
smoldering wick.
smooth again.
smooth as a sign that the conversation was at an end.
smooth, ingratiating voice.
smooth--felt that no small matter was happening, but an important and
smoothing his hair wet with perspiration with his plump hand, "wasn't I
smoothing out the end of her sash while she looked at a corner of the
smoothly brushed forward over his temples, with expressionless face was
snatched it from his hand and began reading it. Pierre looked at
snatching at food. And the consciousness that the insult was not yet
snatching away the pistol and throwing it down, ran up to the officer
snow a purple-black and starry sky showed itself and the frost grew
snow and on the path. This path led to the barn. The log walls of the
snow, greedily bit at it, again raised his head, adjusted himself, drew
snow.
snub-nosed face with its high cheekbones, and baring his white teeth,
snuffbox to his nose. "You are fond of travel, and in three days you
snuffbox while trying to hear what was being said at the other table.
snuffbox. Nastasya Ivanovna dismounted to pick it up. The count and
so I hold my peace. An ax will be useful, a hunting spear not bad, but a
so I kept silent; was not that best, Count?... 'Hey, are you dumb?' he
so again and again, and that will be the end of it. My dear, there's
so agitated society--abolishing court ranks and introducing
so all roads lead to Moscow: there were many roads, and "among them the
so anymore!" By evening this thought had ripened in every soul. At any
so as not to be in her way.
so as not to touch the quilt, followed her suggestion and pressed his
so as to be less exposed to fire. After this from amid the ranks of
so before one can know, it is necessary to believe and to perfect one's
so calmly and quietly and wait so long and so patiently?" thought she,
so close to him that his shortsighted eyes could not but perceive the
so commonplace, that all their words and feelings seemed an insult to
so consistently led him by an uninterrupted series of successes to the
so create an impression that the old fellow was not much good and that
so difficult to utter: "I love you." "It all comes from that! Even then
so doing we should destroy the very conception of man in the case we are
so easily extract a good profit for themselves from a dinner costing
so evident) that this was the only way an army of eight hundred thousand
so far forget herself! Perhaps I might have done the same!..." thought
so far from home that he accepted "Uncle's" offer that the hunting party
so far was not guilty of anything, he added, taking Pierre's hand in a
so fond of travel, to accompany him on his ride, he went out of the tent
so for a while he rose, and, looking about him with frightened eyes,
so great that she felt she should never live till that blessed Sunday.
so had hastened to throw some sharpshooters into the wood.
so happy."
so he drew himself up and looked around him merrily; then it seemed to
so he simply held out his bristly cheek (as yet unshaven) and, regarding
so he went from one group to another. Some of the most important old men
so highly were still more so. Not only could he no longer think the
so improperly at Anna Pavlovna's reception.
so insistently that everyone again believed it had been necessary to do
so it is essential to explain what is meant by power.
so it seemed to Rostov. He put his horse to a trot to avoid seeing all
so it was quite likely he might be in command of a regiment in a couple
so jaded that at a meeting of the huntsmen it was decided to give them
so kann man gewiss nicht den Verlust der Privat-Personen in Achtung
so kind to her. Natasha brightened up and felt almost in love with
so long been deprived. And he suddenly turned from the cares of army
so many stars that one did not wish to look up at the sky and the real
so many years Moravians in shaggy caps and blue jackets had peacefully
so morose and irritable.
so much transcend the general interests that they always prevent the
so much, and was so good-natured, that everybody took advantage of him
so natural that even the Russian marauders moved in that direction, and
so near him than the wine of her charm rose to his head, and he
so near to you... and to all your family that I thought you would not
so on Evstafey's representation Pierre had to put off his departure till
so on mentioned in medical books, but a disease consisting of one of the
so on, the farther movement of the fleeing French, and of the Russians
so on. But if the aim of the battle was what actually resulted and what
so on. People accustomed to think in that way forget, or do not know,
so on. Then a place was assigned to Pierre, he was shown the signs of
so out of keeping was it with the chill darkness and closeness of the
so rapid that they could hardly be his mother's.
so said the youths and maidens themselves as they danced till they were
so sensibly employed the best and simplest means to attain his end was
so she could not guess his words.
so smooth and regular.
so softly that the Rhetor did not hear him and asked him what he was
so strange that one could not take it in. But then the expression of
so strongly agitated, Pierre never spoke to Natasha of his feelings;
so terrible to the soldiers, despite his furious purple countenance
so that he too may benefit. After dinner I fell asleep and as I was
so that his mouth, the most striking feature of his face, was clearly
so that it appears to confirm what they desire, and he knew how readily
so that she understood that he had long been waiting for her to come. He
so that the water splashed in the air, and, having disappeared for an
so that they had to go round by the ford, and he sent huntsmen to ride
so that you may not suffer want! And if you have been told that I
so that, flushed and happy, and passing on her superfluous partners to
so the conception of the action of a man subject solely to the law of
so the countess had been sent for. Pierre saw the distracted count, and
so the worse the condition it was in, the better pleased the commander
so to me? What have I done to you? You are going to the war and have no
so truly discern the importance of the people's view of the events that
so universal historians will be valuable only when they can reply to
so widely from a private.
so, Rostov, with his cavalryman's eye, could not help noticing that
so, and Boris, even had he wished to, could not have done so on the
so, and that they must stop this and the carts must be got ready."
so, then..."
so-and-so.' He went to the next one. 'From whom did you get it?' and so
so-called "philosophical" historians believe, then to determine which
so-called flank march across the Krasnaya Pakhra River. They ascribe the
so. I like being alone.... Father likes her very much. She and Michael
so. It appears so to us because we see only the general historic
so. Nicholas was in such good spirits that this merely amused him.
so; but I warn you that if you dare to play the fool in my presence, I
so?"
sob aloud.
sobbed outright like a child and kept repeating:
sobbing like a child. The door opened. The doctor with his shirt sleeves
sobbing, he asked her and his absent son to forgive him for having
sobbing, with tears that relieved her soul. She now saw his face before
sobs in her throat. Hard as she had tried to prepare herself, and now
sobs of a woman, and the hoarse angry shouting of Ferapontov. The cook
sobs.
sobs. The count was lighting his pipe and did not notice his son's
society and to the whole world.
society be also my husband? How did this happen?" She wished to express
society by his agility. His particularly free manner of dancing even
society had entered the simple feeling of the attraction of a healthy
society had lost her former influential connections. She had now come to
society mostly as weak and insignificant men. Under the Masonic aprons
society of her relatives--Countess Mary, and her brother, her mother,
society with an affectation of doing so against his will. The races, the
society world welcomed him gladly, because he was rich, distinguished, a
society, and so her position now is not a rosy one. We should enter into
society, but his little circle--though not much talked about in
society, more especially of the feminine society, in which I have had
society.
society. All who had known Natasha before her marriage wondered at the
society. Beside him stood a lad of nineteen, also a wounded officer of
society. He believed this so firmly that others, looking at him, were
society."
socket. "Yes, he has a right to speak so calmly of those men's death,"
sofa, cleaning himself with his tongue and teeth. Leading from the study
sofa, her head hidden in her hands, and she did not stir. She was in
soft mud. Rostov joined them. In the middle of the game, the officers
soft snowbanks that bordered both sides of the path. The prince went
soft whispering voice incessantly and rhythmically repeating
soft, confidential voice, as though afraid of being overheard.
soften?... What a happy thing that he saw you again," he added, suddenly
softened but agitated expression on his face. He came up the stairs and
softened their disposition but had on the contrary strengthened in
softened, happy, timid look she watched the boy she loved in the arms
softly over the carpet and went out into the waiting room.
softly with a hissing chuckle, and Speranski in a high-pitched staccato
soil and not to retreat. The enormous Drissa camp was formed on Pfuel's
soil of Russia," said Kutuzov crossing himself, and he suddenly sobbed
soiree.
soirees as before--such as she alone had the gift of arranging--at which
soldier after camp life. Despite his rapid journey and sleepless night,
soldier and not to think of the general trend of affairs, but only of
soldier and the gay and smartly marching men. In the second file
soldier at the front, gave the command "Attention!" and rode up to the
soldier away was squatting by the fire, engaged in roasting a piece
soldier in the rank, stepped briskly forward.
soldier of forty--looked sternly at the singers and screwed up his eyes.
soldier shouted to him. "They'd kill you there!"
soldier three gold pieces.
soldier was doing to her.
soldier was driving, and a woman enveloped in shawls sat behind the
soldier while conducting service, and a French official reported of
soldier with a wagon, who was pressing onto the infantrymen who were
soldier without connections and intrigues, and to one who was associated
soldier's cap, and bast shoes--was round. His head was quite round,
soldier's mind that the relative strength of the armies had changed and
soldier, mimicking the general who had ridden away. "I'd shoot them, the
soldier, or a gun. Pierre, who had not noticed these sounds before,
soldier, who had pretended to suffer from colic, had escaped. Pierre saw
soldier. "I'll teach you to push on!... Back!"
soldier. "Turn back with your slut!"
soldier. I come home on leave and I'll tell you how it was, I look and
soldier. They called him "little falcon" or "Platosha," chaffed him
soldiers and officers greeted him gaily, grew more cheerful in his
soldiers and officers of various regiments, they saw on their left some
soldiers as if threatening to punish them. Cadet Mironov ducked every
soldiers fell.
soldiers fled--without knowing whither, each concerned only to make his
soldiers forming the picket line, like showmen exhibiting a curiosity,
soldiers had biscuits dealt out to them freely, and they even shared
soldiers had enjoyed, and the impatience to do what they had been
soldiers had kindled on the road. Rostov, too, dragged himself to the
soldiers handed up the charges, turned, loaded, and did their business
soldiers held him while two others were flourishing their switches and
soldiers lifted the canteen lids to their lips with reverential faces,
soldiers of his army whether they had taken part in the battle or not,
soldiers of the escort had raised their muskets, fired, and run
soldiers of the third squadron tossed him too, and shouted "hurrah!"
soldiers ran toward the cart from different sides: some beat the
soldiers stopped him.
soldiers to change into their greatcoats. The company commanders ran off
soldiers used to tell of an evening (they were always the same), but
soldiers were doing something on both sides of it and in the meadow,
soldiers were in marching kit with knapsacks and shakos that had metal
soldiers who were seizing the artillery horses and turning the guns
soldiers would violate my father's newly dug grave to steal his crosses
soldiers' bonfires and with his long gray mustache, his white chest
soldiers, "and what a lot of them there are!"
soldiers, and carried him to the hut. Ramballe put his arms around their
soldiers, and militiamen began running forward along the road.
soldiers, evidently suffering, shouted gruffly and angrily at Pierre to
soldiers, having brought some firewood, settled down near him and began
soldiers, munching biscuit and beating a tattoo with their feet to
soldiers, quite forgetting that his inn was at the bottom of the hill
soldiers, straining their lungs, shouted "Hurrah!"
soldiers, taking advantage of the stoppage and congestion, turned back
soldiers, was now occupied by the marshal, the Duke of Eckmuhl (Davout).
soldiers, who could not understand him. Ramballe refused food and
soldiers, who moved that they might hear better what he was going to
soldiers--ill-shod, insufficiently clad, and half starved--who within a
soldiers.
soldiers. Evidently for them "the marshal" represented a very high and
soldiers. The company marched on gaily. The soldiers' voices could be
sole aim was the children's moral welfare delighted him. Had Nicholas
sole will determine the direction of humanity's movement; but man acts
solemn affair. Every general and every soldier was conscious of his own
solemn and important air than formerly. He was so sure that he really
solemn interest and silent approval. The aunt spoke to each of them in
solemn voice to recite the words of the prayer...
solicitor) "and he says the same."
solidity and strength hereditary in his family. A beard and mustache
solitude--she did not know whether she liked it or not, she even thought
solution of the problem, but never reach it. Only when we have admitted
solution of the question, and historic investigation abundantly confirms
solve so delicate a question, and then I have noticed that the less
some Mary Viktorovna or other. At the center of the table, Prince Vasili
some approaching achievement, and some in course of disintegration. He
some bags of flour himself and throwing them into the street.
some by official duties, some by self-interest--house owners, clergy,
some carriages waiting, and as soon as Pierre stepped out of the gate
some concessions. Continuing to represent the liberation of the serfs as
some dried bread with her, had spent two days in the catacombs with the
some freak, as he seemed much upset by the Rostovs' visit.
some garments from under them.
some great change had come over him that day. He was silent all through
some horsecloths, though he had told him the Russians were there. And at
some incomprehensible, mysterious power continued to control them, and
some indefinite order.
some kind of work and again played an active part in life. He did not
some men who were holding him by the arm. He also saw something else
some not. This whole mass droned and jostled in confusion under the
some of our infantry were seen to move forward, words of approval
some of the generals, and, recognizing the former commander of Rostov's
some of the topics at first lightly touched on: their past life, plans
some old and evidently precious memory of his "Christian" life, as he
some other people ran in and began dragging away the maiden who had been
some painted cardboard representing trees, and at the back was a cloth
some particular incident. So now the courtiers' pleasure was based as
some places up to the road itself though in others a mile or more back
some prank from her and did not wish to obey her; but she resolutely
some question--"Most likely he is asking at what o'clock they started,"
some reason everyone called "The King of Rome."
some seven hundred miles.
some song or other. They were singing discordantly, arduously, and with
some symptoms of her father's irritability. However often she told
some tea?" he added.
some thirty paces from Kutuzov, talking to Boris.
some thought and hastened to utter it. The old magnates, whom Pierre
some time quite uselessly.
some time to get the wedding ring off his fat finger. When that had been
some time, listening to what was being said, and evidently found nothing
some trees on the right and saw a group of girls running to cross
some twenty men of his suite. These gentlemen talked among themselves
some undefined force called an idea--history's essential question still
some understanding. He replied: 'From no one; I made it up myself.'
some unseen but evidently important task. They all gazed with the same
some victim and fight and smother it, and the victim, enfeebled or
some voice was repeating. "We must harness, it is time to harness...."
some way and knowing that this was impossible was ready to cry. The Tsar
some wine asked for) that there were no more charges.
some wood!" said he to another soldier.
some wooded hills were discernible, and it was there the enemy probably
some words he had overheard), his adventures in Moscow, his captivity,
some wounded here--officers. Will you let them come? They have nowhere
somebody to Denisov's detachment, Petya begged so piteously to be sent
somebody was sent for a traveling case, and the countess leaned out
somebody. Kutuzov merely shrugged his shoulders when one after
somehow grown so clean, smooth, and fresh--as if he had just come out of
someone and all at once that person vanishes there, into nowhere, and
someone came in.
someone cried.
someone has wronged you, forget it and forgive! We have no right to
someone inquires: by what force did Napoleon do this?--that is, wants
someone outside himself had spoken them, though the impressions of that
someone there not of the conventional society stamp. And such was
someone to fire at.
someone unseen. "Mr. Pitt, as a traitor to the nation and to the rights
someone was uttering or that he himself was formulating.
someone's eye.
someone's orderly passed through the gateway, splashing through the mud,
someone, and the torturing pain in his abdomen caused Prince Andrew to
someone. And suddenly thoughts and feelings again swam to the surface of
something I cannot inflict on others," said Prince Andrew, growing more
something about Vitebsk. Now I'll read it."
something and how she flushed as she replied.
something as she rapidly crossed herself. Seeing her mother she jumped
something as she whispered:
something big, that splashed into the water.
something black, now little lights seemed to glimmer where the enemy
something cracked, shouts were heard, and the troyka flew along the
something detrimental to the children's interests, such as the building
something disconcerting to himself.
something dreadful and alien to him, for, after the previous night's
something else--in the expression of face and tone of voice of those who
something exceptional of them," said the visitor.
something extraordinary and unexpected, and as if the very fact that it
something for itself--he submissively fulfilled the cruel, sad, gloomy,
something for them to eat and drink before the journey, and went into
something from one to another, and a page--the same one Rostov had seen
something gripped her throat, and regardless of manners she stared
something had to be decided, and these conversations around him which
something happened to induce her to sing, a practice she had quite
something important which he had long awaited was drawing near, he
something improper. Anatole smiled as though to encourage her.
something loosened Pierre's tongue. Speaking thickly and with a faraway
something may happen to me such as happened to Plutarch's men, and I
something more which he had perhaps left untold. Pierre in shamefaced
something new and enchanted. Well, whatever it may be..." And shouting
something new and stern showed round the mouth.
something new, and the quiet rapture Karataev evidently felt as he told
something not quite right about this intended marriage.
something on the candlestick.
something on which to vent his rage.
something red--but was firmly convinced that she had then seen and said
something should be done, which is felt by those who are suffering. They
something striking and took part in a conversation only when that was
something stronger and more important than his own will--the inevitable
something terrible.
something that had been forgotten, and even after that he would again
something they spoke of would awaken memories distressing to her. She
something to a companion. Dolokhov got up and called to the soldier who
something to drink?"
something to eat a while ago. He was awfully hungry!"
something to eat."
something to him in French in an undertone and then went up to a small
something to say, the effect is bad. But Anatole was dumb, swung his
something told her it was Kuragin. She turned and their eyes met.
something touching and solemn out of this address to his comrades. He
something unnatural, and as it seemed to him dishonorable, in this
something unusual, something they would have to accept as the regular
something very important--more important than anything he had ever done
something was being torn inside her and she were dying. But the pain
something was lying, stood a tallow candle with a long, thick, and
something was still stretching out, and the candle with its red halo
something white. Pierre went nearer and saw that the lamp stood on a
something with an expression of mingled joy and sorrow.
something with her slender nervous fingers and gazing intently and
something, but Napoleon always interrupted him. To the alleged insanity
something, but when Pierre entered he stopped speaking and went out.
something, pointing to his mouth. The soldiers surrounded the Frenchmen,
something, suddenly blushed and shouted in a squeaky voice:
something.
something. All I care about is to enjoy seeing the chase, is it not so,
something. He now experienced a glad consciousness that everything that
something."
something... With what? Pierre could not say, and he did not try to
something..." said Natasha and pausing added, "something fine?"
sometimes Flabby. Its lack of a master, a name, or even of a breed or
sometimes accept writers and ladies as forces producing events--again
sometimes destroyed it, and sometimes merged with it.
sometimes devised other words they might have spoken.
sometimes felt as if he was vanishing and that neither he nor she
sometimes four abreast. From all sides, behind and before, as far as ear
sometimes in Russian and sometimes in very bad but self-confident
sometimes in a whirl. Well, mon cher, what are you doing personally?"
sometimes involuntarily fixed on him. She knew that her going in during
sometimes keeping well back in them and sometimes coming to the very
sometimes laughed. She hardly ever left the house and of those who came
sometimes like a chip of wood whirling in the river, an hussar on foot,
sometimes like a log floating down the river, an officers' or company's
sometimes running to quite other places than those they were ordered to
sometimes spend a whole night at his writing table. He worked well
sometimes stopping short, gesticulating, and lisping: "the position
sometimes the thought occurred to her that she was repulsive to him, but
sometimes, you know. I have brought some with me, here they are"--and he
somewhat older. Princess Mary was still the same timid, plain maiden
somewhere about something and apparently finding pleasure in it--then
somewhere beyond them. The hussars did not look round, but at the sound
somewhere under her heart would ever cry, suck her breast, and begin to
somewhere where everything was stupid and confused. A week later he
somewhere with the army and had not sent a word since his last letter,
somewhere?" passed through his mind. But just at moments when such
son Anatole, whom they wish to reform by marrying him to someone rich
son has sacrificed himself for his mother," as people were saying.
son made no rejoinder, but it was evident that whatever arguments were
son noticed that an expression of profound sorrow suddenly clouded his
son of Nicholas Bolkonski, I shall be ashamed!"
son of Nun. To the defenders of the laws of Copernicus and Newton, to
son of a dishonest father, the misconduct of a woman who had fallen
son! Satisfied, are you? That's all you wanted! Satisfied?... It hurts
son's arrival: he gave orders to admit him to his apartments while
son's going, Marya Dmitrievna? My son is going."
son's having received a decoration, so he sent that printed army order
son's portrait grew still louder. Napoleon frowned.
son, but felt that to her he was a stranger and a terrifying man. "I am
son, sat at the table writing. He glanced round.
son, who was still in the care of nurses. The other half he spent in
son.
son.
son.
son. In some places she raised her voice, in others she whispered,
son; Nicholas, the undergraduate, the count's eldest son; Sonya, the
songs to fascinate her husband would have seemed as strange as to adorn
sonorous, musical, and aristocratic baritone voice, pleasantly
sons and saying: 'I will perish with them but we will not be shaken!'
sons and thieves and wobbahs...."
sont de bons enfants. Que diable! Voyons! Ne nous fachons pas, mon
soon as he came across a former acquaintance or anyone from the
soon as possible.
soon as revolutions, conquests, or civil wars occur--that is, as soon as
soon as she saw him.
soon as the conversation concerned himself he would begin to talk
soon, but as it was still early the hunt went farther. At midday
soon.
sooner or later he would have to re-enter that whirlpool of life, with
sooner or later he would step across it, but an incomprehensible terror
soothing irony replied: "What a fool I am to ask that! What did happen
sore which, coming after all my previous journeys, quite prevents my
sores immediately turned away and went on with what he was doing.
sorrow arose from the lessons she gave her six year-old nephew. To her
sorrow, that all the old misunderstandings should sink into nothing but
sorrowful, and all-forgiving expression on her face, stood by the door
sorrowful, and at variance with his parents, but, as it seemed to him,
sorry for her that there was no room in his soul for reproach.
sorry for the Emperor that he entrusts our fine army to such as he.
sorry that she was being wasted all this time and of no use to
sorry the prince is still ailing," and after a few more commonplace
sorry to leave the regiment. If I decline the honor of being with you,
sort of thing."
sort you want!"
sorting the deceased's books and papers, only in search of rest from
sorts of things, consider it necessary to do everything in a mean and
sorts, and Russian and Austrian soldiers of all arms, some wounded and
sought a battle and that his marshals advised him to stop at Smolensk,
sought alliances with the Germans and thrust ourselves into European
sought in himself either remorse for having angered his father or regret
soul and his face.
soul there is in Dolokhov, you should see him with his mother. What a
soul were intent on serving that husband and family, she could not
soul, and for that very reason had understood and assimilated the one
soul, her whole being, into the subject that absorbed her, the larger
soul--that very soul of hers which seemed to be fettered by her body--it
soul. And suddenly that father whom she had judged would look for his
soul. He paced through the ballroom, waited till everyone had come, and
soul. It was explained to her that this was la grace.
soul. Never will that moment return for him or for me when he might have
soul: courage, generosity, morality, love of mankind, and especially
souls of the worshipers. The gates of the sanctuary screen were closed,
souls!..."
sound as of a frightful explosion struck his ear, and at the same moment
sound of firing on the right as an indication that the action had begun.
sound of his opponent's voice.
sound of music, and they all began singing. But suddenly a storm
sound of officers' voices in eager conversation.
sound of steel on whetstone. He climbed onto the wagon and sat on its
sound of the hoofs of the approaching cavalcade, but because as he drew
sound of the larger pack, eagerly giving tongue, began to die away in
sound of their hurried footsteps going to the back porch. Natasha got
sound of these voices, the inattentive way Kozlovski looked at him, the
sound of wheels and footsteps heard by the outposts during the night,
sound, like the yelp of a dog, with which Denisov turned away, walked to
sound, yellowish teeth.
sounded far away. Here everyone clearly saw and said that the battle
sounded louder and calmer, the stretchers disappeared from sight.
sounded much like irony. But Kutuzov went on blandly smiling with the
sounding, even the connoisseurs said nothing, but only delighted in
sounds made his spirits rise, but at the same time he was afraid that
sounds of canister shot, one after another. The shot rattled against
sounds of falling drops and the munching of the horses near by, could be
sounds very fast: "Kari, mala, tafa, safi, muter, Kaska," he said,
sounds, rolling her eyes.
sounds. He heard footsteps in the darkness and a black figure appeared.
source of self-consciousness it would be subject to reasoning and
source that Prince Vasili has sent his son to Moscow to get him married
sov'weign the Empewah in other ways. Have we fo'gotten the waising of
sovereigns of Europe and particularly with our own, the grandson of the
space as possible, but others striving to do the same compressed it,
space there was, on the one side, a demonstration made by the Russians
space, seemed suddenly--like an arrow piercing the earth--to remain
spadefuls of red clay were continually being thrown up from behind the
sparkling mead, apples, nuts (raw and roasted), and nut-and-honey
speak about it, but as you ask me I will give you my frank opinion. If
speak and act apart from her own will. From the time Rostov entered, her
speak and to attract their attention, he got up, but at that moment his
speak of Anatole, your youngest. I don't like him," she added in a tone
speak of him to the Emperor, but above all from a certain desperation
speak of his love and therefore meant to be tender, he began speaking
speak of it. Natasha shared this as she did all his feelings, which she
speak so to me. Because Sonya is poor I must not love her," he thought,
speak the whole truth.
speak to him.
speak with equal power in the human soul: one very reasonably tells a
speak, so now she could not believe that that little creature could be
speak--he turned back, rapidly mounted the stairs again with the doctor
speak. He spoke slowly, with assurance that he would be listened to, and
speak. They all looked at him.
speaker, interrupted him. Evidently accustomed to managing debates and
speaker.
speaking French. He opened his eyes. Above him again was the same lofty
speaking Russian, did not understand what was being said to him and
speaking as some third, collective, male person. "Pretty, a good voice,
speaking of commands that are the expression of the will of men acting
speaking playfully of a matter that evidently distressed him.
speaking rapidly just as the prince did, and he climbed into the trap.
speaking to an Austrian general. Prince Andrew, who was a little behind
speaking to him about Lise as if she were alive--he had forgotten she
speaking to himself and bowing his head with a sad but firm expression.
speaking to the colonel gave Pierre an angry look and went away again
speaking to, and saw the quartermaster, Topcheenko.
speaking very gently.
speaking, and with eager curiosity all the bootmakers joined the moving
speaking.
speaks about the wife he has lost, the grief of that loss has gone too
speaks of Lily, but I say, no--the princess! Do you want me to do it? I
special animals called "heroes." And Napoleon, escaping home in a warm
special deep cooing tone, precluding the possibility of interrupting
special enclosure to feed and that becomes twice as fat as the others
special messenger, a police officer, had come from Count Rostopchin to
special national histories are like paper money. They can be used and
special politeness and showed them to the princess' room. The princess,
special providence of God who, loving you, wishes to try you and your
special qualities, on the contrary he needs the absence of the highest
special reason for this, as he had got married two years before--a fact
special sense they attached to it.) "Why does she bother me?" And she
special strength of soul and mind called genius. This power cannot be
special strength, but now we need much more powerful methods. It is
specially amiable mood that day.
spectacle of his power over these three women. Besides that, he was
spectacled doctor came up to Prince Andrew, wiping his hands.
spectacles and white dressing gown, in which he received no one but his
spectacles in her presence, fumbling near them and not seeing them, or
spectacles" (that was how Petya described his namesake, the new Count
spectacles, sat in the drawing room in a loose dress, surrounded by
speech by an unexpected cramp in his throat. He paced up and down a
speech how they could best handle the master for their own ends.
speech in his hand, "it is not sufficient to observe our mysteries in
speech was full of dignity and greatness as Napoleon understood it.
speech, the feeling of majestic triumph combined with pity for the foe
speed before they saw one another--Pierre put out his hands and seized
speed.
spellbound by beauty. It was the same panorama he had admired from that
spend that night at a place three miles out of Moscow. The next morning
spend the night," and during the first day's journey that resting place
spends all one's money. He asked me for tonight, but I won't go."
spent a certain sum every year. He was collecting, as he said, a serious
spent after he was wounded, the more deeply he penetrated into the new
spent alone with his depressing thoughts, Pierre involuntarily enjoyed
spent most of the day in the nursery, taking a mother's place to her
spent most of their time together. When one went out the other became
spent only half as much as before, and that his affairs--which had been
spent the first night in the same yard as the Rostovs. The countess said
spent the night in our house and is going with us."
spent without taking effect.
spent, and almost every year he was obliged to borrow. Besides this the
sphinxes carved on the corners of the bedstead, so that the countess
spilled on dry ground both the dry ground and the water disappear and
spilled on the carpet. They were met by a deacon with a censer and by
spindles at home!'?" said Shinshin, puckering his brows and smiling.
spirit had been laid.
spirit in the righteous defense of the heritage Thou gavest to us and
spirit will not and cannot understand the Emperor Alexander's loftiness
spirit. She went to bed later and rose earlier than any of them, and
spirited impression.
spirits, he mounted his horse and rode out into the field in that happy
spirits. "They can't help liking me," she thought. "Everybody always has
spiritual gaze was fixed.
spiritual labor, but now it was quite differently lit up. There was a
spiritual tranquility on the one side made it the more possible for her
spite of his evident wish to do so he could not give them a joyous
spite of the fact that to some highly placed Russians it seemed rather
splashed through the water that lay in the ruts.
splashing into puddles as they crossed a road. The misty sky still
splashing with blood those near them.
splendid field of oats in which a camp had been pitched and which
splendid march. You know, of course, that His Imperial Highness rode
splendid princess!"
splendid soldiers. Besides he began by attacking Germans. And only
splendidly all the same," he added, winking at Vera.
splendidly... and her voice! One can really say it's a wonderful voice!"
splinters!"
spoiling his own career, and he laughed at distinctions of all kinds. He
spoke as quietly and seriously as they.
spoke of her exalted patroness, supported Helene's wish.
spoke of his love, but that it was the very thing she wished for.
spoke of their future life. Prince Andrew was afraid and ashamed to
spoke slowly in a loud voice and throwing out his chest slightly swayed
spoke smilingly and listened with a laugh.
spoke to prove his own rectitude and therefore imagined Kutuzov to be
spoke. Kutuzov looked down at his own legs, occasionally glancing at the
spoken, but now you yourself have begun. I don't trust him, Natasha. Why
spoken. "Princess, help me! What am I to do? Can I hope? Princess, my
sportsman Rostov had not merely reached hard winter condition, but were
spot chosen by Napoleon, with the guns of Pernetti and Fouche; which
spot he noticed a Russian soldier laughingly patting a Frenchman on the
spot indicated to him. He made no reply on his father's favorite
spot rubbed or kissed, and it feels better when this is done. The child
spot the day before, but now the whole place was full of troops and
spot where Pierre's face had been before he sat down. Anna Mikhaylovna
spot" (he stooped and pointed to the sloping ledge outside the window)
spot. Disregarding the officers' orders, the soldiers stood leaning
spot. His predictions were being justified. Part of the Russian force
sprang onto the box of the moving coach which jolted as it passed out
sprang up between them. It was as if they had not known each other till
sprawled there. It wasn't a case of urging them on, there was no holding
sprawling!"
spread a greatcoat on the ground for the sick man, and brought some
spread a map on the table. "All eventualities have been foreseen. If he
spread by the fact that the Emperor's carriage had really galloped from
spread out his arms with a choleric gesture.
spread out on different sides of Moscow, moved into the city through
spread out on it; but just then the crowd swayed back--the police
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
spread under him was wet with blood which stained his breeches and arm.
spreading out before him the plan of the new building and fixing his
spring buckwheat. The wooded ravines and the copses, which at the end of
spring clouds floating across the clear blue sky. He was not thinking of
spring!"
springing to him, putting her arms round him, and kissing him. This
spurred his horse.
spurs, whirled rapidly round, and, striking his left heel against his
squadron commander.
squadron in which Nicholas Rostov served as a cadet was quartered in
squadron, that in which Rostov was serving under Denisov, to return to
squadron. All were looking at the enemy in front and at the squadron
squadron. Rostov raised his saber, ready to strike, but at that instant
squadron; but when he had gone more than halfway he began to forget his
square in front of the Bazaar were drummers beating the muster call.
square."
squatted down beside him.
squatted down on his heels by the fire beside the officer with the long
squatting on his heels in front of a clerk. The clerk, with cuffs turned
squeaking on its runners as though freezing to the snow, its deep-toned
squeaking over the snow. Natasha and Sonya, holding up their dresses,
squeaky and unsteady voice, raising himself at the other side of the
squealing in the garden. Perhaps it's his brat that the fellow is
squeezed together, sat women with rouged faces, dressed in glaring
stables before dinner. Having taken precautions against the general
stacked before anyone else had his harvest in. She did not understand
staff captain in his deep bass, calmly stroking his long mustache. "You
staff captain on his broad-backed, steady mare came at a walk to meet
staff captain's question by a disapproving shake of his head.
staff captain.
staff could be heard conversing in French, and Kutuzov's gray head in
staff officer, and at Zherkov, and he frowned.
staff that evening, to the officer of the Horse Guards, referring to
staff who get rewards without doing anything!"
staff, and, consulting experienced theoreticians and practical men where
staff, but he does everything alone. The next battle is won by him
staff, he bristled up immediately and grew spiteful, ironical, and
staff," replied Prince Andrew with a smile which Kutuzov noticed.
staff. In attendance on him was the head of the imperial staff,
staff."
staff?"
stage nearer Znaim. The offer of a truce gave the only, and a quite
stage of the campaign. It would be difficult and even impossible to
stages with them had been captured by Cossacks, the other half had gone
staggering on his thin legs, advanced into the middle of the room.
stain on the grass.
stained smith stood beside him with a gloomy face. A drone of voices was
staircase and out into the yard. No one had seen him. But there were
stairs and up another, to Pierre's rooms.
stake is what is dearest to man--his own life--and it sometimes seems
stalls everyone clapped and shouted "bravo!" Then one of the men went
stalls. The Rostovs had not seen him since their arrival. His face
stamp of inconsolable grief, replied: "Yes, Princess" to all Princess
stand made at Krems and the victory over Mortier raised the spirits of
stand still and it was necessary to live. Hard as it was for Princess
stand, a young lad with a long nose and long hair, wearing a monk's
stand, and there's Zakhar himself and still the same horse! And here's
stand?... You know, Count, there'll be a battle tomorrow. Out of an army
standard, he ran forward with full confidence that the whole battalion
standards, and of the ground on which the troops had stood and were
standards. "Lower, lower, that's it. Hurrah lads!" he added, addressing
standing at the front door. From the landing where Pierre stood there
standing beside a green caisson shouted at him, but only when the shout
standing close by, outside the door. It was sad and painful for him
standing here!" Countess Mary turned pale with fright and made signs
standing in a corner of the drawing room surrounded by young men. There
standing in the stirrups, trotted a Cossack. The officer, a very young
standing in the yard directing the men.
standing on the dam wiping himself with a towel, felt confused at seeing
standing on the highest possible pinnacle of human power with the
standing on the pasture by the barn.
standing on the tables, and still more was being brought in from the
standing still? Then why push?"
standing they could see the French. Immediately beyond the forest, on a
standing up, on which lay an open exercise book, and the lathe with
standing, but a moral victory that convinces the enemy of the moral
standing, crumbling down the earth; a black ball flashed before his eyes
standing, when just above his head he heard several voices shouting
standing.
stands on guard for the old view, and accuses the new view of subverting
stands on the social ladder, the more people he is connected with
star is fixed into the icon. Well, and what do you think? He received
starched petticoats and the whispering and laughter of girls' voices
starry night was followed by a bright cheerful morning. The snow was
stars in its faraway depths. "And all that is me, all that is within me,
stars on his breast. He seemed to have grown thinner since the morning;
stars were unnoticed. The sky was black and dreary, while the earth was
stars.
started proving goodness knows what! A pity you were not there--what
started she moved forward.
started, glanced round at him, and screening the candle with her hand
starting a new theme. "They were no more than make-believes."
starting every now and then and muttering something to himself, and
starting from their sockets to watch their chief. On reaching the
starting out of his head, raising his cap and pointing before him to the
starving us to death! Is it? Take this and this!' and I hit him so
starving us?" shouted Denisov, hitting the table with the fist of his
starving."
state and power might be arranged were it possible for all that to
state of French public opinion."
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
state of Moscow.
state of excitement as when she had slammed the door of her room.
state of his gun.
state of mind which makes everything seem possible, pleasant, and easy.
state of things is continually becoming worse and makes one fear that
state of things there, and spoke of the estimate an architect had made
state.
state. She answered questions at random, began sentences she did not
state.... My only hope now is in Count Cyril Vladimirovich Bezukhov.
state; but it was necessary for Natasha herself to see a doctor. They
statement that the greater or lesser success of one army against another
stating them to the Emperor Francis. He vividly imagined the casual
station or a doctor for the cadet, and sat down by a bonfire the
station), and again embraced his sister.
stationary in face of an enemy eight times as strong as itself.
stationed on a hillside. You can imagine!"
stationed on the Pratzen Heights.
statistics. What is man's responsibility to society, the conception of
status with the IRS.
statutes, "be kindly and courteous," recurred to him. He blinked, went
stay here yourself."
stay like that then, I won't touch you. But listen. I won't tell you how
stay to dinner if you care to!" she called after Pierre.
stay with me, let him... he'll be of use here if he's a brave officer,"
stayed his hand. The sergeant, who was evidently wiser than his general,
stayed in Moscow?"
stayed longer."
stayed with him during the whole of his imprisonment, but even grew in
staying here long this time--nor are you--I will try to amuse them. I
steadily and ceaselessly on all sides. With the exception of the aunt,
stealthily glancing at one another's dogs, trying not to be observed by
steel, a delicate muzzle, and prominent black eyes. He had heard of the
step from the heel to the toe (she had on a new and favorite pair of
step into the officers' wards you'll see for yourself," he added,
step that for you all is ended, all is closed except the drawing
step toward regularizing this method of warfare.
step, and each one of these hundreds of soldiers seemed to be repeating
step, that the French losses were much heavier than ours, and that he
step.
stepmother and I'll marry Bourienne!... Ha, ha, ha! He mustn't be
stepped away from the man and looked round inquiringly at the adjutant
stepped back to get a good run, and plunged into the water; another,
stepped cautiously on the cold and dirty floor with her slim, supple,
stepped out of a stuffy room into God's own fresh air. It did not enter
stepped to the middle of the room and stood still.
stepped up to her father and looked at him with surprised inquiring
steps behind him holding two horses by their bridles. Each time Prince
steps down the line. He was evidently pleased at his own display of
steps of the back porch.
steps of the footmen. At one end of the table sat the countess with
steps onto the smooth surface of a bog. When he put his foot down it
steps should be taken to liberate the serfs, which the steward met by
steps, and again stopped.
steps, her workbag on her arm, and gaily spreading out her dress sat
steps.
steps. "O God," he said with tears in his eyes, "how could you do it?"
steps. Behind the company the sound of wheels, the creaking of springs,
stern and solemn train of thought that weakness from loss of blood,
stern but handsome face really joined in the dance. What was expressed
stern expressions on the faces he had seen in passing, were lit up
stern eyes on his son.
stern face as if wishing to make the visitor feel that the absence
stern face, but seeing, that Natasha's head was covered, she smiled in
stern faces to change the candles, but no one noticed them.
stern sallow face and eyes intently fixed on Rostov. The man's neighbor
stern, and he fancied even contemptuous.
stern, and scornful monster among the smiling birch trees. Only the
stern, shrewd, and penetrating expression of that look struck Pierre. He
stern, threatening, inaccessible, and intangible line which separates
sternly and significantly at one another like two fighting cocks
sternly.
steward there, who, bowing respectfully, looked into his face and at
stewards, quarrels, and intrigues, its ties, society, and with Sonya's
stick. Pierre, from club habit, always left both hat and stick in the
stifle this remorse and grow callous, as a result of being able to
stifles real feeling in her. And it must be confessed that Natalie is
stifling atmosphere of the town, and the Rostovs did not move to the
still able to roll forward to Moscow, but there, without further effort
still admiring his handiwork. "You'll be nice and comfortable...."
still bare of grass. It was at the end of a village that stretched
still be told the same. All the way she had sat motionless in a corner
still deeper in the bed. Natasha wept, sitting on the blue-striped
still didn't finish carting the dead away. And as for the wolves, he
still farther ahead a dark line which he could not see distinctly but
still fewer men would be so well able and willing to make up out of
still funnier. Most of the anecdotes, if not relating to the state
still further south to the Tula road. Having crossed over, by a forced
still greater purity and clearness what they were both feeling.
still had no news from Dolokhov and the man sent to capture a "tongue"
still heard the insane despairing screams growing fainter in the
still held their ground.
still in course of construction. Round the house was a garden newly laid
still in terror. But an irresistible impulse drew her forward. She
still in the same place, his stout body resting heavily in the saddle
still it was terrible, and she could not help thinking of it. She was
still kept awake at night so as not to miss the proper time when the
still looking silently at her brother and her beautiful eyes were full
still merrier, and some of them could not refrain from laughter, for
still more afraid of showing his fear. He felt curious to know what was
still more and began proving to Pierre that there was no prospect of
still more attractive to them. Returning from the yard, the doctor
still more firm and resolute.
still more flushed, commanded the men more scrupulously than ever. The
still more lively and he chatted incessantly all through dinner.
still more rapidly after it, despite Rostopchin's calls to defend Moscow
still quite a young lady, before her nose was broken; how she had aged
still red, the veins stood out like cords. He was knocking the back of
still remained a feeling of shame at admitting that they must flee. An
still rolling up his sleeve, he went out to the porch.
still sat in the same position, only his head was thrown further back
still sat softly running his fingers over the strings, evidently
still thinking of her own sorrow. "It would be a relief," thought she,
still to get dressed and they had to call at the Taurida Gardens.
still under the spell of the day's council, at which the party of the
still you are at home while they--you see what they have come to," said
still, in the hollows and woods, there burst from the muskets small
still, with his father's disapproval they wouldn't have been happy, and
still-green, thickly growing oats, and at other quite black fields just
still. "If it were a man whose existence thou didst doubt I could bring
stillness of the night. Everybody near him was sleeping. A cricket
stimulating effect on him. "Vive l'Empereur! L'Empereur!" he now heard
stimulating influence of a June morning, and could not refrain from
stimulatingly around him and his horse was so eager to go that he could
stinging reproaches he meant to address to Kutuzov for his deception. He
stirred in his soul. He felt happy and at the same time sad. He had
stirrup and did not remove his frightened blue eyes from Rostov's face.
stirrup, almost leaning against him. The man was wearing a bluish coat
stirs an old fellow up. Well, go! Get along! Perhaps I'll come and sit
stock which Gerasim had replaced on the writing table, he remembered
stocking and resolved not to turn round till it was finished.
stockings and dancing shoes, stood looking animated and bright in the
stolen from me. In that reunion of great sovereigns we should have
stolen. Napoleon, too, carried away his own personal tresor, but on
stolen..."
stomach with an already stiffened arm flung wide.
stomach, a brain, muscles, nerves, and a liver. She did these things not
stone, hundreds of riders composing the suites moved carelessly but
stone-built Kremlin had died away the French heard a strange sound above
stoned me, crucified me... I shall rise... shall rise... shall rise.
stonily severe expression; and, sitting down opposite the prince, she
stood Dolokhov in a Persian dress, his curly hair brushed up into a huge
stood at every door anxiously noting visitors' every movement in order
stood at the back, and, though he had heard hardly anything, understood
stood before a looking glass and brushed the hair on his temples
stood behind the door. But just when he was clumsily creeping toward
stood beside her, kissing her hair.
stood constantly at the head of the bed.
stood crowds of soldier stretcher-bearers with dismal and attentive
stood frowning and rubbing his face with his hand.
stood in disorder, and in the middle of the night a motley throng
stood in front of him also listening and smiling. Nicholas did not take
stood in my way. I have an adored, a priceless mother, and two or three
stood in the midst of an overgrown garden and, after a glance at his
stood in the midst of the group, without a coat, and with his fine linen
stood just behind the priest's back, and without crossing himself (he
stood open. Grass had already begun to grow on the garden paths, and
stood out sharply above the black collar of his uniform, and he smelled
stood rather far off and could not hear all that the Emperor said. From
stood rows of French troops in blue uniforms with red epaulets and high
stood smiling but silent. One man, older than the others present,
stood still at the window and listened.
stood still while woods, fields, and glittering bayonets ran past them.
stood the carts ready corded. The carriages were at the front porch.
stood up and coughed. His face was gloomy and his lips compressed.
stood with wide open eyes and mouths, straining with all their strength,
stood, met, and separated, some in uniform and some in evening dress,
stooped carefully with a supple and exact movement, picked up the ball,
stooping low, entered the battery to carry away the wounded man.
stop it?" said Prince Andrew sarcastically. "Well, and how's Moscow? And
stop pillage, parties of marauding Guards are continually seen returning
stop.
stopped Pierre asking if he did not know French.
stopped a second time by "Uncle's" borzois.
stopped and glanced inquiringly over his spectacles at his guide. Anna
stopped and looked about him.
stopped at a solitary, deserted house that had probably once been an
stopped at the door with a smile on her face. "Here I am. I am she! Now
stopped at the gate, and the latch rattled as someone tried to open it.
stopped at the threshold and asked in Russian whether Drubetskoy lived
stopped at the village of Aristovo, preparing faithfully to execute the
stopped by Count Rostopchin's orders, had already in June moved with her
stopped her in the middle of the room and, amid general silence, said
stopped him. He turned his horse and galloped off.
stopped in front of Balashev. Balashev noticed that his left leg was
stopped in front of the beautiful Armenian girl and with his hands in
stopped in front of the regiment. Kutuzov and the Austrian general were
stopped in the village at the priest's house in front of which stood the
stopped it), then of Peter Fedorovich's return to the throne in seven
stopped near the hounds, waiting to see how the matter would end. Out of
stopped short in the middle of the room. It was evident that she had
stopped short, flushed till he perspired, but still got out the words,
stopping at the door, "why I'm especially fond of that music? It is
stopping occasionally at a corner to make menacing gestures at the wall,
storeroom to put away what still lay about.
storeroom. A third case was needed and servants had gone to fetch it.
stores, and Murat had only begged leave to loose the cavalry to gather
stories about her, while none the less all without exception respected
stories are the stories of men who have been under the enemy's fire! Our
stories had the sensual character which Frenchmen regard as the special
stories have some weight, not like the stories of those fellows on the
stories of Dolokhov's extraordinary bravery and of his cruelty to the
stories or telling them, but followed every movement of Rostov's hands
stories over and over again to the same audience.
stories. Denisov was moodily silent all the evening.
storm of rain and hail. In general, the summer of 1812 was remarkable
story about Sergey Kuzmich, the laughter, and the food were all a
story more than once and were tired of it. Only the man who had the next
story to him, her seducer. And now he, a real Russian prince, had
story), and how Rostopchin let him go and assured the people that he was
stout and clumsy body took up so much room and doing his utmost to look
stout major who was walking back along the street past the row of carts.
straggling, disorderly crowd it had been on its last march the day
straight ahead, leading his men under fire, without considering in his
straight and strong at sixty as at thirty.
straight at Prince Andrew with wide-open eyes.
straight at his adjutant's face without recognizing him.
straight before him, absently stroking his mustache with his fingers.
straight before him, his right eye was awry, and his brows and lips
straight forward. Now we see light..."
straight home. But the nearer he drew to the house the more he felt the
straight in the eyes, "you know the saying, 'Lucky in love, unlucky at
straight into Pierre's face. He glanced at the dirty innyard in the
straight into his eyes, and his nearness, self-assurance, and the
straight into his son's face with keen eyes which seemed to see through
straight on Napoleon, he was silent.... So insignificant at that moment
straight on his head. He took off his wet felt cloak in a corner of
straight out. Let people think what they will of me, it's really all the
straight to her rich relations, the Rostovs, with whom she stayed when
straight to me. Good-by, my dear boy."
straight to the shed where his horses and trap were. The coachman was
straight toward the inner door.
strained frown she peered toward the world where he was. And now, now
strained to such a degree that it will certainly break," said Pierre (as
strains of Daniel Cooper (somewhat resembling those of a merry peasant
strange and ridiculous to meet objections from Russian generals and to
strange as it may seem to suppose that the slaughter of eighty thousand
strange as it might seem, she must go on a pilgrimage. She disclosed
strange chance no one does so and all rapturously greet the man they
strange chance no one perceives this. His part is not yet ended. The man
strange lightness did not again leave him.
strange though very familiar phenomenon.
strange to her to think that this stern handsome man should be
strange to him that his long-felt wish, which had seemed unattainable,
strange to them but on the contrary it seemed the only thing that could
strange, not in Russian. In among the hindmost of these men wearing
strange, pretty, unfamiliar people--the one with fine eyebrows and
strange, unknown, and dangerous places he reaches, just as a sailor is
strange. She looked about with pleasure, smiling joyfully.
strange; at one moment they looked impudently sly and at the next
strangely consoling. His intention of killing Napoleon and his
strangely indifferent faces, the same blood, the same soldiers'
stranger, asking what he could do for him.
stranger, ran back laughing without looking at him.
stranger, yet nearer to him through the brotherhood of man. With bated
stranger.
stranger. Glancing, however, at Boris, he saw that he too seemed ashamed
stranger. This was the Marshal of the Nobility of the district, who
strangers and unable to send news of himself. The gazettes from which
strangers."
strangest fancies unexpectedly and disconnectedly passed through her
straps, and these changed their familiar faces.
strategic trap at the Berezina River. Everyone assured himself that all
strayed from under her friend's plaits.
stream, and the Uhlans caught hold of one another as they fell off their
streams; and try as he would he could descry no military "position" in
street mounted on a rather small sorrel horse. A huge suite of generals
street to the knoll from which he had looked at the field of battle the
street where the house was.
street, and the adjutant's unceasing moans could still be heard.
street, something exploded, and the street was shrouded in smoke.
street, while others carried bundles of hay.
street.
streets of Brunn and found himself surrounded by high buildings, the
streets of Moscow by Durosnel's order to put a stop to the pillage,
streets to the other side of Moscow.
streets. The gates and shops were all closed, only here and there round
strength and charm of his friendship with Prince Andrew. That charm was
strength and health, of which he had till then been unconscious, and
strength as the hardships of his position increased.
strength in life such as he had never before known. And this not only
strength of Russia could have wounded it, but whether it was mortally
strength of an army depends on its spirit. To lead men forward under
strength removed and transferred to the Emperor. Toll, Konovnitsyn, and
strength to the utmost and could not have done more without destroying
strength, and at the same time felt that she loved Kuragin. She vividly
strength.
strength. He raised his pistol and aimed.
strengthen the fire on the Russian troops crowded in front of Knyazkovo.
strengthening their friendship. Denisov evidently tried to expose Rostov
stressing the word "God" so unnaturally and so unpleasantly that
stretch their legs and converse in couples.
stretched himself to the utmost and, watching the wolf, galloped heavily
stretched his legs, and set his cap straight. The head of the French
stretched over boards. In the center of the stage sat some girls in red
stretcher into which his head had sunk deep and again his eyelids
stretchers came into view before Rostov. And the fear of death and of
stretchers from the battery. Pierre again went up onto the knoll where
stretching out and beating her head against the wall. Sonya and the
stretching out his hands, with his mouth wide open and his eyes fixed.
strides trying to keep to the footprints left on the meadow by the
striding disheveled from the nursery in her dressing gown, and with
strike the keyboard with both hands.
striking him regularly on his bare back. The man shrieked unnaturally.
strings, and then he stopped short and jerked his shoulders.
stripped, so that the screw could not get in or out, but went on turning
stroke of his arm had supernaturally become impotent.
stroke, came up to the prince, bowing his bald head resignedly before
stroking his heated Donets horse.
strolled about watching and listening to conversations, but nowhere
strong at the moment of leaving Voronezh that those who saw her off, as
strong escort to Smolensk. Besides Denisov and Dolokhov (who also led
strong that he could lift the back of the carriage from behind, sat
strong there that Rostov held his nose and had to pause and collect
strong, healthy, cheerful, and excited, and are surrounded by other such
stronger and added a touch of passionate tenderness. Besides this
stronger and higher than all else."
stronger flow of love for his sovereign. He longed to show that love in
stronger forces, but again attack when opportunity offers. This was done
stronger than a pawn, and two pawns are always stronger than one, while
strongest of all influences: the intrigues, flattery, and self-deception
strongly. She listened to every word about the victory of Moses over
strove toward the infinite, the eternal, and the absolute, and could
struck Vereshchagin on the head with the blunt side of his saber.
struck by his beauty. Anatole stood with his right thumb under a button
struck by the fact that there was nothing formidable in this man about
struck everyone by his preoccupied, absent-minded, and morose air.
struck her forcibly, and various traits of his gentle, sensitive
struck him by her beauty on the preceding day. Today, when he had caught
struck his horse three times with his whip, splashing himself and his
struck on the teeth, or what the ham had to do with it.
struck one of his small hands energetically with the other. "Yes, I
struck the ground in front of them.
struck those who saw her by her fullness of life and beauty, combined
struck two and another with a shrill tone joined in from the drawing
struck up more loudly, and this man with bare legs jumped very high and
struggle with one another--that a Legitimist historian will prove
struggle, but with naive and lighthearted gaiety.
struggled against it. Latterly she had become convinced that she loved
struggles of a certain Emilie de Mansfeld. "And why did she resist her
struggling forward shouting "Brothers!" and trying to free himself from
struggling with the yard porter who was trying to lock it. With a last
stubble land and bushes touched with green here and there, and into a
stuck in his girdle. When he espied Denisov he hastily threw something
student in 1809 had been to try to kill Napoleon with a dagger. But as
student, who now, Bolkonski thought, held in his hands--those plump
studied for a long time.
study a little before noon in his silk dressing gown and found his head
study at the door of which stood an adjutant.
study smelt strongly of tobacco and dogs. "Uncle" asked his visitors
study the common, infinitesimally small elements by which the masses are
study, on the blue sofa, the confidential sofa? Why cannot I now, as
study, the old prince went for his walk as usual next morning, but he
study, the very one from which the Russian Emperor had dispatched him
study, trying to enter completely into his ideas, and considered her
study--that was in the old house--and it was dark--we went in and
study.
study. And if Pierre was often struck by Andrew's lack of capacity
study. Sonya sat in the drawing room at the round table, copying a
study. Though Daniel was not a big man, to see him in a room was
study."
studying historic events as the results of man's free will. For if a
studying the events from the letters of the sovereigns and the generals,
stuff. Such magnanimity and sensibility are like the magnanimity and
stumbled on him in the fog, hearing no encouraging word from their
stumbled over it. Several of those present laughed.
stumbling, tripping up, and shouting, ran merrily and wildly toward
stupid old man (as he called Rostov), who had made him stay by assuring
stupid than that could have been devised, or more disastrous for the
stupid you men all are not to have married her! Excuse me for saying so,
stupidity of everybody concerned. Stolypin, stuttering, broke into the
stupidity."
sturdy figure with the sinewy hairy hand and stumpy fingers in which
style, wearing an antique coat and powdered hair; and when Prince Andrew
subdivisions of tendencies and parties:
subject did not relate to himself, but in connection with the stories
subject of metaphysics, even the manifestation of the force of free will
subject of the liveliest jokes by the whole detachment--jokes in which
subject on the path it now follows, seeking the causes of events in
subject to the law of necessity; but it does not advance by a hair's
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
subject under discussion than those they are talking with.
subject, "that the Emperor himself would not be satisfied to find in us
subject, but the count returned to his troubles.
subject, looking at his finger on which he wore a ring with a cameo of
subject. "Do you know what I heard today? Poor Mary Bolkonskaya arrived
subject. Helene with an uneasy smile looked at his curly hair and his
subject; Bennigsen, rather more of a soldier than the others, but all
subjection of the will of a nation to some chosen man and the subjection
subjection to the Deity and in a predetermined aim toward which nations
subjects."
subjugates a kingdom and an entire nation of several millions, all
submissive attitude, his fingers clasped before him. His emaciated young
submissive general.
submissive, expressionless look with which he had listened to the
submissively folded before him his thin hands, unused to work.
submit from habit, and she said: "I wish only to do your will, but if
submit my report, with the information that if the army remains in its
submit myself to Thy will!" she thought. "I want nothing, wish for
submit. Feeling himself in their power, he resolutely took the salver
submitted to him by his marshals, and personally giving commands to his
subordinate by me.
subordinate, now looking aside and now gazing straight into Rostov's
subordinates. "The mob is terrible--disgusting," he said to himself
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
subscription was fifteen rubles a head, and at which there were two
subscription. The lady who was thought to be most pleasing to the
subsequently in 1813. His activity at that time was no less astounding
subsequently termed "that gosling I have made an eagle").
subsequently termed his sufferings, but which at the time he scarcely
subsequently, and for the rest of his life, he thought and spoke with
subsided within its shores and seemed to have become calm. But the
subsiding under the delightful interest of his own story, "is that the
substitute for it money made of metal that has not the specific gravity
substituting a z for the s and adding de and the article le, still
subtle smile on his lips and a peaceful look of delight at her beauty,
subtle smile.
suburb.
suburb. "Moscow deserted!" he said to himself. "What an incredible
success and at the inability of others to understand these things.
success and was honored by the special attention of So-and-so, but she
success reached Kutuzov's cheerless staff with the galloping advent of
success. The enemy's fleet, which subsequently did not let a single boat
successfully cannonading the French, our artillerymen only noticed this
successfully, evoking memories of the best times of her youth and
successfully, of what he had thought while in the country.
such a beauty! It pulls out and has a secret English drawer, you know!
such a crime against his fellow man without comforting himself with
such a laugh she always felt nearer to him. Natasha would have been
such a look of cold dignity. He did not know that Natasha's soul was
such a lovely night before!"
such a nation," he said to Pierre. "You, who have suffered so from the
such a nature that nobody can know or use it unless he be prepared by
such a plan in which the enemy's position was assumed to be known,
such a point that they break into the cellars and stores containing army
such a question, who saw in the project a desecration of the sacrament
such a question. Pierre put the same question to Prince Andrew.
such a tale about Mademoiselle George and Buonaparte!"
such a thing never happened to me before," she said, surprised and
such a treasure... she is a rare girl.... My dear friend, I entreat you,
such an extent.
such and such favorites and such and such mistresses. Moreover, certain
such and such people wrote such and such books? Of the immense number of
such as Napoleon about whose moral qualities opinions differ widely,
such as Princess Mary had not seen on her face for a long time, "he has
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
such as his companion and himself, "but probably they would not dare to
such brilliant and polite young men, beamed with satisfaction, try as
such conditions. You say I have begun this war! But who first joined his
such distractions lasted only a moment, and for eight hours the men had
such efforts the enemy had fled--experienced a similar feeling of terror
such facts as the very cruel murders of the French Revolution resulting
such hints from Prince Vasili and others, and was seized by terror lest
such histories as Thiers' will be interesting and instructive and may
such importance, and was surprised that this event, now that it had
such lengths? He is a deceiver and a villain, that's plain! What will
such love," said Prince Andrew. "It is not at all the same feeling
such mad, drunken determination that, taken by surprise, the French had
such orders were given by the officers on the spot nearest to the
such peace all around, such blessedness, that one don't want to come
such things made a large collection, and in spite of being deprived of
sudden emphasis on the word her--"as a mother receives her zealous sons
sudden exile and alleged treachery had just reached Moscow.
suddenly appeared from behind Mary Hendrikhovna. He had been awake for
suddenly appeared in the fog, there was a flash, followed by a report,
suddenly appeared senseless. He unexpectedly felt himself ridiculous,
suddenly appeared, looming huge as an elephant.
suddenly awoke with a start and in a cold perspiration.
suddenly banished the shadows of the past. "Now tell us about yourself,"
suddenly became serious. But this lasted only a second. "Don't dare
suddenly became unnaturally merry and chattered incessantly to the
suddenly began to cry.
suddenly came to and, lifting his head with an effort, took Rostov, who
suddenly changed to one of horror. The French were supposed to be a
suddenly cried. "Even without a bet, there! Tell them to bring me a
suddenly felt tears choking him, a thing he had thought impossible for
suddenly felt that what before had seemed to him merely a possibility
suddenly flared up again brightly, lighting up with strange distinctness
suddenly flushing. "And I say boldly that I have not a single man's life
suddenly he remembered how his love had ended. "He did not need anything
suddenly heard a sound new to him, of something swiftly approaching...
suddenly heard saying, and the general attention turned to the police
suddenly heavy slanting rain came down.
suddenly his lips trembled and he began to cry, in the way full-blooded
suddenly instead of those chances and that genius which hitherto had
suddenly on the wolf, and they rolled together down into a gully just in
suddenly overcome by fear not only of death but of sickness, weakness,
suddenly overcome by that sense of confusion and hopelessness to which
suddenly pushed forward with a scared and angry look and wanted to seize
suddenly quite vanished, and her anxious, imploring eyes were fixed on
suddenly replied in French.
suddenly rolling his eyes.
suddenly seemed to him dull and tiresome, and he experienced an
suddenly stopped. Unconsciously she sat up, smoothed her hair, got up,
suddenly struck up the air of As 'twas growing dark last night--the tune
suddenly there stood..."
suddenly there was a ringing in his ears, a dimness in his eyes, and
suddenly thought. "What do I want? To be free, released from Sonya...
suddenly two old women began spinning round on the carpet? Was that real
suddenly with a determination he himself did not expect, Rostov felt for
suddenness and prompt him to the coarsest and most reckless actions.
suffered so many disappointments and is so sensitive," said she to the
suffered, but I would not exchange even that torment for anything in
suffering as I am. Who then is it? Who?" flashed for an instant through
suffering man. It would be continual torture." And he looked searchingly
suffering of a soul burdened by the body appeared on her face. Nicholas
suffering on her gentle face. He suddenly felt sorry for her and was
suffering, and the nearness of death aroused in him. Looking into
suffering, but what he wanted to do was too terrible.
sufferings. What a heart! How like him it is! And how he has remembered
sufferings."
suffers a complete defeat the nation is quite subjugated.
sufficed to destroy the whole cosmography of the ancients. By disproving
sufficient cause for war; that Kurakin had acted on his own initiative
sufficient in Moscow for the whole army--and methodically to collect
sufficient, there must also be a possibility of doing it, and that
sufficiently and of being so ready to get her off their hands. The old
sufficiently weakened to be successfully attacked. But still he did not
sugar--and then run out into the yard to see whether it had done so.
suggested to him a blow from something. He looked at Prince Vasili
suggested to him a point of view which gave him a right to despise the
suggested--on the plea that it was necessary for the sovereign to arouse
suggesting to him that the sublime moment having been too long drawn out
suggestions that they should attack.
suitability of which serious doubts were beginning to be felt.
suite and said in French:
suite pointed out to Bagration a French column that was outflanking us.
suite, and in the smoke that suddenly surrounded the gun they could see
suite, with Pierre among them, set out on their ride along the line.
suite, with their Cossacks who were talking loudly together, Prince
suite. "But, gentlemen..."
suitor. This memory carried him sadly and sweetly back to those painful
sum of the components must equal the resultant. This condition is never
sum of the numbers did not come right. Then he changed the spelling,
sum of them is 666, and that Napoleon was therefore the beast foretold
summer languor, that content and discontent with the present, which
summer to see one of her sons, allowed herself plainly to express
summer. As Natasha, at her mother's side, passed through the crowd
summertime mingled with memories of bathing and of the liquid, vibrating
summoned Berthier, began pacing up and down the bank with him, giving
summoned Lelorgne d'Ideville, the interpreter.
summoned the village elder and asked him what he knew about the French,
sums offered for the horses and carts, but on the previous evening and
sun as gaily as around the living hives; from a distance it smells of
sun gleaming on the blue waters. There was perfect stillness. Pierre
sun were reflected, flashing back like lightning from the water, from
sun, and the songs of the cavalrymen vividly recurred to his mind.
sun. How beautiful the sky looked; how blue, how calm, and how deep!
sunbeams. In front, beyond a hollow dale, could be seen the enemy's
sung, and long before she again sang, as she did that evening. The
sunny morning and by eight o'clock it was already hot. "A good day for
sunny. She could understand nothing, think of nothing and feel nothing,
supercilious consciousness of his own superiority. It was as if he said
superciliousness, as if ashamed to confess that the sounds pleased him
superfluity of the comforts of life destroys all joy in satisfying one's
superfluity. And now during these last three weeks of the march he had
superfluous steam to blow off when the pressure exceeds a certain limit.
superintendent had said, and looking at the departing trap.
superintendent of the work, should in an access of zeal plaster over the
superintendent's trap which drove into the square attended by two
superior.
superior?
superiority of his opponent and of his own impotence was gained by the
superiority over those sovereigns of the day who co-operated with him;
superiority to Alexander.
superiority, but at the same time by saying it she made a demand on
superiority. She was right in regarding all arguments as nonsense in
superiors, located in the background, re-formed them and brought them
superstition, and only two virtues--activity and intelligence. He
superstitions and her dislike of Mademoiselle Bourienne, who, he said,
superstitiousness of old maids, or the petting and spoiling of children.
supper for his French friends. The guest of honor was an aide-de-camp of
supper he chatted or listened to conversation or read. But under the
supper, fed the horses, and came out into the porches.
supper? Why, we settled how everything was to be. I don't quite remember
supplied an occupation and consolation to the family circle? How would
supplied them with a certain energy, there was another cause binding
supplied themselves with guns from the arsenal, and fired" (the
supplies of all kinds to two appointed markets, of which one is on
supplies the basis of the movement of all humanity, just as a similar
supplies were for the most part stored along the Oka in the Tula and
supplies will be bought from them at such prices as seller and buyer may
supplies. Others have disgraced themselves to the extent of disobeying
support me in the path of virtue. In his presence doubt has no place.
support of his battery all was forgotten. Prince Andrew listened
supported him under the arms. There was a gurgle in his throat and he
supporting him. At that meeting he was struck for the first time by
suppose it has to be like this!" she thought. She kept looking round in
suppose that I should look severely on your affection for that young
supposed that The Russian Guards, Abroad, was quite a definite address,
supposed, but by the activity of all the people who participate in
supposed, long ago have effaced? But the spirit and the movements were
supposed, must have risen to fifteen thousand. In reality it already
supposed, share the general Russian antipathy to the Austrians which was
supposed.
supposing Natasha to be asleep.
supposition is not confirmed either by reason or by experience.
suppress a smile as she gazed admiringly at a gold comb set with pearls,
suppressed smile brightening both their faces, a smile that had nothing
sure he had brought presents for them all.
sure he thought he was hiding. Awfully sweet! There, now he's crying.
sure he will distinguish himself. He was glancing at everyone with a
sure her prayer will be answered. Why don't I pray for what I want?" he
sure my husband will consent," said the countess, "but your father..."
surface and demanded satisfaction. From that evening she seemed to have
surface, sinks to the depths, and again emerges. There now, Karataev
surmises and the rewards this or that general received; but the question
surmises concerning their collective activity.
surpassed my expectations. I thank you in the name of the Fatherland!
surpassing beauty in awe and joy.
surprise and even alarm as they went past him. The senior artillery
surprise at Pierre's huge stout figure and listened to his talk of
surprise of the officers:
surprise, and noticing the glance he turned on Natasha as he rose.
surprise, and seemed pleased to have someone to wait on. That same
surprise.
surprise. Mention was made in Kutuzov's report of the Russian losses,
surprise. Then came the prayer just received from the Synod--a prayer
surprised Pierre.
surprised how simple and easy had been what used to appear so
surprised them all. Nicholas was himself rather surprised at the way he
surprised those he met by his significantly happy looks and smiles which
surprising news. He informed her of his engagement to Natasha Rostova.
surprisingly good. In spite of this he was placed that day with the
surrender!" He hurriedly but vainly tried to get his foot out of the
surrendered but had beaten the French.
surrendered. Though this news was being concealed from the inhabitants,
surrendering French officer by his collar. Our fugitives returned, the
surrenders without a shot; his most reckless schemes are crowned with
surrounded by inquiring sympathizers, recounted his exploits.
surrounded by the magic plain bathed in moonlight and spangled with
surrounded them in superior numbers, when the disordered French, hungry
surrounded them with superior forces we could not beat them? How could
surrounded, and talking, disputing, and joking began. When there
surrounding the battery and gazed at what was going on around him with
surrounding the church. From the words of his comrades who saw better
surroundings of human life. Daniel himself felt this, and as usual stood
surroundings unable to find their own regiments. In this way the action
surroundings, and from her smiling lips flowed sounds which anyone may
surroundings, but now he felt disinclined to go to it.
surroundings, she felt more and more deeply the loss of her father which
surveying the guests, and leisurely arranged her wide sleeves as if
survive, I am glad of this opportunity to tell you that I regret the
suspected that Russian Masonry had taken a wrong path and deviated
suspended from his neck and a star on his left breast. It was Speranski.
suspicious and wrote such and such books; but we do not learn why after
swagger which would have been ridiculous had he not been so good-looking
swallowed the cold snow, his lips quivered but his eyes, still smiling,
swallowing his r's and generally slurring his consonants: the voice of
sway and scatters its last snows and storms with desperate fury. A relay
swayed by the breeze. Everything was in blossom, the nightingales
swayed from side to side.
swaying in the gloom of the night. The lower stakes cracked more and
swaying to and fro and muttering something, was choking with sobs. Two
swaying, came to a stop. The carriage steps clattered as they were let
sways the world. Think this over and I will come to you again."
sweeping the street, and everybody within the houses was still asleep,
sweet root," because it was the second week that the last of the
sweet. Would you like some?..." and Petya ran out into the passage to
sweetest comforts to my poor heart, which has already suffered so much.
sweetly solemn hymn. Petya was as musical as Natasha and more so than
sweetly. It was the third time that day that, with an ecstatic and
sweets. Afterwards she brought a freshly roasted chicken, ham, preserves
swept over all the troops.
swiftly moving legs and the shadows of the troyka they were passing.
swiftness of Ilagin's borzois, and in that beautiful bitch saw a rival
swinging one foot, and, with his head a little bent, looked with beaming
swinging their arms and keeping time spontaneously, marched with long
swollen and heavy, his eyes dim, his nose red, and his voice hoarse,
swollen faces, were sitting or walking about in the sunshine in the
swooped down," said the woman, pointing to the French soldiers.
sword in his hand. The soldier was pale, his blue eyes looked impudently
sword of Frederick the Great.
swords in their hands pointed at his breast. Among them stood a man
syllable, "and if you like I can put you in touch with him." He paused
symmetrical pose of an Egyptian statue, evidently distressed that his
symmetrically and above all freely, and in front of them two men--the
symmetrically on his knees in the naive attitude of an Egyptian statue,
symmetry, a countermovement occurs from east to west, attracting to
sympathize in any way.
sympathy for others, shone in his eyes with a questioning look as to
sympathy for the "daredevil," as she called Dolokhov. "They say Pierre
sympathy with anyone's sorrow," she felt, and she said to herself: "No,
symptoms of the approach of the end.
table and placed on it his small leather-gloved hands.
table began to watch her hands arranging the cards. From the dancing
table every day. These were all their own people who had settled down
table on a corner of which he smilingly and absent-mindedly fixed his
table seemed to feel this, and they forgot their duties as they looked
table was moved up to him with savory beef tea, or when he lay down for
table were vodka, a flask of rum, white bread, roast mutton, and salt.
table with a determined and drunken gesture and preparing to climb out
table, a child's table, and the little chair on which Prince Andrew was
table, and this is a paper he has forgotten...."
table, and, having laid the manuscripts before him, opened them out,
table, beside her lay Anatole's letter. Sonya picked it up and read it.
table, chairs, and a clavichord. One adjutant, nearest the door, was
table, screened by a bound music book so that the light did not fall on
table, writing.
table.
table.
table. Denisov was sitting there scratching with his pen on a sheet of
tables and the same chandelier with a cover over it; but someone had
tables. On the nearest one sat a Tartar, probably a Cossack, judging by
tacit consent, to their chosen rulers.
taciturn Michael Ivanovich more often than to anyone else.
tactics, as the Germans did. But the French troops quite rightly did not
tail and mane and a bleeding mouth, rode a young officer in a blue
tail extended, Bedouin, as if also conscious of the Emperor's eye
tail from which tufts of matted hair hung down.
tails turned away from the center of the group. Two huntsmen galloped up
take Mademoiselle Bourienne into the bargain. She'll be the wife, while
take a single step till it has chosen one of two things: either a return
take advantage of her misfortunes to intrude upon her.
take all the most necessary things."
take her nephew with her. Whether it were difficult or easy, possible
take him away from surroundings in which, protected from all the
take it and hand it personally to the French Emperor. When dispatching
take it!"
take it..." He threw it on the table. "I have an old father and
take out the top one."
take part in receiving the visitors. The count met the guests and saw
take part in the conversations or express any opinion. After hearing
take that force to be something quite different. They see it in what is
take the girls with her. Natasha, pleading a headache, remained at home.
take the landlord's grain," said a voice at the back of the crowd.
take them first to the Iberian shrine of the Mother of God, and then
take turns in order of seniority to receive one's tumbler from Mary
take up the position of a practical man and condemn dreamers; now that
take who got there.)
taken along with him, having been wounded in the leg at the battle of
taken and after that, with no further battles, it is not Russia that
taken away.' You remember? She is one that hath not; why, I don't know.
taken by the fight, and that course never can be known in advance and
taken down. There were trunks in the rooms, and hay, wrapping paper, and
taken for the army or have died--this is such a year! It's not a case of
taken from the kitchen for them to try. That beverage was already known
taken from the prisoner.
taken her, or else where can she be?" he added.
taken him under their protection, he would have given everything away.
taken off, onto the farther bank, and reharnessed. The sun had sunk half
taken on myself the role of Natalie Rostova's knight at all, and have
taken on the spot, besides standards and (what seemed most important to
taken place, did not affect him, and even seemed quite insignificant. He
taken place.
taken prisoner at Boulogne, and why, later on, were those criminals whom
taken proper pains and written a more adroit note, or for Napoleon to
taken such possession of him, but he remembered nothing of the past,
taken two, a third had set a house on fire, while another had simply
taken up with dinners and balls and was spent chiefly at Prince Vasili's
taken, and all this for the beaux yeux * of His Sardinian Majesty. And
taken, it was not his fault but the corporal's who had sent him to seize
takes place at such moments.
takes place: the continuity of movement in time both of the events and
takes smaller and smaller units for examination. But however small the
takes, I don't care about that."
taking Nesvitski's arm he left Zherkov, who did not know what to say.
taking charges from their pouches, while others were firing, though who
taking her arm led her out to the veranda, soothing her and trying to
taking her eyes off the stage. And feeling the bright light that flooded
taking him by the hand led him forward. The hairs tied in the knot hurt
taking his papers from under his pillow he went to the window, where he
taking his squadron quartermaster with him, drove at a gallop to the
taking leave of Anna Pavlovna. "It is settled," she added in a low
taking out what she was holding inside it, as if what she held were
taking part in a battle.
taking up his cap and moving toward a small empty room. "We must have an
taking up now one occupation, now another, and at once abandoning them.
tale, nor did he like Zdrzhinski himself who, with his mustaches
tales she had heard) to see a coffin, or him, Prince Andrew, in that
talk about rural economy with the count, fashions with the countess
talk about that they could not discuss before the old countess--not
talk about the reception of a new Brother. They laid on me the duty of
talk and to hear a human voice. The satisfaction of one's needs--good
talk business. Have you been to the Horse Guards?"
talk of all the government offices having been already removed from
talk to his driver.
talk to one another about him. They felt that they could not express in
talk with Boris. He need not come so often...."
talk with you, Countess," he added after a moment's pause.
talk, and especially a quick glance Sonya gave her.
talk, tea, and lighted candles.
talk.
talked about her health, and this pleased her. But sometimes she was
talked some nonsense. Dessalles, that fool, said something. Something in
talked to her. "Perhaps I imagined it; perhaps I shall go in and find
talked with Napoleon.
talking about him in the presence of that Frenchwoman," thought Natasha.
talking about.
talking and listening too eagerly and too naturally, which was why Anna
talking as now, Nicholas did not leave Sonya's side, and gazed at her
talking at once, and it was so strange that she must herself have been
talking broken Russian to the servants, but was still the same narrowly
talking came up to listen. Berg, oblivious of irony or indifference,
talking himself, and continued to talk with the sort of eloquence and
talking in low voices and Kutuzov smiled slightly as treading heavily
talking of a levy of ten men per thousand. Oh yes, let me congratulate
talking of the Schon Grabern affair? Were you there?"
talking on all sides.
talking to Mademoiselle Bourienne. The countess caressed the boy, and
talking to a tall man wearing stars and a ribbon. Natasha at once
talking to him about the first sitting of the Council of State to be
talking to him and he has turned away," she said, pointing at him. "I'd
talking to himself. And he spent the night on a bed made up for him
talking to the Emperor himself, to that very Emperor who had written his
talking to the corporal immediately asked what the Frenchman had said.
talking to them about matters unconnected with the battle.
talking too loudly and vehemently with the abbe, so she hurried to the
talking with Magnitski, let you know what may interest you, and shall
talking with this cheerful and good-natured man.
talking, or sometimes listening to Pierre's stories, and then would go
talking. He neither smoked nor talked, but bending his head first to one
talks sense, but to temporize and wait for something now when Bonaparte
talks with experts, tried to form a definite opinion about it. But the
tangible object to love and a tangible object to hate. Pierre became the
tangled black hair.
tapers burning before the golden covers of the icons, the Kremlin Square
tapped with his stick. Some latecomers took their seats in the stalls,
tasha... (Won't she be surprised when I tell her how I've seen the
task Pierre had to face was one for which he had very little aptitude or
task. He could make nothing of it. Bennigsen stopped speaking and,
taste for what they call "serious reading."
taste. And she had a lady's maid, also big. She said..."
tattered and dirty notes as last time, but nice clean ones for the
tattered coat and trodden-down boots.
tattered inhabitants, and the sick and drunken soldiers wandering about.
taught her to use would now be merely ridiculous in the eyes of
tea and their voices were audible from the next room. At tea all sat
tea talked of the price of corn, the crops, and the good weather for
tea. Seats were brought in and so was the tea. The officers gazed with
tea?" asked his valet.
teach you to think!" and lifting his stick he swung it and would have
teacher.
teachers!" and again his voice grew shrill.
teaching not in words only but also by other means, which may perhaps
tears for his fellow men, for himself, and for his own and their errors.
tears in his eyes.
tears of joy and excitement and embracing her mother.
tears of joy that filled his eyes, concentrated all his enthusiasm
tears of joy, and he embraced his wife who was glad to hide her look of
tears of sadness and rapture. So the boy also was happy that Pierre had
tears of tenderness and joy that choked him, and without finding the
tears, evidently wishing him to come near that he might say something to
tears.
tears.
tears.
tears. As he listened he did not think of Prince Andrew, nor of death,
tears. She never cried from pain or vexation, but always from sorrow or
tears."
teatime she would prepare the countess, and after tea, with God's help,
teeth fiercely and spurring his black thoroughbred Arab, which twitched
teeth gleamed, brows frowned, ever the same words of abuse flew from
teeth on edge!" said a wrinkled clerk who was standing behind Pierre,
teeth were missing that had been knocked out by the butt end of a gun at
teeth, he began with stubby fingers of both hands to ruffle up his thick
teeth. After reading the first words of the Gospel: "In the beginning
tell Lise."
tell a long story.
tell anyone!" and she ran off at once to Sonya.
tell anyone, but, oh God! what am I to do if I love nothing but fame
tell her everything!" said she to Pierre. "One hasn't the heart to scold
tell him of the young Count Kamensky's campaign, the old prince
tell him something. He had a look at all the details of the hunt, sent
tell him.
tell his comrades something very important.
tell me that among some good things it contains others which our weak
tell of the influence some of these people had on others, and say: that
tell the colonel in the presence of other officers that an officer has
tell the truth.
tell them to saddle for us, and Michael must come with my dogs," she
tell whether I saw anything or not?" flashed through Sonya's mind.
tell you he is in our hands, that's certain! But what was most amusing,"
tell you it's quite likely you'll have to suffer for it."
tell you why."
tell you!..." she almost screamed, so as to drown his voice.
tell you, but you have been treating her badly. What a heart she has,
tell you," she went on, turning reproachfully to Mademoiselle Bourienne,
tell you. There is a war now against Napoleon. If it were a war for
telling her things. She has had a dream and is frightened."
telling him his favorite anecdotes and his observations on the
telling it all to Natasha he experienced that pleasure which a man has
telling the truth?" And suddenly I saw him lying like a dead body; then
telling you to fire the bridge, when inflammable material had been put
tells us, the expression of that will is independent of time and is not
temper because Prince Vasili was coming, or whether his being in a bad
temper made him specially annoyed at Prince Vasili's visit, he was in a
temper. "I shall answer for it and not you, and you'd better not buzz
temper. But he is impossible: such a child! I don't know what would
temperature was lower. He had regained consciousness that morning.
tempest and approached her mother with rapid steps.
temple it seemed to me that he was smiling contemptuously at my words,
temple, where an Ismail bullet had pierced his skull, and the empty eye
temples as the Emperor Alexander wore his hair.
temporarily--he felt that it no longer existed for him and could not
temptation she slipped quietly behind one of the columns. In the midst
temptations of the devil would surge into her imagination: thoughts of
ten paces apart to mark the barrier. It was thawing and misty; at forty
ten thousand people were still in Moscow on the first and second of
tenacious endurance and vigor of hardy old age. After a few more turns
tender filial affection with the majestic benevolence of a monarch. He
tender, and proud love of his wife rested on his feeling of wonder at
tenderly on her son's arm, "be affectionate and attentive to him. Count
tenderly paternal way.
tenderly sad voice, she said:
tenderness and emotion with which her heart was overflowing, but without
tenderness she had been feeling for him vanished instantly and was
tenderness with which Natasha spoke of him, the boy, who was only just
tenderness, and glancing at Pierre she went out of the room.
tenderness, sitting beside her and talking of the simplest and most
tenderness.
tenderness. She could not believe that there was nothing to thank him
tens, will have the following significance:
tent.
tenth I don't receive news that they have all got away I shall have to
tenth time that if the letter to the Emperor and the will in Pierre's
tenth time, Molibre's words: "Mais que diable alloit-il faire dans cette
tenths of the men of our left flank had fallen and the full force of the
tents came now loud angry cries and now plaintive groans. Occasionally
term and has proposed to me to be your sponsor. I consider it a
term then also there could have been no war. Nor could there have been
terminated by peace.
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
terrestrial globe and the stick in his other hand a scepter.
terrestrial globe--to show, in contrast to that grandeur, the simplest
terrible and menacing. A cold shiver ran down his spine. He rose
terrible attack of angina pectoris, but in intimate circles details
terrible crash and something huge collapsed.
terrible dividing line of uncertainty and fear--resembling the line
terrible news from her till after her confinement, which was expected
terrible pain of being lifted onto the stretcher, the jolting while
terrible pain. "What is that pain like? Why does he have that pain? What
terrible storm. He repeated every injustice he had ever inflicted on
terrible stormcloud he had desired with the whole strength of his soul
terrible strain, put on speed close to the hare, knocked it off the balk
terrible thing! Quelle terrible chose que la guerre!"
terrible to look at than before. However, he did not look at them now,
terrible to think.... This is my son," she added, indicating Boris. "He
terrible, and now he has this authority of a commander in chief of
terrible.
terribly tangled skein of life which previously had terrified him was
terror I felt of him? What is this gnawing of conscience I am feeling
terror and death the cornet was suffering and knew that only time could
terror and overflowing with love.
terror.
test me!" His heart contracted and the blood rushed to his face. "Let
than I expected. Evidently it had to be...."
than Nicholas had ever seen her before.
than a hundred cannon were already in the hands of the French.
than a man who has been looking at a tuft of steppe grass through the
than a man."
than a yard above the glow of the charcoal. Flakes of falling snow were
than all else is to love this life in one's sufferings, in innocent
than all the others?" she asked herself, and passed in review all those
than any words could have done--did he betray to himself, to her, and to
than anyone could have expected and, gnashing her teeth, flew at the
than anyone, led the guests into the drawing room, and seated them on
than anything he had yet seen or heard.
than at home. They had not as many visitors as before, but the old
than eighteen thousand."
than five hundred paces from where Kutuzov was standing, a dense French
than he did, he found that this was the body of a man, set upright
than he had ever before shown himself.
than her. She knew that for the Penza estates and Nizhegorod forests she
than in Russian but quite calmly.
than in spring, when everything shines so brightly in the rare clear
than is needed to resist attacks. But this rule which leaves out of
than it was in Egypt, in Italy, in Austria, and in Prussia. We do not
than mere words. This chamber with what you see therein should already
than never" and heard them repeated several times by others, people
than one standing on dry ground, and that makes the actions of a man
than ours, and he is always advising the Minister. I am not merely civil
than previous ones because the battle of Borodino was the first Napoleon
than sign the disgrace of my country and of my beloved people whose
than the drawing-room talk of society scandals, the weather, and
than the other; the serfs everywhere seemed thriving and touchingly
than the poorest beggar. A thousand thanks, dear friend, for the volume
than those of a father, but that is not a reason for me to shut my door
than to act "just anyhow."
than what he thought.
than with politics," said he in his quiet ironical tone. "I know nothing
than you or me," as they said, and to doubt the correctness of that
than, anyone he had met before, and above all better than himself.
thank heaven, without offense. Among these folk, too, there are good
thank me. 'I am happy when I can do good, but to remedy injustice is the
thank you with my whole heart." To Rostov every word sounded like a
thanked her for offering him his freedom and told her that one way or
thanked him, and said he would report his gallant deed to the Emperor
thanks especially to the fact that the privations came so gradually that
that
that 'the enemy of the human race' pays no heed to our fine speeches
that Anisya Fedorovna, who had at once handed her the handkerchief she
that Catherine Petrovna would play valses and the ecossaise on the
that Daniel and I are often quite astounded," said Simon, well knowing
that Dolokhov whom others treated so fawningly. He winked at him gaily,
that Dron had finally given up the keys and joined the peasants and had
that Frenchwoman."
that God heard her prayer.
that His Highness was in the ballroom and wished to see her.
that I am serving Barclay. I confess I do not want to."
that I burned my arm for her sake. Look here!"
that I could not have exiled the Postmaster had he not been a harmful
that I had nothing to forgive. It gave me joy to tell her this. She need
that I knew in the past. The whole world is now for me divided into two
that I should meet her just when Natasha's engagement had been broken
that I was doing wrong, but could not tear myself away from them. Lord,
that I would willingly sacrifice everything, only I have nothing...."
that Karataev had been killed, but just at that instant, he knew not
that Kutuzov was. Count Rostopchin was mentally preparing the angry and
that Moscow had been abandoned by its inhabitants (grave as that fact
that Moscow is called 'Holy Moscow'? How many churches are there in
that Moscow would be abandoned, and did not prepare for it. The
that Moscow would soon be in the enemy's hands, just as Count Rostopchin
that Napoleon had power and so events occurred; with some effort one may
that Nicholas received a promise from his mother that Sonya should not
that Petya thought the French would immediately detect their disguise,
that Pierre could no longer see the reddish-yellow face with its gray
that Pierre tried to reply, but his jaw trembled and he felt tears
that Princess Mary and Natasha exchanged glances, evidently wondering
that Princess Mary in this guise looked very plain, worse than usual,
that Rugay, the red hound, was like Uncle, and that if he were a man he
that Russia was really in danger and that the members of the English
that Sonya had told her something about Prince Andrew whom she had seen
that a Russian cannot exist and there is no sense in anything. I thought
that a carpenter uses to a gentleman who has picked up an ax: "We are
that a woman needs variety, and the same thing over and over again would
that absent-minded crank, a grand seigneur husband who was in no one's
that action of his might be. He was convinced that, as a duck is so made
that affair would have ended ill."
that afternoon. She felt that as she brought with her the person the
that all Europe is powerless before him.... And I don't believe a
that all men, though they understand nothing and are conceited and
that all that occupied them was a mere frivolous trifle unworthy of
that all this has happened so quickly and has destroyed all that went
that all was now over. The terrified wolf pressed back her ears and
that all was well."
that another line of thought had sprung up, and while thinking of her
that anything was hidden from her, but because she had dropped so
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
that army: a feeling of self-forgetfulness, a proud consciousness of
that at dinner he gave orders that Mademoiselle Bourienne should be
that battle had been deplorable. Napoleon made ironic remarks during
that bliss. To love one's neighbors, to love one's enemies, to love
that both her slender bare arms clasped him above his neck, and, tossing
that brilliant light. She knew what it was all meant to represent, but
that bulged on his round shoulders, moved slowly along the road on his
that by not speaking of him" (she meant Prince Andrew) "for fear of not
that by resigning himself now to the force of circumstances and to those
that came from bad food, preferred to remain on duty, and hardly able
that came into his head. "I like your being businesslike about it.... I
that came upon him at Hollabrunn, which was clearly impossible. But a
that can't be!"
that contemplation seemed to have forgotten all she had wished to say.
that could be said for those who drew up this project, for it was not
that could happen had been foreseen by the authorities.
that could happen, had been foreseen in his scheme, and that if there
that could happen. They went away even before the battle of Borodino and
that could save the army, and how he alone would be entrusted with the
that covered her head, embraced her, pressed her to him, and kissed her
that crowd. Natasha heard and felt that several people were asking about
that curled up from the rotating black ball. "I cannot, I do not wish
that day and Natasha was sitting with him. In the next room sat the
that day and on which an intense, concentrated fire from several hundred
that day and wished to convey. "He was such a delightful old man, and
that day now seemed to him quite clear and completely solved. He now
that day. But no sooner had Natasha finished her barcarolle than
that deed."
that destroyed Napoleon's army, is impossible.
that diminishing, but still considerable, crowd before the palace while
that dinner was ready! The door opened, and from the dining room came
that direction. Projectiles began to fall still more frequently in the
that district immediately increases. How much then must the probability
that does not exist, and to recognize a dependence of which we are not
that done which settled the matter? And who was to blame for it?"
that dread of beaten tracks, and wish to express itself in a manner
that dreadful abyss, Pierre said to himself: "What am I doing? I need
that during their stay of four days they might have learned where
that effort, and the flame of battle burned slowly out.
that enmeshed him, and which in his present condition he was unable
that entered his head. "It may turn out very well," he thought, "but
that eternal human need for hope of relief, for sympathy, and that
that even if she did not understand, still she could not doubt, and at
that evening thanks to her agitation she was particularly pretty. She
that evening. Kuragin was to put her into a troyka he would have
that every event that occurs inevitably coincides with some expressed
that everybody could see them--he let himself be plundered of hundreds
that everyone had left it. The faces of those who were not conferring
that everyone regarded the Italian in the same light, and he treated him
that everyone was submissive, but that all the same it was dull, Natasha
that exchange bank of history which offers to exchange history's
that exists) is subject. But regarding him from within ourselves as what
that fights more fiercely and spares itself least will win. And if you
that firing, Count Ostermann-Tolstoy's adjutant came galloping from
that flank march. But it is hard to understand why military writers,
that for an instant). Why should he not love her now, and even marry
that for the first time since his arrival Prince Andrew was roused, had
that foreign word, incomprehensible to others as well as to herself.
that goes on in the world and especially about the honors conferred on
that greatest of all geniuses, who the historians declare had control of
that grows does so by sprouting into two leaves, and that the palm, the
that had been announced in a manifesto, and about the recruiting. None
that had been brought that day.
that had been dragged out of the houses. Besides Russian families who
that had been forgotten or sleeping within her had awakened. Thoughts
that had been gained. Prince Andrew introduced his protege, but Prince
that had been pulled to pieces. Several bandaged soldiers, with pale
that had concealed them and, separating, flowed on and on by the three
that had he known it sooner things would have been different.... A
that had not entered her mind for years--thoughts of a life free from
that had passed between them had been long forgotten and could never in
that had placed the Vienna bridge in the hands of the French without
that had previously occurred to him of the cabalistic significance of
that had seized them at the start. Once at a standstill they all seemed
that had taken place in Pierre. They considered that he had become much
that half the prisoners--with whom the Russians did not know what to
that happen?
that has in its onslaught received a mortal wound, felt that they were
that have induced you to take this melancholy decision.
that he and Uncle Pierre, wearing helmets such as were depicted in
that he and all the other prisoners were exactly the ones they wanted
that he asked his opinion, Pfuel rose and, suddenly growing animated,
that he can act as he pleases. Every man, savage or sage, however
that he can order me about. I will certainly go to the French camp with
that he could scarcely breathe, and everybody shouted, "Hurrah! hurrah!
that he decided to go. The thought immediately occurred to him that his
that he did not wish to see them, that Princess Mary might do so if
that he did understand, and he really had understood all she wanted to
that he fell in with the Rostovs.... What a strange coincidence!"
that he fell off his horse and sprained his arm and then ran as hard as
that he had come. His coming had nothing to do with her sufferings or
that he had given his word and bound himself forever, but that he did
that he had no opinion at all on the matter. Another who wished to
that he had not forgotten the morning's talk, that his decision remained
that he had some business.
that he has been expelled by the police."
that he has learned to be fulfilled.
that he is unable to work his charms) because the business of their
that he read this diary about his children for the first time.
that he regarded her with indifference and irony, and so had shrunk into
that he should see her profile in what she thought was its most becoming
that he was at the front and in the power of a man toward whom he now
that he was covered with a pink quilt and that his eyes were closed.
that he was dangerously wounded.
that he was destined to save Russia and that that was why, against
that he was entangled but becoming more and more so at every step, and
that he was in everybody's way. He really was in their way, for he alone
that he was indifferent, because something else, much more important,
that he was nevertheless willing to negotiate. But he had begun talking,
that he was prepared to sacrifice himself for the common good. A third,
that he was restoring to its parents a child he had saved from the
that he was singing, to strengthen the si he sung a second, a third
that he will leave it to the French people themselves to choose their
that he would come or would write to her.
that he would go away without having sold his three roans to the Polish
that he would have a chance to give a reliable account, which he had
that he would have to answer it justly, and justice clashed not only
that he would take no part in the matter, Rostov agreed to be Dolokhov's
that held by jurisprudence, it follows that jurisprudence can tell
that her bare little shoulders shook. Natasha's face, which had been so
that her children were being ruined, that it was not the count's fault
that her husband to whom she had written (that wretched, profligate
that her last chance of marrying has come and that her fate must be
that her question, following his mention of freedom, ascribed to his
that here was a real comrade in her grief, and consequently a friend.
that high, everlasting sky he had seen while lying on that battlefield;
that his Serene Highness did not wish his face to be seen.
that his freedom had also completely gone. He felt that there was now a
that his heart stood still. His hand trembled as he gave his horse into
that his quill spluttered and squeaked. "If you have anything to say,
that his voice rang far through the rooms.
that however impossible it may be, it is so, for without this conception
that humanity calls right or even just, the historians produce a saving
that if anyone should come from you they were to have the books."
that if anything good has been accomplished in this reign it was done by
that imprint of newness found in the households of the newly married.
that in spite of Karataev's affectionate tenderness for him (by which
that in spite of all the unpleasantness he had to endure he would still
that in the Otradnoe avenue and at the window that moonlight night had
that in the depth of his soul he was glad she was remaining at home and
that in the duel with Bezukhov, Pierre was right and Dolokhov wrong, and
that in the excitement of the dispute he had added when expressing his
that incessantly sprang up, proving how right and strong he was (in his
that insignificant society people might carry them from drawing room to
that instant the galling thought occurred to him that he might have to
that is just what you want to deprive him of. I envy him, but you
that is not yet ready.
that is the chief thing," thought Princess Mary; and fear, which she had
that is the poor people, and the price of commodities. An enormous crowd
that is, by his wishes which Natasha tried to guess. Their way of
that is, her husband whom she had to keep so that he should belong
that is, never in the way people devised, but flowing always from the
that is, of any science whatever. If there is even a single body
that is, to doing the very thing that was bound to lead to destruction.
that it became his favorite and almost his sole occupation. Nicholas was
that it is the lieutenant colonel himself," said the esaul, who was fond
that it must all be kept from her father and assuring her that nobody
that it must live in water, so God had made him such that he must spend
that it plainly and indubitably proved the fallacy of all the plans for
that it seemed to be made of one piece with her head and covered with
that it was all nonsense and rubbish, and he did not in the least fear
that it was impossible to defend Moscow and that it would have to be
that it was madness to leave a height which commanded the country around
that it would be a bad thing), but he knew it would happen.
that it would soon pass if only the coachman went to the chemist's in
that kind of thing. But when his Serenity took command everything became
that knoll Pierre had no notion that this spot, on which small trenches
that last winter the count made a will by which he left all his
that law it might have been possible to retain the old conception of
that lay before her.
that lay on the bank. At a mute sign from him, a telescope was handed
that le principe des monarchies est l'honneur me parait incontestable.
that led to his own apartments.
that life is not over for him. But together with this mental change
that light, and had even herself come to believe that she had suffered
that lofty, infinite canopy of heaven that had once towered above him
that low and simple kind that Pierre had once felt for his wife, nor
that makes me unhappy. But even in this I can see lately a shade of
that man following the general law may have developed from lower animals
that man has vanquished me. He has taken hold of me. I could not resist
that many of them came up to her, stared her in the face, and unabashed
that meet the beekeeper are not the same. To the beekeeper's tap on the
that might lead up to the subject--this halting on all sides at the
that mob, the dregs of the people," he thought as he gazed at the crowd:
that moment an immense number of things passed dimly through both their
that moment been wounded and his face showed fear rather than suffering.
that moment it meant nothing to him who might be standing over him, or
that moment little Andrew shouted from outside the door: "Papa! Mamma's
that moment this conversation began, contrary to all the laws of logic
that month and a half while he felt himself drawn nearer and nearer to
that morning; and heads were bowed more frequently and hair tossed back,
that movement from east to west?
that night had gathered to fortify themselves. Pierre well remembered
that no one could understand it. She loved and knew Prince Andrew, he
that no one should notice it, while maintaining as martial an air as
that nothing had happened and asked him not to worry. Marya Dmitrievna
that number because forty-three was the sum of his and Sonya's joint
that occupied him. Evidently these girls passionately desired one
that of Prince Andrew.
that of a force commensurate with the movement observed.
that of him; but when listening to the reports it seemed as if he
that of the lady in the black dress and said:
that old man--in whom there seemed to remain only the habit of passions,
that on receiving news of the defeat some would simply not believe it,
that one's companion is the only man besides oneself capable of
that only a fool would renounce such happiness."
that opening door came a breath of fragrance which suffused Pierre with
that ourselves!" Another, without looking round, as though fearing to
that out of her pure, quiet love for Nicholas a passionate feeling
that pair of women's gloves?" (He referred to the Masonic gloves given
that party Natasha again met Anatole, and Sonya noticed that she spoke
that passionate animal feeling which was apt to master him with great
that peculiar expression of polite weariness which plainly says, "If it
that people had. Yet in reality those personal interests of the moment
that people who meet in a desert generally express for one another.
that period, have passed, and my resolution is firmer than ever. If the
that pleasure because he was already under the command of the Polish
that provisions are supplied and the routes indicated," said Bilibin,
that question been settled? At Drissa and at Smolensk and most
that rarely had so many beautiful women been assembled in one place.
that remained uninjured out of the four, they began moving down the hill
that rule.
that safety lies in running back, sometimes in running forward; and
that same evening there was to be one of the balls that Iogel (the
that same face and same look and step, and the same union of majesty and
that same vaguely disagreeable feeling of moral nausea. "But what
that same year and, as always happens, after the father's death the
that sank into the sofa. "As for us, Count, we get along on our pay. I
that science it is necessary to purify and renew one's inner self, and
that seemed to him so easy. It seemed to him that he had been vicious
that sentence: "Contez nous cela, Vicomte."
that separated the bridge from the Kaluga road, taking more than an
that several times she was on the point of abandoning everything and
that she and I may be man and wife," he told himself.
that she could not see anything, and again settled down in her former
that she could not share it; but she could not understand the joys and
that she did not try to hide the fact that she was no longer sad, but
that she did not--but with her pregnancies, her confinements, the
that she had become fond of him. Pierre did not in any way seek her
that she had to employ her diplomatic tact.
that she made a sign to an officer who drove past, whom Sonya took to be
that she understood not only what he said but also what he wished to,
that she understood, and this seemed to make her love for him still
that she was and is perfectly free and that I wish her all that is
that she winced and uttered a cry.
that she would not be able to bear it and would burst into sobs in his
that smile made Pierre uncomfortable. Toward him Boris behaved with a
that soldier's breast for the soldier to be forever happy, rewarded, and
that somebody actually submitted such a proposal to him. But a commander
that something had gone wrong during his absence, but it was so terrible
that something had gone wrong. He expected the wolf to come his way any
that song.
that stood in his way, threw himself on the sofa.
that strength of mind which he thought constituted his merit and his
that stupid people might meanly despise him on account of his humble
that stupid, meaningless, constantly repeated fraud? Always the same and
that surrounded the Emperors.
that that man suffers, and this Don Juan, wicked fellow, is taking
that that was not he, but something mysterious and horrible, seized her
that the Corsican monster who is destroying the peace of Europe may
that the Emperor talked a long time with the French ambassador, and how
that the French no longer ventured to attack.
that the French officer's head had been torn off, so swiftly had he
that the French retreat from Moscow was a series of victories for
that the French were not all captured or destroyed when our three armies
that the French were only some twenty-five miles away, that French
that the National Convention, the Directory, and Bonaparte were mere
that the Rostovs involuntarily came to think it would be a good thing,
that the advantage was now on our side. There was a substantial change
that the battle of Borodino was fought by us on an entrenched position
that the bee flying with the pollen of a male flower to a pistil
that the conditions are unknown and indefinite, and that the appearance
that the convoy had fifteen hundred men. Denisov had two hundred, and
that the elder hussar's luckless love for Natasha played a part in
that the enemy had been in a certain position the day before, by the
that the events depended on those commands. But examining the events
that the gates of the citadel had been barricaded and that there was
that the general could not refuse. But when dispatching him he recalled
that the incorrect and extraordinary statement was invented (probably to
that the latter knew his face, and all those at court, far from
that the majority of the council voted for such a retreat, and above
that the man was taking off his leg bands, and the way he did it aroused
that the man who advocates the conclusion of a peace, and that the
that the moment had come she was filled with dread of what she might
that the momentous event was accomplished that will always remain the
that the more he valued her the less he loved her. He had taken her at
that the new force they have devised does not account for what happens
that the nurse had been hiding the dead baby. He drew the curtain aside
that the old man wanted to speak to him. He drew nearer and saw that the
that the only possible attitude toward them was one of good humored
that the prince was in a bad humor, stood awaiting him; Mademoiselle
that the princess' offer of corn to the peasants the previous day, and
that the pupils' parents wept at having to let him take their children
that the question of his wife's guilt which had been tormenting him the
that the relations between him and herself could lead to love on her
that the size of any army does not coincide with its strength and that
that the sole weapon against him was prayer, and she tried to pray. She
that the sovereign himself should not be with the army."
that the strange lady, the aide-de-camp, and some of the servants, all
that the sun or the earth had a property of attraction; he said that all
that the various operations necessary to free her from her husband
that the war has ruined you. That is our common misfortune, and I
that the whistling and the turning of wheels are the cause of the
that the wolf should come his way. He prayed with that passionate and
that their foremost ranks were mixed up with some foreign cavalry
that there are not many wives with husbands such as you who would not
that there is any connection between intellectual activity and the
that there were precedents (there were up to that time very few, but
that therefore every emergence of a new power, every struggle
that these thoughts had been suggested to Prince Andrew by his father's
that these will be safeguarded, since such is the will of the greatest
that they can possibly disobey. Having wrung a submissive "I understand"
that they despaired of the possibility of checking this disorder.
that they knew what they were doing and did it of their own free will,
that they looked heavier below, were twitching violently; but he wore
that they may run smoothly.
that they should take with them. The countess sent for her husband.
that they wanted to reunite him with his wife, and in the mood he then
that they were all hurrying--not as men hurry to do something they
that they were not attending on him (he was no longer there, he had left
that they would speak nothing but Russian and that those who made a
that this airy structure should not collapse; but nevertheless it kept
that this is admirable, this is glory--it resembles Caesar and Alexander
that this is our last meeting!" He sighed deeply and rode back to Gorki.
that this mysterious force completely controlled these men and that it
that this tale redounded to the glory of our arms and so one had to
that this was exactly what he had desired and expected. Turning to his
that this was unnecessary and that there was nothing he could teach
that this was unnecessary.
that those in the drawing room heard her and were startled. "Why do you
that those living in it aimed at keeping it spotless--but neither was
that those men with whom you have ridden round the position not only
that though all this was true, and though nothing had happened, yet the
that time and now the whole French army was there. Ermolov wished to act
that time and of his love for Natasha, and passed at once to what now
that time paid no attention to the general progress of events but were
that time that it all resulted from the fact that the alliance between
that time:
that tonight he was a person obliged to perform some sort of awful
that very Bolkonski who had been engaged to his sister.
that very night if possible. With a woman's involuntary loving cunning
that very often in spite of the plainness of her face they gave her an
that village, amid the smoke, was something resembling a battery, but it
that was as yet burning only at one end, just below the roof, and around
that was good in it--equality of citizenship and freedom of speech and
that was good.
that was his quick temper together with his old hussar habit of making
that was it was not that which tormented Pierre at the moment. He was
that was near to the man she loved; and of pity, suffering for others,
that was necessary so as to get from under that ceiling, out into the
that was not pretty, but neither Mademoiselle Bourienne nor the little
that was not what made her unrecognizable; she was unrecognizable at the
that was now deep and now shrill:
that was smoldering in the morning light, stopped suddenly, and Petya
that was strange.
that was swaying from its weight in Prince Andrew's hands, but he
that was unanswerable. It was more than true.
that way. Halfway lay some snow-covered piles of firewood and across and
that we are not in Otradnoe, but in Fairyland. And then I thought... No,
that we must all become like her, and that they were glad to yield to
that weally still going on?"
that went on around him and to note it down. At the time of the meeting
that were afloat, and so Kutuzov's suggestion of an Austrian victory
that were brought him and gave directions when his subordinates demanded
that were covered with sores--his footgear having long since fallen to
that were running past, and demanded reinforcements which did not
that when he was there Count Nicholas would cease going every day to
that when we are thrown out of our usual ruts all is lost, but it is
that which caused Russians to grieve, he had such a sad face when shown
that while Napoleon's proclamation was being read to the troops the
that whole nation to submit. An army gains a victory, and at once the
that will by others.
that within five minutes she had come to feel herself terribly near to
that words can be the immediate cause of the movements of millions of
that world some structure was still being erected and did not fall,
that would astonish people, to perform some patriotically heroic
that year, as all his estates had been remortgaged, and so Nicholas,
that you are not one of those who on pretense of saving mankind wish to
that you were Parisian! You have that... I don't know what, that..." and
that you won't marry her."
that you write about--I mean the report of my brother's betrothal to
that'll do!"
that's all there is in what is called heroism! And did I do it for my
that's all!"
that's certain! There's only one way--guewilla warfare!"
that's not it." Something else, resembling remorse, tormented him. "Yes,
that's not what is needed now.
that's the way they treat me! No confidence in me! Ah, ordered to keep
that, Nicholas had told his wife all that had passed between himself and
that, availing yourself of these circumstances, you might advantageously
that, believe me, is why I am so fond of you. Few people do understand
that, even if only one guest was present, their evening had begun very
that, even more than in Moscow, he felt a sense of bewilderment, bustle,
that, for certain considerations he could not know of, this was
that, he had experience enough to know that nothing happens in war at
that, hearing he was in a bad humor, she had decided not to appear.
that, it means that I loved him from the first. It means that he is
that, the officer, lifting his elbow with a smart gesture, stroked his
that.
that. But consider the position in which you are placing her and me
that. But even it does not exist, there is nothing but quiet and peace.
that. It always seems to me..."
that. Paper money may deceive the ignorant, but nobody is deceived by
that..."
that..." And remembering his former tenderness, and looking now at his
that...."
that: get rid of falsehood and let war be war and not a game. As it is
that?" said different voices.
thawing in the sunshine, the horses galloped quickly, and on both sides
the "heroes") of the efficacy of the directions issued in wartime by
the 3rd Corps who, not satisfied with taking from the unfortunate
the Apocalypse he did not know, but he did not doubt that connection for
the Arbat and got a powder and some pills in a pretty box for a ruble
the Archduchy of Austria, and yet other regiments freshly arriving from
the Arkharovs' ball, talked about the war with Field Marshal Kamenski,
the Armenian family and at two French soldiers who had gone up to them.
the Assumption--and Petya unexpectedly received such a blow on his side
the Austrian General Weyrother: a lucky accident had ordained that the
the Austrian general, "I have the honor to congratulate you."
the Austrians and their uniforms, about their lines, about Bonaparte,
the Austrians, who surrender without a battle. Chance and genius give
the Catholic clergy, offer praise to God for their victory over the
the Christian law of forgiveness of injuries and love of our neighbors,
the Club dinner.
the Club from the day it was founded. To him the Club entrusted the
the Cossack.
the Cossacks had given him he at once agreed with Mouton and issued
the Cossacks rode past Petya and Denisov. When they had all ridden by,
the Cossacks) horses, saddles, horsecloths, and the like. All this had
the Council of State, stood at the table with a beaming countenance. His
the Deity but from a man, which is, that the man who gives the command
the Dorogomilov gate, but there again stopped and, dismounting from his
the Emperor Alexander has surrounded himself with my personal enemies.
the Emperor Alexander that the war was being carried on contrary to all
the Emperor Alexander wished for peace, but would not enter into
the Emperor Francis is arranging a meeting with Bonaparte, that they
the Emperor Francis.
the Emperor Napoleon had resented the demand that he should withdraw his
the Emperor Napoleon, and in the upper circles of Petersburg there was
the Emperor an icon of the Venerable Sergius. It was regarded as a model
the Emperor by his aides-de-camp. This idea was eagerly received.
the Emperor dined--looking in at the palace windows, expecting he knew
the Emperor entered, when a ball should be given in the Emperor's
the Emperor for having moved his army along the Ryazan road, and the
the Emperor had been at headquarters for a month. Each of the three
the Emperor has honored us. But to judge what is best--conscription or
the Emperor immediately!" thought Rostov and galloped on.
the Emperor should first be carefully and skillfully prepared, and then
the Emperor was. One could see that he wished to pass through the rooms
the Emperor would most likely be satisfied immediately, as the Emperor's
the Emperor's arrival and the beginning of a new campaign.
the Emperor's arrival led a dissipated life.
the Emperor's neglect of him by His Majesty's displeasure at Bolkonski's
the Emperor's wish and by the will of the people, he had been chosen
the Emperor's wish, not a military council (the Emperor preferred
the Emperor) "need only say the word and we'll all die fo' him!" added
the Emperor, and a thousand reasons occurred to him why it would be
the Emperor, and all the brilliant young people of Petersburg. The
the Emperor. He felt that this nearness by itself made up to him for the
the Emperor. Suddenly a distant shout aroused him. He started and opened
the Emperor. The countess took up a position in one of the front rows of
the Emperor."
the Empress Marie Louise--who regarded him as her husband, though he had
the Englishman.
the Enns and the Danube became visible, and the rocky left bank of the
the European peoples from west to east and afterwards from east to west.
the Freemasons he had experienced the feeling of one who confidently
the French appearing below them, and then they fired grapeshot at them.
the French are charming, very charming. No one more charming in society.
the French army was beaten and preparing for flight. But these were
the French army.
the French army; his opponent who threw away the rapier and snatched up
the French assumed a still more tragic character, with men freezing,
the French embassy and by many belonging to that circle and noted for
the French general, officers, and men changed to one of determined
the French had now to be fought; the adjacent locality was known and
the French had offered to move him from the men's to the officers' shed,
the French had unexpectedly advanced, and had barely time to remove his
the French infantry, so necessary to the honor of our nation.
the French line on the hill fires flared up and the shouting grew louder
the French moving about on it, opened out before them. All eyes fastened
the French pickets had been standing that evening.
the French sentences which to them were meaningless, with an air of
the French stationed at Tarutino; the news of easy successes gained by
the French were firing, and he felt his heart palpitating as he rode
the French were fleeing toward Smolensk, there were hundreds of such
the French were in Moscow, and (above all) a dim consciousness in every
the French were outflanking our left. The general and colonel looked
the French with his whole army was impossible. The road for the French
the French!' Murat, seeing that all is lost if the sergeant is allowed
the French.
the French. At the beginning of the battle they stood blocking the
the French; for this flank march, had it been preceded, accompanied,
the Frenchmen with the gunners ended, whether the red-haired gunner had
the General Staff!" he said with a smile, knowing that those words would
the German village of Salzeneck. The best quarters in the village were
the Grand Cross of Maria Theresa, and the whole army received rewards.
the Great and is therefore good.
the Guards he went with firm quick steps to the reception room.
the Guards to the field of battle, afraid of letting a ready victim
the Guards. He was clean-shaven and wore a Guardsman's padded coat with
the Hofkriegsrath and both Emperors took part. At that council, contrary
the Holy Mother of God has been revealed.' On hearing those words I said
the Horse Guards.
the Iberian Mother of God and go to fight, or of the balloons that were
the Ismaylov regiment was quartered for the night ten miles from Olmutz
the Jews."
the Kaluga road to the day their leader fled from the army, none of the
the King himself!" cried he, looking around him with eyes that glittered
the Kirghiz horse (who performed the duties of an adjutant) to go and
the Kolocha, a mist had spread which seemed to melt, to dissolve, and to
the Kremlin he even began to avoid being crushed and resolutely stuck
the Kremlin, but called on his friend Obolenski, who was fifteen and was
the Lodge, told the password, and at last was permitted to sit down.
the Lord and we are Thy people. Show Thy mercy upon us this day, O Lord,
the Lord!"
the Marshal had insisted on Princess Mary's leaving at once, as it was
the Marshal, meeting her at the house door.
the Mason in a stern and tremulous voice.
the Mason's arguments; he dreaded not to be able to believe in him.
the Mason. "Yes, I never thought of it, but I have led a contemptible
the Minister of War and went to join the army in Moldavia. While in
the Minister of War less than any of the other matters he was
the Mokhovaya Street and the other at the Provision Market. (2) Such
the Moroseyka, the Lubyanka, and Pokrovka Streets. Others quartered
the Mother of God to the wounded in the Catherine Hospital where we will
the Niemen--only the Niemen?" repeated Napoleon, looking straight at
the Note.
the Old Guard into action. Ney and Berthier, standing near Napoleon,
the Panins had at their party. Everything was just as it was everywhere
the Petersburg Berezina plan would be attributed to Kutuzov led
the Petersburg world this sad side of the affair again involuntarily
the Povarskaya, so well known to all Moscow. The countess herself and
the Preobrazhensk regiment--white chamois-leather breeches and high
the Raevski Redoubt, or the Knoll Battery, but Pierre paid no special
the Reformation the peoples massacred one another, nor why during the
the Rhetor but Pierre's sponsor, Willarski, whom he recognized by his
the Rhine and the Colosseum. The cabmen he met and their passengers,
the Roman, Spanish, or French realm; to another it is liberty, equality,
the Rostovs' affairs was by Nicholas marrying a rich woman, and that the
the Rostovs' drawing room Natasha was in her own room. When she heard
the Rostovs' had jocularly assumed the role of Natasha's knight. "I'm
the Rostovs.
the Russian army in its retreat from Vilna to Moscow lost in the various
the Russian army moved voluntarily, with no such threat of destruction
the Russian army, but might in other circumstances have led to its
the Russian general entered, and after glancing over his spectacles at
the Russian people, after the enemy had been destroyed and Russia had
the Russian people, the causes and meaning of which are so baffling to
the Russian position.
the Russian soldiers with red and vacant eyes. Occasionally he emitted
the Russian troops had been broken up, there was no part of the Russian
the Russian troops were quietly encamped at Tarutino, a change had taken
the Russians aimed at.
the Russians and the French looked at Pierre with surprise. Besides his
the Russians had been overwhelmed by flying Austrians and had had to
the Russians opposed the entire French army launched against our left
the Russians were running away and that he himself was killed, but he
the Russians with but a tenth of the energy he had shown when he
the Saltanov dam being "a Russian Thermopylae," and of how a deed worthy
the Semenovsk regiment, then about Arakcheev, and then about the Bible
the Shevardino Redoubt as the left flank of the position. It was much
the Shevardino Redoubt was the left flank of our position, and the
the Shevardino mound to observe the enemy. On the twenty-fourth, we
the Sivtsev Vrazhok, those old Moscovites who desired nothing, hurried
the Smolensk) road acted simultaneously on him also.
the Sunday before, "and always the same life that is no life, and the
the Sushchevski or the Rogozhski quarter."
the Tarutino, the Vyazma, nor the Krasnoe battles were necessary; that
the Thabor Bridge, at Vienna.... They have crossed without striking a
the Three Hills. Having waited there for Rostopchin who did not turn
the Treasury in Petersburg to recruit the militia, and then to the army
the Tsar did.
the Tsar!' so they began looking for him," here Karataev's lower jaw
the Tsar, as if such relations with an Emperor were an everyday matter
the Tsar-cannon. Several people were sorry for Petya, and suddenly a
the Vienna-Znaim road. Bagration was to make this march without resting,
the Vilkavisski forest and flowing over the three bridges thrown across
the Warsaw highroad, and from there they would hasten abroad with post
the Young Guards stationed behind the knoll moved forward. Napoleon
the abandonment of the city in which her greatness is centered and in
the absence of a moral barrier between them.
the abundance of it in the other--a spirituality he himself lacked and
the accountant with the naive face was feeling its texture, shaking his
the accuracy of his theory.
the action the less they can command and the more numerous they are,
the actions of the mass to the will of one man, would have found it
the activity of individuals who ruled the people, and regarded the
the activity of the leaders represents the activity of the people.
the adjutant had come in and interrupted him. The adjutant, also, had
the adjutant on duty," said the official. "He will conduct you to the
the adjutant--a handsome lad with long black curls arranged like Murat's
the adoration then common in Moscow for the Emperor, who was spoken of
the advance because on learning that Napoleon was there he had quite
the affairs in Spain.
the afternoon, having made all his calls, he was returning to Bilibin's
the afternoon," replied Bolkonski growing more animated and expecting
the age.
the aide-de-camp who had opened the ball, and several other young men,
the aide-de-camp, having returned and choosing an opportune moment,
the aim of the Russians was to stop the French, to cut them off, and
the aim of the officer who wished to go into action to distinguish
the aim was the aggrandizement of France, that might have been attained
the air of a man little concerned in what the two ladies were saying.
the air of an old brigadier.
the air of the chorus so that Sonya should catch it. "Where were you
the air.
the ammunition wagon.
the ancient monuments of barbarism and despotism I will inscribe great
the ancients insoluble. The absurd answer (that Achilles could never
the angle became still more acute and we withdrew still farther, because
the angry whispers of the adjutants who tried to stop him. Kutuzov, his
the anteroom and inquired timidly and softly whether the prince and
the apple fell because he wanted to eat it and prayed for it. Equally
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
the arm of Pierre whom he had promoted to be a Frenchman for saving his
the armies and the whole region--powers no commander in chief ever had
the armistice immediately and march on the enemy. Inform him that the
the armpits and dragging along a little old man in a uniform and
the arms, ammunition, gunpowder, and stores of corn not removed? Why
the army and a lengthening of its marches, whereas the only reasonable
the army and return home. On receiving this letter, Nicholas did not
the army considerably. Throughout the whole army and at headquarters
the army drew near Moscow--despite the strength of the feeling that had
the army now that it is in danger. I understand that. Mon cher, it is
the army to General Buxhowden. During this interregnum we begin a very
the army to the other.
the army unless he is a general!" said Napoleon, evidently uttering
the army was a great grief to me. This young man, of whom I spoke to you
the army, another, a ninth party, was being formed and was beginning
the army, took none of these steps.
the army, were dissatisfied with the peace concluded after the battle of
the army," and which constitutes the sinew of war, Kutuzov's words, his
the arrival of a suitor agitated her, and still more so by both her
the artful maneuvers suggested by our generals meant fresh movements of
the attainment of the historic, universal, aims of humanity. A deed done
the attempted abduction of Rostova. He resolutely denied these
the attention of all the superior officers, the militiamen and soldiers
the avenue leading to the house as if he were entering an enchanted,
the baby born?"
the back fitted, she heard in the drawing room the animated sounds of
the baggage trains, and the prisoners, hemmed in on all sides, emerged
the baggage wagons had all crossed, the crush was less, and the last
the balance of power in Europe, the diffusion of the ideas of the
the balance of power, and the latter, evidently interested by the young
the balcony. Petya's eyes grew bloodshot, and still more excited by the
the bald head. Vera, Natasha, Sonya, and Petya now entered the room,
the ball became livelier after his departure. For one of the merry
the ball, in those brightly lighted rooms--with music, flowers, dances,
the ball.
the ballroom looking after the packing of the glass and china. Natasha
the ballroom where, shyly at first and then more and more merrily and
the ballroom with his heavy waddling gait, he was arrested by someone's
the ballroom, pointing to Natasha.
the ballroom, which she particularly liked for its loud resonance, and
the bank of the Drissa. As there was not a single town or large
the battalion commander. "Oh, my God!" he added, stepping resolutely
the battery and along the Kamenka streamlet retreated. From the battery
the battery to retire as quickly as possible. When the supports attached
the battery. (This was the attack for which Ermolov claimed the credit,
the battle at Austerlitz? The French losses were almost equal to ours,
the battle of Austerlitz began said that it would be lost, he alone, in
the battle of Schon Grabern than you do now," said his son with a smile.
the battle of Vyazma, Petya had been in a constant state of blissful
the battle was actually fought, this position, protected by the river
the battlefield, believed that the French had been defeated and were
the battlefield.
the bear back to back and put the bear into the Moyka Canal. And there
the bearer of the letter.
the beast: for it is the number of a man; and his number is Six hundred
the beautiful expression of her own eyes--the look they had when she
the bed, pale and dry eyed, and was gazing at the icons and whispering
the beginning of the Russian campaign--to transfer the authority to the
the beginning of the new year. Natasha was still as much in love with
the belfry of Ivan the Great. The domes of the New Convent of the Virgin
the bells of the old prince's carriage approaching. Prince Andrew and
the bells were ringing, Pierre got out of his vehicle and proceeded on
the bench and the lieutenant colonel sat down beside him.
the best and happiest moments of his life--especially his earliest
the best horses, and promised to assist him in every way.
the best man in the world and free, he would ask on his knees for her
the best maroon dress, and so on, all would be well. They forgot that
the best matches in Russia.
the best of all. If only you did not go away! Do you remember how
the best position for an army when it is not being attacked is where
the best possible setting for this strikingly poetic, charming girl,
the best time of the year for the chase. The hounds of that ardent young
the better match and how the matter would be regarded at court. There
the better of cleverer ones, Helene--having realized that the main
the better, so much the better, Monsieur Pierre! Terrible in battle...
the birches that formed the forest, it was ten times as thick and twice
the black-mustached Denisov with servile deference.
the blackguards have looted.... There! See what that one has behind
the blood that rushed to his heart at the thought. "I will fall at his
the bonfire, and addressing Tushin asked him to have the guns moved a
the bookcase with her eyes fixed on a streak of light escaping from the
the boots and drawing his sword, moved threateningly toward Pierre.
the boots.
the borzois, who did not get any closer to her.
the box for cards.
the boy he got up quickly, took out his handkerchief, and went to the
the boy's hand. "Entrez, entrez." *(2)
the boyars had already taken definite shape in his imagination. That
the bridge chased each other along. Looking on the bridge he saw equally
the bridge, and now someone has gone and blundered; they are all beside
the bridge, for the horizon as seen from the valley through which the
the bridge.
the bridges were strong and had handrails. Everything bore an impress of
the bright August sunshine and the bells sounded merrily. One of the
the bright glow of some inner fire that had been suppressed was again
the brilliant surroundings in which he had last met his friend in
the broken sealing wax and pens.
the brood cells. In place of the former close dark circles formed by
the bushes came the huntsman who had been fighting and rode toward
the bushy edge of the road where he was to stand, arranged his reins,
the business of packing was received skeptically. Everybody expected
the business there in the commissariat department and if possible sign
the butler thrust mysteriously forward, wrapped in a napkin, from behind
the cadet to restrain him.
the cadet under fire for the first time had experienced.
the calamities that would follow the abandonment of the city and the
the calm frost of twenty degrees Reaumur, the dazzling sunshine by day,
the campaign and the two battles in which he had taken part, and his
the campfire listening to the talk.
the campfire. They were quarreling and fighting desperately, each trying
the campfires were blazing on all sides ready for cooking, the wood
the candles was focused on those two happy faces alone.
the candlestick of which the cockroaches that had been gnawing it were
the cannon balls and shells all flew overhead, but sometimes several men
the cannon the men moved still more briskly and busily. No one any
the cannon! Look there, those are furs!" they exclaimed. "Just see what
the cannon, under the horses' hoofs and between the wagon wheels, men
the cannon--still agitated as before by the thought of the Emperor and
the captain, and passed out into the street.
the capture of that officer and the blow he had dealt him.
the cares of worldly welfare, in order without clinging to anything to
the carpenters cutting the timber for new houses with axes, the women
the carriage beside the countess and gazing at the slowly receding
the cart on foot, caught hold of it with his sound hand and turned to
the carts with the wounded had moved out of the yard.
the carts with the wounded, the ringing bells, the slanting rays of the
the carved back of a velvet chair he had turned round for the purpose,
the castle. In spite of the severe frost some hundred generals and staff
the cause of her sadness, and because she was feeling well. She was also
the cause of his dispositions not being as well planned as on former
the cause of his embarrassment, but it resulted from the state of his
the cause of his grief.
the cause of which Pierre so well understood.
the cause. But despite their endeavors to prove that the cause of events
the causes of phenomena--the old method of history is moving.
the causes that produce it. But modern history has not done this. Having
the center of the Russian army, and that that center was already
the center sofa. The bigwigs, the most respected members of the Club,
the center?" he inquired, searching with his eyes for someone. (Prince
the chair for her.
the changed expression on Prince Bagration's face at this moment. It
the chantry long before, but that nine tenths of the peasants in that
the charcoal.
the charitable Prussian ladies send us two pounds of coffee and some
the cheeks, the same expression was on her charming childlike face with
the chief author of the plan of campaign; Paulucci, an adjutant general
the chief."
the child down and ran with her to the large house. It was now, however,
the children of earth are--eternally--children of the whole universe.
the children of the peasants and household serfs.
the church.
the circle of her contemporaries and had once been a real, living, and
the city and now at the plan, considering its details, and the assurance
the city and there is not the slightest danger. See! I've just been
the city but of the camp, walking in the middle of the streets. Both
the city he was met by Count Rostopchin's adjutant.
the clatter of knives and forks, the voices of visitors, and the soft
the clavichord, sang the tune. Bolkonski was not there. None of these
the clear starry sky between the dark roofs of two penthouses.
the clearing from which Denisov had reconnoitered the French camp,
the clever though shy, but observant and natural, expression which
the climate," said he.
the coachmen and the yard porter noticed him and raised their caps to
the cobblestones, and the brilliant, hot sunshine were all full of that
the coffin--the Marshal, the village Elder, peasant women--and all with
the cold in his head at Borodino to the sparks which set Moscow on
the cold wind, swarmed in these earthworks like a host of white ants;
the collar of his coat which, though it was unbuttoned, still seemed
the collective will was transferred to him.
the colonel, Nesvitski, Zherkov, and the officer from the suite.
the colonel, closely--to find in his face confirmation of his own
the color of muddy water. At times a sort of mist descended, and then
the column, gave him the order to advance.
the combs, and the short home bees, shriveled and listless as if they
the command of the detested foreigner Barclay, whose rank was inferior
the commander in chief and had taken it to his commander. Just as he had
the commander in chief speaking but an ordinary old man who wanted to
the commander in chief would inspect the regiment on the march. Though
the commander in chief's regarding the regiment. Behind Kutuzov, at a
the commander in chief's soul as in that of every Russian.
the commander in chief.
the commander-in-chief, Kutuzov.
the commissariat department in that town.
the companion and expressed his dissatisfaction with his daughter by
the company commander might get killed and he, as senior in the company,
the company, and overtook the carriage, still keeping time to the song.
the complaints of the French as to the nonobservance of the rules, in
the complete darkness Tushin's guns moved forward, surrounded by the
the conception of a man's completely free action.
the conception of the infinitely small, and the resulting geometrical
the condition in which she had found Prince Andrew. But Pierre's face
the cone and its base. The soldier himself does the stabbing, hacking,
the connection between those men and the nations has not been found.
the conquerors, nor even in armies and battles, but in something else.
the conspiracy is crowned with success.
the constrained, activity of man? That is a question for history.
the construction of my own body. I chose one out of all the possible
the contempt with which Rostov, from his fighting army point of view,
the contradictory replies, not meeting the questions, which all the
the contrary case, Your Majesty, I shall see myself forced to repel an
the contrary the greater the heat the more solidified the remaining snow
the contrary, the deviations made from his theory were, in his opinion,
the conversation from taking an unpleasant course, told a story that had
the conversation she noticed "Granddad" give Bennigsen a quick, subtle
the convoy officer.
the copse across which our men, regardless of orders, were running and
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
the corner of the house with a frightened yet resolute look, carrying a
the corpses over the parapet.
the cot.
the cot. He did not look round, but still gazing at the infant's face
the count aside and implored him with tears to take her away quickly,
the count have borne his dearly loved daughter's illness had he not
the count was already leaving the room, Princess Mary went up hurriedly
the count went with the prospective purchaser to his estate near Moscow.
the count's first words he raised it slowly and looked up at him as if
the count. It is amazing how his Serene Highness could so foresee the
the countess in vague general terms, avoided talking with her and
the countess interrupted him.
the countess smiling.
the countess, but Natasha, who had bustled about helping them all, was
the countess, indignant that they should have dared to treat this little
the countess, trying to conceal the action from herself and from him,
the countess, your wife, is preparing to go abroad. I expect it's
the countess.
the countess. "But I am in great need of this sum."
the countess... promoted to be an officer... thank God... How tell the
the countess; about 70,000 went for interest on debts. The building of a
the country life to which she was accustomed, youth prevailed. Natasha's
the country was richest.
the country."
the course of events in the first case, but did so correspond in the
the course of the Kolocha and Moskva rivers--was broken and hilly.
the courtiers addressed him and the way Paulucci had allowed himself to
the courtiers who tried to arrange compromises between the other two.
the creditors threatened, he re-entered the government service.
the crops and burn wood to their hearts' content. I don't order it
the cross on Lazarev's breast and, dropping his hand, turned toward
the crossing of the Berezina that destroyed the French army. In reality
the crowd and stopped behind the priest. He crossed himself with an
the crowd collected round him he seemed confused, but at the demand
the crowd moaned and heaved forward, but again paused.
the crowd of generals and officers surrounding him. Suddenly his face
the crowd of retreating soldiers, ordering them back. Bagration rode up
the crowd standing there. The crowd unexpectedly found itself so close
the crowd without seeking anyone, and her delicate arm, bare to
the crowd, and the people rushed toward the reader.
the crowds of soldiers.
the crowned heads of Europe. The discredited rulers of the world can
the cubs and the borzois three. The huntsmen assembled with their booty
the cubs from under your very nose."
the cudgel was the Russian people; those who try to explain the matter
the current rumors from all sides and gave superficial and hasty orders
the curtain was slowly drawn, and from behind it a soft mysterious voice
the customary place before an icon of the Blessed Virgin, let into the
the cutting and there it was cold and damp, but above Pierre's head was
the dam, the pond, and the bank.
the dam, throwing two soldiers off their feet, and ran onto the slippery
the dancer. "As they turned them over one seemed still alive and, would
the dancers. He invited Prince Andrew to come and see them, and asked
the dark.
the darkness he took the boy's hand and pressed it.
the darkness.
the darkness. He was continually imagining that a cannon ball was flying
the darkness. This was the last French attack and was met by soldiers
the daughter. "Boris says his soul finds repose at your house. He has
the dawn merging with the afterglow of sunset, was visible.
the day to the army.
the day's success--a success exceeding his expectations, but the old
the dead eyes, and hastened to close them. She closed them but did not
the dead man.
the deception and confusion," he thought, "but how am I to tell them
the deceptions, robberies, and murders which would have to be committed
the deep snow. He held the pistol in his right hand at arm's length,
the deep wet snow between the place where they had been standing and
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
the defects of the latter and the merits of his own plan, Prince
the delight Nicholas felt when he escaped from the region covered by the
the delighted "Uncle" dismounted, and cut off a pad, shaking the hare
the demand was that I should withdraw beyond the Vistula and the Oder,
the departments when everybody has to pass examinations?"
the depth of a whole spiritual world foreign to him was an irresistible
the depth of their national feeling, then the role chosen by Rostopchin
the deputation.
the deserted field. "No, it can't be!" thought Rostov, taking a deep
the desire for revenge that lay in the heart of every Russian as long as
the desire to find those causes is implanted in man's soul. And without
the desired result, namely a conviction. As soon as Pierre began to say
the destiny of those Thou hast sanctified.
the destruction of "Thy Jerusalem," and she prayed to God with the
the destruction of all their property. In this letter the countess also
the details of her husband's plans, thoughts that had no connection with
the details of how Metivier and Feller had not understood the symptoms,
the determination of Denisov who flourished his sword and shouted
the devil himself! When you get there you'll find out what those
the devil knows what!"
the devil moves it. Another man says the locomotive moves because its
the dew, and from the bayonets of the troops crowded together by the
the diagonal of a parallelogram of forces.
the different streets with one and the same desire to get on quickly;
the difficult problem of what was taking place before them. From the
the dinner sat silent, glancing with a frightened look now at her
the direction indicated. At the back entrance stood his caleche. The
the direction of Kovno, preceded by enraptured, mounted chasseurs of the
the direction selected by the whole herd." Such is the reply historians
the direction the herd takes to what animal happens to be at its head.
the dirty pond beside the Smolensk road. Yes, it was the same flesh,
the discovery of the law of Copernicus the Ptolemaic worlds were still
the dispatch. "But Komarov and I"--he pointed to the Cossack--"were
the dispositions in German, and now, much exhausted, he arrived at
the dispositions or anything else--he was engaged in satisfying the
the distance in that birch and fir forest to the right of the road, the
the distance straight before him, down the narrow open space, holding
the distance, the other pack rushed by the wood past the count, and it
the distance. These were troops of Beauharnais' corps which had started
the distinguished dignitary who bore the title of "Collector of Alms"
the doctor said, it seemed might easily happen--she could not oppose
the doctor's encouragement. The countess passed a fortnight in an
the doctor. He felt Prince Andrew's pulse, and to his surprise and
the doctor. Perhaps he'll take pity on me someday, when it comes to
the door Prince Andrew and the figure of the old man in a white dressing
the door and as soon as it opened his rough old arms closed like a vise
the door and the noise of a chair falling over, and a girl of thirteen,
the door and went in without giving her an answer.... "Disgusting,
the door himself behind him.
the door into the part of the hut where Prince Andrew lay. It was dark
the door of the shed.
the door she heard Nicholas clearing his throat again and stirring, and
the door, that dreadful something on the other side was already pressing
the door," and Natasha ran across the drawing room to the dancing hall,
the door.
the door.
the door.
the door. Pierre took the bandage off his eyes and glanced around him.
the door. That door opened and Natasha came out, looking excited. Not
the door; the scream ceased and he heard the wail of an infant.
the doors, they all sat down and remained for some moments silently
the dragoons could successfully make a flank counterattack. If they
the drawing room and seeing Anatole went up to him.
the drawing room, where he saw Vera and his mother with the old lady.
the drawing room.
the drawing room.
the drawing room. He evidently tried to find something to say, but
the drawing room? Even if I like him I can't now be myself with him."
the drawing-room door, at which the Emperor reappeared talking to the
the drink store, having received orders to do so.
the drunken rabble; now had processions displaying the icons, and now
the duchy to the Duke of Oldenburg"--and there would have been no war.
the duel and had spent that first agonizing, sleepless night. But now,
the dusty road came the infantry in ranks, bareheaded and with arms
the duties of wife and mother upon me I shall try to perform them as
the duty that now bound him to her forever. The present feeling, though
the ear of the company.
the early days of their marriage, took her about with him wherever the
the earth wall with his back turned as if he were examining something
the earth. Perhaps the red spot was a fire, or it might be the eye of an
the east to the west form the essence and purpose of these events, and
the east. The abandoned campfires were burning themselves out in the
the ecclesiastical point of view, and that her directors were making
the edge of the wood stood Mitka, the count's other groom, a daring
the effect of making them gradually begin to forget him without being
the elder one with frightened look clutched her younger companion by the
the elder, as though shielding himself, had replied, as all village
the elderly lady, even betraying some impatience, she gave him an
the eldest princess and Prince Vasili she spoke disapprovingly, but in
the employment of power confer benefactions.
the enchanted circle I cannot escape from. I am now going to the war,
the end of a year began to feel that the more firmly he tried to rest
the end of her life to love the man with whom she had fallen in love for
the end of the fourth month of their separation she began to have fits
the end of the third verse as the last note died away, twenty voices
the endless variety of men's minds, which prevents a truth from ever
the enemy column. That morning's attack on the wagons had been made so
the enemy from flank and rear and securing from the Ukraine recruits for
the enemy was, might have arranged some more advantageous plan and
the enemy will bring up his guns to use grapeshot."
the enemy will not soon attack him. Forty eight guns with ammunition
the enemy would ruin you..."
the enemy's armies will be in a day's time, and no one can gauge the
the enemy's fires, but heard the shouting of the French more loudly and
the enemy's line, and a cavalry attack by "the men of iron," all these
the enemy, came with jingling spurs up the steps of the porch, despite
the enjoyment of that day was over. He did not go straight home from
the enormously high study door opened and showed the figure of a rather
the entrance.
the entrenchment, and went on again. Just behind it they came upon some
the esaul with an air of importance about tomorrow's undertaking, that
the evening again turned to Boris, asking him in a tone of caressing
the evening at Count Kochubey's. He told the count of his interview with
the evening before? "Yes, yes! All that has happened, and now all is
the evening, heaven knows what might not have happened. But tomorrow we
the evening. You must come.... Come!"
the event falsified them. There are always so many conjectures as to the
the event seemed to depend) should be carried out, the concurrence of
the event.
the events, and who always combine in such a way that those taking
the example and instruction of the best and wisest men.
the exception of Prince Bagration, who declined to come, were all there
the excitement shown in some of these faces lay chiefly in questions
the exhausted, wavering men felt comforted and inspirited.
the expression of the will of someone endowed with power, but that
the expression she saw on the maid of honor's face, and again relapsed
the expression with which he frowned and looked away Pierre thought he
the expression with which people compliment their host at a ball. "Let's
the expression women assume when they suppose they are saying something
the external world, on time, and on cause, we arrive at laws."
the extinction of life there is a severance, a spiritual wound, which
the eyes of the Guardsman's horse. The heavy black horse, sixteen hands
the face and with bloodshot eyes, dragged Mitenka out by the scruff of
the face that emerged from the shirt.
the faces of the people crowding at the crossroads. Black figures
the fact that Pierre was very rich, had two mansions in Moscow, and that
the fact that he had no connections in the city and was a stranger
the fact that only those came who wished to dance and amuse themselves
the facts he was recounting. For some time he engrossed the general
the facts of history (as far as we know it) confirm the truth of the
the familiar thou, but said you to her, and kissed only her hand. After
the family groups to divide into separate households. He was hard alike
the family to get used to him, proudly assuring them all that he only
the family--that is, one wife or one husband. Natasha needed a husband.
the far distance finds what he sought at his very feet. All his life
the farther he went the more disorganized they were. The highroad on
the fate of battles had arrived. Would this disorderly crowd of soldiers
the father had dragged his legs upstairs while the son had followed him
the fatigue of his old and feeble body.
the favors of a very important personage and Boris had only recently
the fear of her father, and even the possibility of love and of family
the feeling he had noticed between his protegee Natasha and Prince
the feet of Thy faithful servants! For Thou art the defense, the succor,
the ferocity to wound them with their sabers, as I have repeatedly
the ferry, but Pierre and Andrew, to the astonishment of the footmen,
the fichu with a happy and kindly smile.
the field marshal that it was impossible to fight there before Moscow
the field of Borodino.
the field of battle with the pale and terrified Ober-Hofmarschal Count
the field of battle, who though still in some confusion were less
the field toward the very spot where the wolf had disappeared. The hazel
the fields on which these men were floundering about. As soon as they
the fields."
the figure cut in the stencil.
the figure of Makar Alexeevich, always so timid before but now quite
the figure of a bareheaded man in a peasant's coat. He grasped a musket
the final proof that events had matured. The tightly coiled spring was
the fire and the soldiers looked at him in silence.
the first and last time in her life.
the first and second squadrons of hussars and infantry battalions
the first couple. Noiselessly, skillfully stepping with his little feet
the first fortification. General Campan's division did not seize the
the first impression of him, as of something round, was fully confirmed:
the first movement of the main wheel of a large tower clock. One wheel
the first of you who moves forward." Little Nicholas turned to look
the first place it is hard to understand where the profundity and genius
the first squadron?"
the first time picturing to himself her soul. And he understood her
the first time, that he may not make a mistake and fall into the enemy's
the first time. With scarcely any exceptions they all were, or seemed to
the first to dance? Is it possible that not one of all these men will
the first to gallop into the village street.
the first voice, but in society to the second. So it was now with the
the flagstaff that had been dropped beside him. (The flag had already
the flames hiss and crackle. The men drew nearer and lit their pipes.
the flames talking and shouting could be heard. Seeing that his trap
the fleches. As soon as they had descended into that hollow, the smoke
the fleeting glance they threw at the riders and in the malevolent
the flesh of different animals--from men to horses--in various stages
the flooding waters glittering in the setting sun.
the floor of the hive, drowsy shriveled bees crawl about separately
the floor. He was telling me something, and I wished to show him my
the floor. Many followed his example, and the loud shouting continued
the foe made him forget his own sorrow. He was entirely devoted to the
the folding bedstead of Bennigsen's adjutant. This adjutant was also
the following was written:
the fondest mother could do for her son you have done and are doing for
the food in the cauldron, and he thought it more delicious than any food
the footlights, and from horns and contrabass came deep notes while many
the forces had already made itself felt in Petersburg, was dispatched,
the forces of Western Europe began, and in 1812 these forces--millions
the forces of Western Europe crossed the Russian frontier and war
the foreman of a spinning mill, when he has set the hands to work, goes
the forest where it reached out to Shamshevo, to have a look at the part
the forest, and Count Orlov-Denisov, having seen Grekov off, returned,
the forest, her feelings, and a talk with a beekeeper she met, and
the forests in the province of Kostroma, the land lower down the river,
the form in which he had expressed his thoughts, but displeased that
the fourth was Nicholas' own with a short shaggy black shaft horse.
the frightened face and the figure could not be altered, and that
the front door.
the front of her little shawl and, still kneeling on the floor, set to
the front of his squadron, and before he had time to finish giving the
the front, in the very center, leaning back against the orchestra rail,
the frozen window, she felt still sadder and more in love, and forgot
the fruit. An old peasant whom Prince Andrew in his childhood had often
the full moon fell on the floor. Dimmler had finished the piece but
the full significance of the words he heard.
the fun of the game which interested him most.
the funeral. But this he was unable to do, for he received tidings that
the game. She looked at him and, screwing up her eyes sternly, continued
the gate and by Morel, who came to say that some Wurttemberg hussars had
the gates and began pitching their camp in the Senate Square. Out of the
the gateway of the courtyard. In the dense wavering smoke some of the
the general asked him to restore it. All his absent-mindedness and
the general confusion. The men of this party had both the quality
the general course of affairs and as to the man to whom it had been
the general had begun such a discussion and so Berg drew Pierre to it.
the general merriment stopped and the guests began to converse sensibly
the general opinion of all who had known him previously was that he had
the general state of affairs, and when Rostov spoke of these matters did
the general, who looked through his field glass.
the general. "In the heat of a battle it is easy to make a mistake. Go
the general... third company to the commander." The words passed along
the generals espied him and, hearing what he had come about, informed
the genius Napoleon and, suddenly recognizing him as a brigand, sent him
the gentlemen and Mademoiselle Bourienne rose and the little princess,
the gentlemen around.
the gesture of a man too busy to lose a moment, glanced at Kutuzov and,
the girl in white went up to the prompter's box and a man with tight
the girls' educational establishments under the patronage of the Dowager
the gleaming icons stood a long invalid chair, and in that chair
the good of that? War is my profession, but his business is to reign
the good-natured expression still more apparent, and gazed at his friend
the gory trace of that recollection would not pass with time, but that
the government--an activity that in the opinion of the historians was
the great man's mercy; the Emperor of Austria considers it a favor that
the great reception room and, bowing politely, asked Balashev to follow
the great standing armies should be reduced henceforth to mere guards
the greater or lesser desire to fight and to face danger. Only then,
the greater part of the men had to halt and an unpleasant consciousness
the greater their achievement. How does God above look at them and hear
the greatest war there ever was, and I know nothing and am fit for
the greatness of something incomprehensible but all-important."
the grief felt by the subjects he was abandoning, latterly, after he
the ground with his hand. The other generals followed his example,
the ground, the other being caught in the stirrup. His eyes, screwed
the group and shouted at Mishka.
the group round Mortemart to listen to what was being said there, and
the guests. "The vicomte is a wonderful raconteur," said she to another.
the guitar, and went to the drawing room.
the gun from which they had removed the dead officer. The cloak they
the gunners who had seized it straining to roll it quickly back to its
the gunpowder they used instead of salt was even pleasant; there was
the guns there had been abandoned at the very beginning of the action.)
the guns.
the guns."
the habit of running, trotted awkwardly stumbling on his toes toward the
the hair of the bared heads and with the ribbons decorating the icon.
the hair was wet, so profusely had the child perspired. He was not dead,
the half-burned house against which Pierre was leaning.
the half-closed eyes was there greedily gnawing a mutton bone, and the
the hall and anteroom, as if someone had arrived.
the hall door squeaked from the cold as it let in the Rostovs and their
the hall facing an elderly woman of Oriental type, who came rapidly to
the happier for it?" So thought Prince Bolkonski while dressing, and
the hatred of the French that all sons of the fatherland should cherish.
the head that he was considering this information.
the high bedstead with its silken hangings. On leaving the bed both
the high springs creaked, and the body of the coach swayed. The footman
the higher laws.
the highest law thou shalt regain traces of the ancient dignity which
the hill at Mozhaysk and momentarily on many and many faces he had met
the hill not to go beyond the stream, but Rostov pretended not to hear
the hill on foot.
the hill to support the battery. As they took the places vacated by the
the hill to the right in the courtyard of the farm, as he called the
the hill, they threw up their caps and shouted: "Vive l'Empereur!" and
the hill.
the historian who judges Alexander will also after the lapse of some
the historians of culture involuntarily contradict themselves, and show
the history of the life of the peoples.
the hollow the less they could see but the more they felt the nearness
the holy of holies of the order. This was the authentic Scotch Acts
the holy relics, the gunpowder, munitions, and money, and had told the
the honor of being received, that I have not yet had time to think of
the honor of conversing so pleasantly, instead of being in the ambulance
the honor of this visit.
the honor, but I shall never be your son's wife."
the honors of the district, but was in reality a good general, useful
the hope of a less cruel fate, should be certain that inevitable and
the hope of an alliance with her.
the host's father and mother, and of himself in military uniform. The
the hounds were fit (Daniel himself wished to go hunting), Nicholas
the hounds, and the huntsman that he was being carried away by that
the house among the rosebushes. The shutters were all closed, except at
the house and felt at ease only with her brother Petya. She liked to
the house but remained in the village awaiting her departure. When her
the house. Entering the drawing room, where the princesses spent most
the house; but when it was possible to have a domestic serf conscripted
the human race while ourselves setting an example of baseness and
the hunters who were arriving. The presence of Natasha--a woman, a lady,
the huntsmen were already nearing it. Rostov, having finally settled
the hussar officers.
the hussar. He was succumbing to irresistible, youthful, childish
the hut had made him groan aloud and again lose consciousness. When he
the hut the dark shapes of the two wagons with their horses beside them
the hut--and it was then so warm that the officers, of whom there were
the hut. The panes were rattling in the little windows and his groom was
the icon he began to say his evening prayers.
the icon stand. To her surprise and distress she found that her prayers
the icon. They, those strange men he had not previously known, stood out
the icons and there was a pleasant scent of flowers and burnt pastilles.
the icons, as though declaring to all that she could not answer
the imaginations of a dozen people. It could not exist because it was
the impetuosity he used to show at catchplay, now and then turning his
the impossibility of changing a man's convictions by words, and his
the impulses felt by a single person are always magnified in a crowd.
the indication of intellectual activity and say that this indication is
the inevitable conditions which always limit the activities of any
the infantry went toward his horse with jerky steps, and having mounted
the infinitely small can now yield solutions in other more complex
the inhabitants of the district.
the initiator of a settlement of any sort. Such is the present spirit
the injustice of taking everything to the Faceted Palace in the Kremlin;
the inn at Yankovo he respectfully took leave of her, for the first time
the innumerable causes of the act is known to us we recognize a certain
the inquisitive man, and looked around him.
the institutions of state and church are erected.
the interactions of Chateaubriand, Talleyrand, Madame de Stael, and the
the interview.
the jingle of their weapons and saw their horses, their figures, and
the job just as well."
the joyful expression on the faces of soldiers, officers, generals, and
the judges wished the answers of the accused to flow so as to lead to
the justness of his views, but no one undertakes to carry them out, so
the keener grew the passions of the Russian commanders, who blamed one
the key to the whole position.
the kind in Russia. On other estates the serfs' compulsory labor was
the kitchen garden looked wet and black and glistened like poppy seed
the knife, placed it under the head of his bed, and, seating himself
the knitting of stockings. The needles clicked lightly in her slender,
the knoll.
the ladies.
the lady's maid, the necessary report of how handsome the minister's son
the land lies lowest.
the landing below, Philip, the footman, stood looking scared and holding
the large drawing room. Prince Vasili came up to Pierre with languid
the largest direct share in the event take on themselves the least
the last navvy struck it for the last time with his mattock. In historic
the last part. In particular, the words "I will come back to dinner,"
the last post station before Otradnoe he gave the driver a three-ruble
the last two years, as a result of his continual absorption in abstract
the latter returned to Russia. In a new country, amid new conditions,
the law in honor of which we have built in Moscow forty times forty
the law of God," the voice had said. "Simplicity is submission to the
the law of inevitability in history, like the law of Copernicus in
the law of reciprocity comes in, confusing the whole matter. A good
the laws of history lie, and that as yet not a millionth part as much
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
the leader of all these movements--as the figurehead of a ship may
the least accident might now--with the fight balanced on such a strained
the least firing. The Emperor's gratitude was announced to the vanguard,
the least sign of hesitation, shame, or secrecy, her cause would
the left was the dying embers of a campfire, that the man who had come
the left where the Voyna flowing between its marshy banks falls into
the left, and took up the bottle. Anatole brought two candles and placed
the left, the firing became more distinct. Kutuzov had stopped and was
the left-flank columns had already descended.
the left.
the less are they free.
the letter direct to him and tell him all... could they really arrest me
the letter in his pocket and went straight to the house.
the lid of the case containing the carpets would not shut down. A few
the life and activity of the Godfreys and the Louis-es and their ladies?
the life of nations during which various powers arise simultaneously and
the light of heaven, and from the blessed Mother's cheek it drops and
the light of the fire the slender, handsome figure of a young soldier
the lines and an adjutant ran to look for the missing officer.
the little Rostova. I do not think my brother will ever marry again, and
the little princess and Mademoiselle Bourienne, whose chattering voices
the little princess curiously noting the impression "Marie" produced on
the little princess. She felt, as courtiers do when the Tsar enters, the
the little shop where we used to buy gingerbread! Can't you hurry up?
the little town could be seen with its white, red-roofed houses, its
the little washing wharf, torn from its place and half submerged, was
the liveliness of a fourteen-year-old boy, and yet it was the face
the living from the dead lies uncertainty, suffering, and death. And
the living mass of moving infantry, Vaska Denisov, red and shaggy, with
the lodge and was about to dash into that part of it which was still
the lodge. The majority of the Brothers, seeing in it dangerous designs
the lofty heavens, his wife's dead reproachful face, Pierre at the
the logs together.
the long German carts six or more pale, dirty, bandaged men were being
the look Platon had given him as he sat under the tree, of the shot
the loss of Prince Andrew had reached Bald Hills, and in spite of the
the loss of the whole edifice constructed through the ages, on the other
the lowest ranks to the man at the top, who takes the least direct share
the machine cannot conceive that the small connecting cogwheel which
the main army and that Kutuzov has been appointed commander in chief. He
the man (a French officer) by the shoulder with one hand and by the
the man has!"
the man to the world and the clearness of our perception of the place
the man without taking his eyes from him.
the man's action occupies in time. That is the ground which makes the
the many horses, grew so confused that it leaped along the road in front
the march: in their greatcoats, and packs, and without any preparation
the marriage was to be postponed for a year. "But why a year? Why a
the marshal to the least soldier, that place was not the Vozdvizhenka,
the marshal's baggage and the French army, which occupied the
the matter?" made Natasha approach more swiftly to what was lying in the
the mayor, a man with a thin sallow face and narrow beard. Both were
the meadow.
the mean jocular way common to anonymous letters said that he saw badly
the meaning of her excited, resolute, unnatural look the day before
the meaning of his puckered brow and the happy complacent smile that
the meaning of power, seem to consider that the collective will of
the meaning of the square and all the various figures of the temple of
the medical treatment, in the depths of her heart she hoped that prayer
the member of the Hofkriegsrath who had arrived the previous evening.
the memory of a remote event long past.
the men (the commanders, as we saw at the council of war, were out of
the men and women had separated as in church. All were silently crossing
the men around him were his assistants. Arakcheev was a faithful
the men collecting wood in the copse. It was no longer possible for the
the men moved forward.
the men with a rapid movement of his chin.
the men's at the other.
the men.
the messenger a significant look.
the middle of a field without rhyme or reason. It's all those damned
the middle of the room and at the word of command, 'One, two,' and when
the middle of the room and, pressing the head of a pin till it hurt her
the middle of the room smoothing out the folds of the gauze.
the middle, unfastened, exposing their sunburned collarbones, impressed
the midwife with wide-open eyes of alarm.
the military regulations or of the arrangement of the Ryazan serfs'
the militia in the yeah 'seven? All that did was to enwich the pwiests'
the militia--we can leave to the supreme authority...."
the mines and blow up the bridge, this sergeant, seeing that the French
the minister and his son had arrived, but the appearance of both had
the misfortunes of our common cause, or we are merely lackeys who care
the mist.
the mist. From information he had received the evening before, from the
the moaning, the distant cries, and the crackle of fires which seemed
the moment Prince Andrew entered the room had watched him with glad,
the moment is not Bonaparte but Buxhowden. General Buxhowden was all but
the moment of our loss, these thoughts could not occur to me; I should
the mood of the moment. In reality, however, all these movements forward
the more I jest and the calmer I am the more tranquil and confident you
the more heated became the disputes, culminating in shouts and
the more inevitability the less freedom.
the more manifest the law of inevitability.
the more obvious it becomes, that the ultimate purpose is beyond our
the more remarkable because, in spite of his great physical sufferings,
the more serious and stern grew Sonya's.
the morning amid the lines of his army with his suite of marshals and
the morning, carriages with six horses had been coming and going
the morning, loudly blowing his nose. He asked whether the Russians had
the morning. In this letter she said briefly that all their
the mornings--what is called an "old wives' summer."
the most intimate friend of the Bezukhov household since Helene's return
the most part harmful (the harm was scarcely perceptible, as they
the most skillful strategist could hardly have devised any series
the most striking and definite examples is an army.
the most stubborn who remain victors," replied Raevski, "and in my
the mother's sacrificing herself and offering her daughter in marriage
the mother.
the mothers, wives, and children of the men who were going and should
the motion of the planets, so in history the difficulty of recognizing
the movement of history, we see that every year and with each new
the movement of the locomotive by the smoke that is carried back has
the movements of the bodies, but without disproving it, it would seem
the muddy road.
the muddy, slippery road, looking at his feet and at the roughness of
the name of her who could give up Prince Andrew for anyone else.
the name of the sovereign. Three hundred persons took their seats in the
the nation and the salvation of Europe!"
the natural sciences: leaving aside the question of cause, they seek for
the nearest commander, contrary to Napoleon's instructions, moved them
the neck and applied his foot and knee to his behind with great agility
the new church he had built, and then receive visitors who would come to
the new homestead he was constructing and its buildings, but even here,
the new wrinkle on his forehead deepened. "Yes, I am well," he said in
the news of his son's intentions had occurred to him in jest--that
the news that the prince could not attend. Prince Andrew came in
the next higher and smaller section of the cone consists of the next
the next man's shoulders and whispered: "Dry Madeira"... "Hungarian"...
the next night. More than once he had enabled Dolokhov to escape when
the next room were heard the footsteps of boys and girls running to
the next vacancy, for his mother now clung to him as her one hold on
the next. Helene was touched, and more than once tears rose to her eyes
the night at an unusual hour would irritate him.
the night on a soft clean bed, or when he remembered that the French had
the night ten miles from Olmutz and next morning were to come straight
the night, dragoons mostly. I took down the name and rank of their
the night, reading it by the faint light under the green shade, did he
the night.
the nineteenth March, and her downy little lip rose from old habit, but
the noblest role on earth, and he is so virtuous and noble that God will
the nonsense talked by the Austrian generals. Shinshin, standing close
the notion that Buonaparte is negotiating on equal terms with all the
the number of cannon or of slaughtered men, but by that intangible force
the number of people taking part in it the more rapidly was the wealth
the nurse brought it to him and nodded approval when she told him that
the nurse's and Dunyasha's protests she went out into the porch; Dron,
the nursery was all he saw and heard from his former enchantress.
the observation of all these "eyes of the Emperor," became still more
the odor emanating from him which was now stronger than before, Pierre
the officer she unfolded the kerchief and took out of it a white
the officers and men of Denisov's squadron, though they tried to talk of
the officers as he went: "Have these gentlemen attended to and taken
the officers lay down in the tavern, covering themselves with their
the officers or adjutants who wandered about in the fog in those unknown
the official side of the service. These gentlemen received Prince
the officials--the heads of the various government departments--knew
the old Russian type. His purse was always empty because it was open to
the old and the new conception of history, and theology in the same way
the old commander in chief. But a little further on he saw infantry
the old count came in and welcomed the princess. He had changed very
the old count's death, now after staying a short time in Orel--where she
the old count's with a trotter from the Orlov stud as shaft horse,
the old count, and would stand for a long time holding the clothes and
the old countess to weep tears of joy. After that, young Rostov took
the old countess' rooms.
the old emigre who declined to marry the lady with whom he had spent his
the old interests of her carefree girlish life that had been so full
the old man inspired in all his visitors alike a feeling of respectful
the old man, "then they might do as they please." With his son, however,
the old man--the cause of their losses (if they were losses)--now
the old man. He appeared to address condescending words to him from an
the old prince first heard of the defeat at Austerlitz stated, as usual
the old prince made difficulties. This letter grieved and mortified
the old prince's for news of him.
the old prince, Mademoiselle Bourienne, and the architect; to the other
the old prince.
the old prince. "There in Petersburg they are always writing--not notes
the old prince. Princess Mary, too, went round to him.
the old soldier, yawning.
the one Prince Andrew gave to this naive question.
the one below. Natasha jumped on it, sank into the feather bed, rolled
the one nor in the other but in the union of the two.
the one side and Prince Bagration from the other are marching to unite
the one that will result from it will be as victorious! However, dear
the one with the mole, who was of a cheerful and lively disposition,
the only intimate person now remaining to her, was exposed. She was
the only pretext for his departure it was decided that it was necessary
the only thing left me--not singing!" his thoughts ran on. "Go away? But
the only thing possible."
the openings of the windows and from under the roof.
the opera he described to Dolokhov with the air of a connoisseur the
the operations would take place was familiar in all its details to
the opposite," replied Bennigsen.
the opposition of her mother, the doctors, and even of her husband
the orator with animation.
the order of the day for tomorrow. And you," he continued, addressing
the order to march, thereby indicating that he intended to lead that
the order to start. The sick soldier, Sokolov, pale and thin with dark
the order: (1) The preservation and study of the mystery. (2) The
the orderlies and servants.
the orders he gave them and, to his surprise, found that no orders were
the orders in the disposition was, or could be, executed. But in the
the ordinary uniform of the nobility, and the general characteristic
the other dark, shaggy, and sinewy, with a flat nose. The third was
the other end of Europe, with but one thought--to be worthy of their
the other from Sonya. He recognized them by the handwriting and opened
the other guests.
the other in an overcoat and on foot, stood at the corner of Ilyinka
the other men in the room, her anxiety could only have reference to
the other side of the fire, warming his thin yellow body.
the other side, the children, tutors, and governesses. From behind the
the other sleigh.
the other sleighs jolted in the same way, and rudely breaking the
the other voice. "If before that you are not ten times wounded, killed,
the other, came up to Tushin and asked for a seat.
the other, quite a new reflection of the society in which they had taken
the other, still more reasonably, says that it is too depressing and
the other. At last our enemy. Buxhowden, catches us and attacks. Both
the other. I looked round and saw Brother A. standing on the fence and
the others who did not approve of the plan of attack, were right--he did
the others. Again someone shouted, "Stretchers!" Four men seized the
the others. But no: the answers he had given when questioned had come
the outposts of the flank. As soon as he noticed a French officer, who
the pack and took up a glass and a pipe that were handed him.
the pale face and shining eyes of the very Natasha of whom he had just
the panorama seemed carved in some precious stone of a yellowish-green
the panorama spread out before him. From the twenty-sixth of August
the panting old general.
the parlor--the first room they entered. To Pierre's assurances that he
the parquet to the door opening into the garden, where, seeing Balashev
the part played by free will in the general affairs of humanity. A
the passage. Only Malasha, Andrew's six-year-old granddaughter whom
the passages.
the past with nothing but her charms which gave him delight, but for
the path of his caleche. Ahead of the rest and nearer to him ran a
the pavement.
the peace and welfare of all my subjects.' However, I know their
the peasant, moving away.
the peasants caught the commissaries who ventured too far out of town
the peasants were obdurate and that at the present moment it would be
the people at the ball alike were good, kind, and splendid people,
the people in so strange a manner, contrary to the Tsar's wish, to
the people in the defense of Moscow, Pierre had met the Rostovs and
the people is unconditionally transferred to historical persons, and
the people resumed their places and the service continued. During this
the people who know of it the less a woman in travail suffers, everyone
the people's loyalty, that the declaration from Petersburg gave him
the people's will, as some historians suppose, then all the details
the people, and of his coming himself from the army to Moscow. And as
the people, we have found that they and their orders were dependent on
the peoples as clerk to master.
the period of youth when there seems so much to do that there is no time
the personality of the Freemason inspired in him and his own habit
the petition to the Emperor drawn up by the auditor, in which Denisov,
the pickets of the vanguard had done, and an adjutant of the corps
the pilgrims and the solitude which refreshed her at Bald Hills--and she
the pine forests veiled in the mist of their summits... There was peace
the pistol next day. Makar Alexeevich came twice that evening shuffling
the plan of campaign against Napoleon and, having induced Alexander to
the plan of operation for the coming campaign. He explained how an army,
the plumes?..." was whispered among the crowd.
the point of tears and sympathized with his wounded pride, and the more
the point of view of the old countess and of society it was out of the
the point, but it was evident that Kutuzov despised knowledge
the point. Between ourselves, mon cher, do you belong to the Masons?" he
the porch and the cook came running into the vestibule.
the portionless Sonya. Though she blamed herself for it, she could
the portrait. "It is too soon for him to see a field of battle."
the position was finishing his savory dinner. They waited for him from
the position was most difficult all through the Russo-French wars from
the possessor of those Penza and Nizhegorod estates and had apportioned
the possessor of wealth. How have you used it? What have you done
the possibility of failure and so forth.
the post, waiting to be blindfolded like the others, and like a wounded
the potato.
the pre-eminence.
the presence of a monarch, talked with extreme familiarity of the
the presence of that Helene it had all seemed clear and simple; but now,
the present state of affairs, had arrived during that fortnight. He
the present! Quicker, quicker--and that they should leave me in peace!"
the pressure of the crowd with the other.
the pretense of illness, from his daughter's distress, and by the
the pretext. When she wanted to be agitated, Nicholas and his health
the prevailing silence. Some minutes passed. A second and a third report
the previous evening at Boris'--ran forward and, bowing respectfully
the priest whose home it was, and that she intended to offer his Serene
the priests and deacons and some servants also went in at the door.
the priests, rose and offered him her seat; an aide-de-camp picked up
the prince and smiling amiably at him as if to show that political
the prince had received the Rostovs, pretended not to notice how upset
the prince was lying on the sofa, looked at him, noticed his perturbed
the prince, but made up his mind to address him nevertheless.
the prince, tied his head up with a handkerchief that the mouth should
the prince, who was in his large study. From the far side of the house
the prince.
the princess and Dessalles with the little prince to Bogucharovo and
the princess and hastily adjusting his lorgnette, as if without this
the princess did speak, her words would not be flattering to Anna
the princess gave orders to harness for her journey, the peasants had
the princess in a tone of entreaty.
the princess in the same petulantly playful tone in which she had spoken
the princess noticed all that was going on around her and felt the
the princess' carriages. Meanwhile he went himself to the police
the princess' sorrow and making herself a partner in it. She said her
the princess. At last an old, cross looking footman came and announced
the prisoners had seen in front of them during the first days was
the prisoners of war. Without understanding what was said to him, Pierre
the process of regeneration had already taken place in him, and I rushed
the process of the flight and disintegration of the French army went on
the progress of the war. This committee came to the conclusion that
the proofs he deduced to convince himself that it was not worth stooping
the proprieties--a deputation.
the provisions, of which (according to the French historians) there were
the purchaser was going on satisfactorily, and there was nothing to keep
the pursuit, the barring of the way, or any other particular conditions.
the quarters occupied by the French were other regions still unexplored
the quartette, "The Brook," with which everyone was delighted. Then
the question arose whether the troops were to be in marching order or
the question for me to think of marrying her. And it must needs happen
the question of selection. Pierre disturbed the symmetry by moving a
the question.
the questions that had haunted him, but because his conception of her
the raised hood of Prince Andrew's caleche. She did not know who was
the rank of major, and Rostov, who had already drunk enough, at the end
the ranks of obscure officers and offer him the first step to fame!
the ranks would be the best that could be hoped for.
the ranks, and above all being unable to see anything in front or around
the ranks. A morose soldier marching on the left turned his eyes on
the rapidity of its movement, and a convincing proof of this is the
the rapidity of which was unparalleled for such a time of the year.
the reading of novels, the distribution of awards, his correspondence
the realms of Russia with death-bearing terrors; humble Faith, the sling
the rearguard stood with a staff officer, scanning the country through
the reason of that sadness and suddenly began to cry.
the reason why the life and activity of people who lived centuries ago
the reception hall: Michael Ivanovich, Mademoiselle Bourienne, Princess
the reception room familiar to Pierre, with two Italian windows opening
the reception room, where he found some ten officers and generals.
the recruiting, granted by the Emperor. If I had been two hours late
the red, stout Nesvitski, lay on a bed with his arms under his head,
the redness of which was evidently due to intemperance, and his mouth
the reform of the army regulations to the Emperor personally, but the
the regiment Kutuzov had reviewed at Braunau and in which Dolokhov was
the regiment but was not liked; Rostov especially detested him and was
the regiment under a hail of bullets which fell around, but fortunately
the regiment with these gentlemen, and I consider that on us tomorrow's
the regiment, and how satisfied his father was with him. Berg evidently
the regiment. The horse of an ammunition cart put its leg over a trace.
the regiments and was annoyed at the irregularity of a movement. With a
the renovation of the European world depended on Attila's caprice. The
the report of musketry.
the reports most flattering to our army were circulated. In the French
the reports of the Cossacks there had previously been nobody--there were
the reproaches Princess Mary had mentally addressed to her. "Besides,
the reputation of being the most honorable and disinterested of cranks.
the resounding strains of the polonaise:
the respect the guards showed him--entered the coach house where the
the responsibility for all that happens. A sovereign should not be with
the rest of the army merely lost some hundreds of men uselessly.
the rest was night in which the influence of discipline cannot be
the rest."
the resultant of various forces, and then his power is itself a force
the resulting force. To define and express the significance of this
the results of the crossing were much less disastrous to the French--in
the retreat of the frightened Bonaparte.
the revolving pulleys whirr with the rapidity of their movement, but a
the rewards sent to the army are innumerable. Though he is a German--I
the ribs and telling him to hold his hand up. Soldiers scattered over
the right flank and the French were already advancing, were engaged
the right flank of the Preobrazhensk battalion and came straight up to
the right place for it.
the right position opposite the other; her face assumed a serious
the right side glittered in the sunlight, wet and shiny and scarcely
the right sounded oftener and nearer. As soon as Tushin with his guns,
the right stood our infantry in a dense column: they were the reserve.
the right they will expose a flank to me. Soldiers! I will myself direct
the right time! You mustn't trifle with it, you know, or it may turn to
the right to grant dispensations..."
the river. The troops, knowing of the Emperor's presence, were on the
the rivers Inn (at Braunau) and Traun (near Linz). On October 23 the
the rivers Kolocha and Voyna.
the road connecting him with the troops arriving from Russia, he would
the road disappeared into a yellowing forest on the horizon. Far in
the road he was stopped by a French sentinel who ordered him back.
the road ran. The sunshine from behind the hill did not penetrate into
the road to the place to which he had been sent, he had galloped to the
the road, and heard his friend the captain reprimand and threaten to
the road. The men sat huddled up trying not to stir, so as to warm the
the roads along which those supplies lay. Just as it is impossible to
the room and persistently talked about Moscow amusements and theaters.
the room and something strange happened. We were sitting or lying on
the room for a long time, no longer piercing an imaginary foe with
the room in silence, and then, suddenly and unexpectedly, went up to
the room next to the one where the prince lay. Several times, waking up,
the room the old prince, looking uneasily round, threw down his napkin
the room where Khvostikov and Makarin were sitting.
the room where the witnesses were sitting, through the study to the room
the room, and without greeting anyone went up to Denisov and began
the room, stepping briskly to the front of the crowd of gentry.
the room, to the corner darkened by the icons that hung there.
the room, when Natasha, her face distorted by anger, burst in like a
the room.
the room.
the room.
the room. "Uncle" continued to play correctly, carefully, with energetic
the room. But in the yard there was a light from the fire at Little
the room. Pierre went close up to him, but Davout, evidently consulting
the room...."
the rows of hay are lying in the hollow, there's the bridge. That's our
the rows, came toward their box. When he got there he leaned on his
the rules--as if there were any rules for killing people. In spite of
the sacrifice of their lives how devoted they are...."
the sale of the land and forests and to release them from the Land Bank,
the salons is unchanging. Since the year 1805 we had made peace and had
the same an incompetent who was unable to do anything in 1807 and who
the same attitude of submission to fate, Napoleon abruptly turned
the same breeding and traditions, Bolkonski would soon have discovered
the same chair a canon, the sight of which had even then filled him with
the same coquettish, self-satisfied girl, enjoying every moment of her
the same direction; on the other hand an army corps could not surrender
the same expression on his face again swayed his head.
the same feeling as when his mother, his father, and his sister had
the same instant of time, or of an effect without a cause, that only
the same kind of lamentation was heard from other parts of the street.
the same look. In the middle of a dull and halting conversation, Helene
the same notes were thrummed again, but the listeners did not grow weary
the same object in view he came to Moscow. There he wavered between the
the same opinion. One in particular declared with martial heat that they
the same pettiness, worldliness, and senselessness. Now, however, he
the same positions as before, whispering to one another. All became
the same reminiscences.
the same sergeant major Ivan Mitrich, the same company dog Jack, and the
the same submissive attitude. As if inflamed by the sight, he raised his
the same the governor's wife went on with her matchmaking, passing on to
the same tone.
the same tone. Many spoke eloquently and with originality.
the same voice in which he had shouted it on the field at Schon Grabern.
the same waistcoat and high white stock he had worn at the meeting of
the same walls, sounds, and smell, and the same timid faces, only
the same way I thought there was something lacking in her."
the same way toward Karataev.
the same way, bent double, in a pool of blood at the edge of the earth
the same words, about their health and her own, and the health of Her
the same yard as themselves and in a part of the hut across the passage;
the same. In Carriage Row carriages had been left in the shops, and
the samovar for the doctor when the latter awoke.
the samovar. The children with their tutors and governesses had had
the sand, the bricks and roofs of the houses, the green church spire,
the satisfaction of one's needs and consequent freedom in the choice of
the savior of Russia. Along that line of thought such a deduction is
the scouts all say the same thing."
the screaming children the mummers, covering their faces and disguising
the screen of trees was less dense. On reaching a large oak tree that
the seal of her letter. It was from her most intimate friend from
the seat the old prince used to like to sit on, and beside him strips of
the seclusion of our lodge--we must act--act! We are drowsing, but we
the second assumed precisely the same expression; while the youngest,
the second week.
the second, or any of the processes the human mind can discern. The
the senator, but thought it necessary on this occasion to address him
the sensation of this drawing out and the construction of this edifice
the sense of youth, animation, and determination that had come on him
the serfs and gentry join in one large circle: a ring, a string, and a
the serfs to work. Say that everything out of the hothouses must be
the serfs' quarters.
the sergeant major with brightened expressions, licking their lips and
the sergeant to meet some mounted men who were riding along the line.
the serious business which, he considered, awaited him next day. He
the seriousness of his stupid smile, could not but give him a moment's
the service and patriotically Russian. He resented Shinshin's remark.
the shed and approached Pierre with a friendly wink.
the shed full of animation, but on seeing Prince Andrew's face he felt
the shed with super human force, throwing up a mass of earth. The ground
the shed, became quiet and with the baby in her arms went to the gate,
the shed.
the shed. Rapidly and timidly raising his fingers to his forehead by way
the ship to move, such a delusion is no longer possible. The ship moves
the shop. She had taken a cab and driven home by a side street and the
the shoulder, led him to the window, and began to talk to him.
the shouting and trampling that resounded from all sides at once. He
the shouts of the mob, the count began to repent. He remembered with
the shrines of the Moscow saints. She suggested that Natasha should fast
the shuffling of their feet grew more hurried, as if the weight they
the sick and wounded lay in two rows with their heads to the walls, and
the sick and wounded were lying on the floor on straw and overcoats.
the sick man's groans.
the sides of the carts as they were jolted against one another. Almost
the sight of the grandeur and glory with which he has covered France.
the sight of the killed and wounded.
the sight of the swaying smoke, now gathering into thick black clouds
the silence continued. Only among the back rows of the people, who were
the sinews and scorching the flesh of his sprained arm and shoulder. To
the sitting room.
the skill--and apparently the genius--of Murat.
the skillful statesmen and diplomatists (especially Talleyrand, who
the sly what was left in the glasses. From the third room came sounds of
the smell of linstocks, came the artillery which crawled between the
the smell of smoke. Pierre sat up and sighed. The three soldiers were
the smile of the little princess--influenced by the general mood though
the smoke were moving, at times as if the troops moved. Sometimes shouts
the smoke which the wind carries away.
the smoke, Rostov hesitated whether to gallop after them or to go where
the snort of a horse, the crack of a whip, or the whine of a straggling
the snuffbox in his hand but not taking any. After the cry of the hounds
the so-called Duke of Elchingen (Ney) ventured to remark that a movement
the so-called King of Rome spiking the earth with a stick, the allegory
the societies in Petersburg, and a passionate devotee of the new ideas
the sofa beside Prince Andrew.
the sofa, facing her brother. "She is quite a child: such a dear, merry
the soil, still kept out in the fields by groundless fear, listen!
the soil. The government has taken the following steps to ensure freedom
the soldier always has around him the same comrades, the same ranks,
the soldier shouting "Brothers!" was a prisoner, and that another man
the soldiers blindfolded them, drawing the sacks over their heads, and
the soldiers who were blocking his way. "Hi there, boys! Keep to the
the soldiers who, marching in regular ranks briskly and gaily, were
the soldiers' faces and unnatural warlike solemnity on those of the
the soldiers' pipes, kitchens, and campfires, and by the carelessness of
the soldiers' ward, and still seeming to see fixed on him those envious
the soldiers, evidently afraid that Pierre might want to take from
the soldiers.
the sole cause of the whole disaster, and with characteristically
the song grew brisker and the time quicker and when, here and there, as
the sort of man he is, and nothing more," replied Dolgorukov, looking
the soul of the frightened yet happy and enraptured Natasha, but in the
the sound by a barefooted girl, and a stout, rosy, good-looking woman
the sound of cries and blows were heard. On returning to lunch Nicholas
the sound of his own words: "Cut him down! I command it...."
the sound of voices and the shouts of command. The whole air reeked with
the sounds of firing.
the sounds of music that had immediately struck up. Behind him walked
the southern army to do? Prussia is neutral... I know that. What about
the sovereign seemed directed merely to making him spend his time
the sovereign was coming to the capital for consultation with his
the sovereign was inspecting the fortifications that he, Pfuel, had
the speaker and listened. Count Ilya Rostov, in a military uniform of
the spectators by the unexpectedness of his adroit maneuvers and the
the staff captain, "but we old fellows, who have grown up in and, God
the staff had of late been exceedingly strained. Ermolov had been to
the staff of his division to explain his violence at the commissariat
the standard of right and wrong is merely to admit one's own nothingness
the standard.
the standards to advance and surround the commander in chief with them.
the steppes of the East. All his loquacity was suddenly arrested and
the steps of a belated arrival were heard. "There's Kuragin!" whispered
the stern expression of the adjutant who was also looking that way, he
the stern shrewd old man (himself a relic of the past century) with his
the stewards (there were semiliterate foremen among them) listened with
the still greater unimportance of death, the meaning of which no one
the stone of the gate and upon the wooden beams and screens, and two
the story of his ancestors, his childhood, youth, and manhood, and all
the strange cruelty that impels men to kill one another, but she did not
the streams and hollows of Sokolnitz and Schlappanitz beyond which we
the street; cockroaches rustled on the table, on the icons, and on
the streets soldiers in various uniforms walked or ran confusedly in
the streets were crowded with them. In the streets, around carts that
the streets. Do not be upset, brothers, that the law courts are closed;
the streets."
the strength of an army to be identical with its numbers. Military
the strength of that impetus was exhausted and no fresh push was
the strength of the French, does not make a single attempt to attack for
the strength of the Russian army was trebled.
the stretchers, and love of the sun and of life, all merged into one
the strict performance of these forms without troubling about their
the struggling men, and the fate of the red-haired gunner, who had
the study of the movement of the nations and of humanity and not the
the study, like pistol shots, came the frequent sound of the old man
the subject of her request and must not be shown before the request was
the subject of history, while free will itself is the subject of
the subject of observation) the first and most primitive approximation
the subject--they talked of the governor's kind wife, of Nicholas'
the subjection of personality to the laws of space, time, and cause
the submission of millions of people resulted--that is, how component
the suite by the arm. "Look! A man has fallen! Fallen, fallen!"
the suite. Despite the presence of the commander in chief, who attracted
the suitor could not but know; and above all, Vera was twenty-four, had
the sum of individual wills is never expressed by the activity of a
the sun bathed the top of the opposite slope with yet another sort of
the sun so bright, everything around so gay, but that slim pretty girl
the sun, this water, that gorge!..."
the sunshine.
the superfluous vehicles to be burned, as he had done with those of a
the superior officers, who was acquainted with the higher authorities,
the sutler's hut without his boots." He recognized the agreeable,
the swift sinister whistle of a cannon ball, now with the agreeable
the table for boston. The general sat down by Count Ilya Rostov, who was
the table to clink glasses with the count, with the children, and with
the table, searched everywhere, and stood still in the middle of the
the table, summoned his daughter. He never gave his children a blessing,
the table.
the table... who do you think? No, but wait a bit!... Who is it that's
the tale of the merchant who suffered innocently, there was now an
the tall lad were drinking in the dramshop that morning, had brought the
the task nearest to hand. First they camped gaily before Vilna, making
the tavern in the twilight of the dawn, Rostov and Ilyin both glanced
the taverns solitary shouts or drunken songs could be heard. Nobody
the tears from his eyes and from the letter, then having dried her
the ten-year preparatory period this man had formed relations with all
the tenderness the Italian expressed for him.
the termination of the ceremony. He looked up joyfully at the baby when
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
the terrible memory would, on the contrary, dwell in his heart ever more
the tete-de-pont. At length appears the lieutenant general, our dear
the theater of war and on the army's direct line of march, and advised
the thing is that these two hundred thousand men will fight and the side
the things to be removed from Bogucharovo. Though the peasants paid
the things were treading heavily on the parquet floors. The yard was
the third division and convinced himself that there really were no
the third time already.
the thought flashed into his mind that it really would be a good thing,
the thought of his wife which had been a continual torment to him was no
the thought of what might await her there--not after many days, but that
the thought of winning a hundred rubles to buy that casket for Mamma's
the thought that little Nicholas would be left without a father. With
the time (Joseph de Maistre and others) recognized. Still more senseless
the time Achilles has covered the distance that separated him from the
the time I was alone with him in the dark chamber. I caught myself
the time had come to experience the joy of an attack of which he had so
the time had not deceived her--that that state of freedom and readiness
the time seemed merely strange to Pierre: he felt he could not grasp its
the time with a feverish tremor. The man was sobbing and choking
the time."
the tipsy guests who were again crowding round the window, and listening
the tone in which he addressed her.
the top may make, we shall win tomorrow's battle. Tomorrow, happen what
the total exceeded the round sum of forty-three thousand; and taking up
the town at the Dorogomilov bridge saw ahead of them masses of soldiers
the town where the headquarters and the diplomatic corps were stationed
the track into the snow, Pierre looked down at his feet, then quickly
the travelers and would immediately turn them out, had she not at the
the trees there, came upon Prince Andrew. On seeing the young master,
the trees. Denisov, the esaul, and Petya rode silently, following the
the trooper Nikitenko, who was galloping ahead, shot away from him, and
the troops forward according to his own ideas without mentioning the
the troops in their disorderly flight confirmed these rumors.
the troops moving toward him and has taken up a strong position where
the troops to loot, to prepare winter clothing--of which there was
the troops to occupy the high ground. This disposition on the left flank
the trouble I have put you to," said Pierre, and seeing Savelich smile,
the truth admitted thousands of years ago by all the religious and
the tumblers on it jumped about. "Telyanin! 'What? So it's you who's
the twenty-fifth, Barclay de Tolly and Bagration were convinced that the
the twenty-fifth. In view of all this information, when the enemy has
the twenty-sixth at Borodino, and each day and hour and minute of the
the twenty-sixth of August was unimportant.
the twenty-sixth the battle of Borodino itself took place.
the two peasants who kept as close to him as horseflies to a horse.
the two who had been nearest to her. Mademoiselle Bourienne, with whom
the undefinable essence of the forces of heat and electricity, or
the understanding of the force which produces events, and furnish no
the unexpected realization of the fact that he still valued life as
the uniform thrown down beside him. Four soldiers were holding him, and
the universal historians and historians of culture themselves, for they
the universe had crumbled before his eyes and only meaningless ruins
the unpleasant thought that occurred to him, of how all that nest
the unwritten code," thought Boris), "but nothing more would come of it.
the use of the income from them. Julie saw Boris' indecision, and
the uselessness of freeing the serfs, who were quite happy as it was.
the valley. He greeted the men of the foremost regiment and gave them
the valves opening and wheels turning; but I have no right to conclude
the vanguard of Ney's army was already emerging from the Great Ordynka
the vanguard. Before he came up with the hussars, several adjutants met
the vast field. The whole army was extended in three lines: the cavalry
the verge of a quarrel.
the verses.
the very end?" Princess Mary sometimes thought. Night and day, hardly
the very middle of it, some strange airy structure was being erected out
the vestibule.
the vice-King's division will open a heavy fire on seeing the attack
the views he formed of men and circumstances at this time remained true
the village in Ryazan which belonged to his wife's nephew, wrote two
the village letting the troops pass by him. That morning Kutuzov seemed
the village of Mikulino to that of Shamshevo. To the left of the road
the village of Novoe, and the center at Borodino at the confluence of
the village of Shamshevo. The men crowded together round the campfires.
the village of Stromilova to Dmitrovsk.
the village, and over the fields the larks rose trilling, one after
the village, but it was not of them she was thinking. She felt that she
the villages of Sokolnitz and Kobelnitz, whereby we can both fall on
the visitors cast on him seemed to say: "And what is he sitting here
the visitors, treading heavily, and vainly trying to appear cordial and
the visitors. And she saw Mademoiselle Bourienne, with her ribbon and
the voice of an old maidservant saying, "Straight, straight, along the
the waist with a rope. He had a nightcap on his head and his feet were
the waiter.
the wall of soldiers burdened with knapsacks and muskets marched in
the wall, his eyes fixed on a burning candle, and seemed not to listen
the wall. Pausing for a moment, Pierre noticed several other men of the
the walls), and the heat and smoke and rapidity of motion, produced
the walls, and a big fly flopped at the head of the bed and around the
the waltz.
the war and had no perception whatever of the inevitable, or of the one
the war at Anna Pavlovna's severely condemned Barclay de Tolly, but was
the war in Italy he is several times on the verge of destruction and
the war is over, if I am still alive and still loved by you, I will
the war. Napoleon nodded condescendingly, as if to say, "I know it's
the water could flow to waste. Pierre felt, moreover, what the accused
the water, or when he challenged a man to a duel without any reason,
the wattle fence, and seized hold of it.
the wattle.
the wax with the baby's hair had not sunk in the font but had floated.
the way and was the only one who did not notice the fact. Most of the
the way from Ulm, while Dolokhov maintained that the Russians had not
the way he walked through the ranks behind the generals, bending forward
the way of life at Otradnoe--Mitenka's management of affairs, in
the way of life there unchanged and still the same in every detail.
the way the hunt approached and receded, by the cries of the dogs
the way they had spoken during the council, communicated something to
the way. Occasionally he glanced at the familiar crowd around him and
the weakness of the French, and the administration of that shock which
the weather, asked if he had heard of Kuragin's abduction of Rostova
the wedding Berg entered the count's study early one morning and, with
the wedding, but the count had not yet decided in his own mind the
the weight of that resolute and affectionate scrutiny and glanced at her
the welfare of the charitable and educational institutions under her
the well-trained horse looked round unconcerned and did not stir. An
the west at the end of the eighteenth century and their drive eastward
the west eastwards to the Russian frontier, toward which since 1811
the wheels go round; and till he has reached the ultimate cause of the
the white Horse Guard's cap and a military overcoat with a whip hanging
the white plumes, evidently suggesting that he should do the same. The
the white uniform of the Horse Guards.
the whole approach on that side of it. Through the smoke glimpses could
the whole army is in despair that this most important place has been
the whole campaign, enclosed for them a plan he had drawn and forecasts
the whole corps, which Bennigsen and others may have had in view; nor
the whole day on horseback inspecting the locality, considering plans
the whole expanse.
the whole government now!"
the whole herd is constantly altered, this is because in order to follow
the whole human race, offering it in our members an example of piety
the whole interest of the story, and we are still unable to accustom
the whole matter and decide what was right and how he should act, but
the whole nation will certainly throw itself into the arms of its
the whole of his army service. When he related anything it was generally
the whole party. The wax candles burned brightly, the silver and crystal
the whole place and the warm air heated by the crowd, Natasha little
the whole place were dragging logs and brushwood and were building
the whole position of our troops. Pierre listened to him, straining each
the whole space. Just as in the mist-enveloped hollow near Borodino, so
the whole sting of her remark to lie in that word.
the whole throng hurried to the entrance.
the whole town. This was terrible! What a position for the Emperor to
the whole weight of his wrath fell on her. She was to blame that a spy
the whole world centered for him on anticipation of the next note, the
the whole world had gone crazy."
the will of God, modern history has given us either heroes endowed with
the will of one man or of several men.
the will of one man--Peter the Great--and that France from a republic
the will of the people is delegated to the rulers conditionally, but
the wind fell, as if it dared not spoil the beauty of the summer morning
the window, he saw it was an unsurpassable morning for hunting: it was
the window.
the window. She was evidently leaning right out, for the rustle of her
the windows of the house that gleamed invitingly in the moist velvety
the windows of the houses also flags and bunting were displayed.
the windows of the streets through which he rode, rugs, flags, and his
the wisdom of age understood, that it is impossible for one man to
the wish to understand everything is pride, that it is impossible to
the wolf, but it vanished into the wood before they could do so.
the wolf, seizing her by the ears. Nicholas was about to stab her, but
the woman he had known as a child, of whom when her beauty was
the woman's vehicle for trying to get ahead of others, and the strokes
the women at home, two brothers away earning wages, and only Michael the
the women!"
the wonderfully clear air, brightly illuminated by slanting morning
the word "plenary" (of the service), a word Petya did not understand.
the word angina was repeated with great satisfaction.
the word thwee begin to advance.
the words all is over, "and the count's papers are opened, the will and
the words of the order were not clear to the regimental commander, and
the words: "Sergey Kuzmich, From all sides reports reach me," etc.
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
the world he alone could encounter the invincible Napoleon without fear,
the world he had lived in--his strength, his disdain for the comforts of
the world in which she had been living of late, and she felt not
the world, I have not lived till now. At last I live, but I can't live
the world, and especially therefore above himself.
the world, but we are a different matter..."--without knowing why or how
the world, from Africa to the steppes of Muscovy alike, was enough to
the world; and for the French its immediate result was that they were
the worthlessness of the Drissa camp lies in having the river behind it,
the wounded gathered in, the supplies of ammunition replenished, the
the wounded traveling with them were all distributed in the yards and
the wrong place, and for a long time two menservants stood one on
the yard and in the house. The count had been out since morning. The
the yard gazing at his worn-out boots with lowered head and a faint
the yell the officer turned round, and at the same moment Pierre threw
the young man had departed. "There is never any 'impossible' with him.
the young prince. The members of the household were all gathered in
the young soldier at the execution. Pierre looked at the soldier and
the younger men, but with this difference, that he saw thousands of
theater, Berg had pointed out Vera Rostova to him and had said in
theater, where he had been with his family and Denisov. He was at once
their active service, were stationed near Olmutz and the camp swarmed
their adjutants had come to witness the curious phenomenon of the lights
their affairs disentangled now lay in his marrying Julie Karagina.
their affairs. Sonya was nearly twenty; she had stopped growing prettier
their age.
their arms and offering him a glass of water, but his trembling, swollen
their assistance. The majority struggled back to the bank from which
their battery a milk-white cloud arose. Then came the distant report of
their belongings, did so from the latent patriotism which expresses
their blessing.
their bodies heal, and they are happy as before. But it is a good thing
their cleanliness and discipline. They had come by easy stages, their
their cleverly contrived costumes, and particularly how they suited the
their commander in chief.
their companions and searching uneasily for rivals to their own borzois.
their conqueror with love. I will tell the deputation that I did not,
their context. Every word and action of his was the manifestation of
their conversation and quit that corner in the sitting room, but Natasha
their energies. Beyond a certain limit no mechanical disruption of the
their engagement, quite different, intimate, and natural relations
their enormous mass drew the individual human atoms to itself. In their
their ex-Elder.
their eyes.
their eyes. A lady entering the next box shot a glance of feminine envy
their fatherland. You can understand that there are reasons for this and
their favorite corner where their most intimate talks always began.
their feeling of hostile distrust gradually began to change into a
their former disharmony and her own jealousy recurred to her mind.
their former friendly relations.
their greatcoats were ranged in lines, the sergeants major and company
their grief in their own way. The old prince would not cherish any hope:
their ground and continued to fire.
their guns, were running toward him. He also saw French infantry
their handkerchiefs to him.
their head. Thousands of crows rose above the walls and circled in the
their heads. Several people came round the corner talking eagerly.
their heels the greater distance they had to cover. Only by following
their host, there were also twenty-two hours in the day during which the
their houses, hoping thereby to secure themselves from being plundered.
their inevitability would be still greater. The dishonest conduct of the
their innumerable conjectures many were to quite the contrary effect.
their intellect and polished manners.
their investigation.
their journey. She answered him and continued her chatter.
their knotted purple veins were lying on the quilt; his left eye gazed
their language, to grasp the hidden meaning of their words, and felt
their long hair falling over their magnificent glittering vestments,
their marriage, then he threatened that if she molested Sonya he would
their marriage, with bare shoulders and a languid, passionate look on
their memory: "These wretches had occupied the sacred citadel, having
their minds by dwelling on mystical books that merely awaken their
their misfortunes. These are the measures the government has adopted to
their mother's absence...."
their motion are unknown to us) continued to operate.
their mouths, and fanned it with the skirts of their greatcoats, making
their musical talent, to sing something. Natasha, who was treated as
their muskets. A general with his suite came to the battery, and after
their opinion these persons have promoted or hindered that abstraction.
their opinions from others--Ilya Rostov among them--remained for a
their orderlies were to be seen. They were all looking at the count and
their orders, like Napoleon's, were seldom carried out, and then but
their outlooks, lie those two old, unavoidable assumptions.
their own and settled down in town.
their own old, quiet, and commonplace life," thought Natasha.
their own plight still worse, treated them with particular moroseness
their own resources what might be needed for the success of the fete.
their own, only in universities and among the mass of readers who have a
their places for the polonaise.
their places, and one of them read an exhortation on the necessity of
their present situation.
their prisoner's name was Count Bezukhov?
their quarters at Yankovo, ten miles from Bogucharovo, and went for a
their relation is always one of inverse proportion.
their rooms.
their rushing and galloping at one another did little harm, the harm of
their saddle girths, and formed companies. Denisov stood by the
their seats, went up to "congratulate" the countess, and reached across
their shoulders and checking the peasants, who were walking unevenly and
their shoulders but not venturing to utter the implied word--le
their sufferings. Deprived of power and authority, his crimes and his
their surrender, wasted time, and did not do what he was ordered to do.
their sympathy and enthusiasm but also to consider the means by which
their theory that they lose sight of the theory's object--its practical
their theory, say that power is the result of events, and sometimes,
their thick, bushy eyebrows sternly scanned all present and rested on
their things snatched off and their earrings torn out..." he flushed
their turn, and the procession of carriages moved up the street. In the
their uniforms and settled down again in their homes and clubs, and not
their uniforms, in the second bearded merchants in full-skirted coats
their voices, bowed to their hostess and arranged themselves about the
their way to destroy Moscow, they have outraged and are outraging me
their well-fitting Hessian boots, Nicholas told the blonde lady that he
their woolen stockings to the earthen floor and began putting on his
their work.
theirs.
theirs. We do not grudge them anything. Tell them so."
them Ermolov's big imposing figure. They all had their coats unbuttoned
them Pierre noticed a large cast iron ring with a seal representing a
them a little, but the thought of her husband and his unreasonable
them a paper addressed to Major Denisov from the regimental commander
them again, but the salons of Anna Pavlovna and Helene remained just as
them all and saw them in detail. She saw Prince Vasili's face, serious
them all at one blow.
them all for a drive in his troyka, proposed to take with them about a
them all,'" Tikhon concluded, looking cheerfully and resolutely into
them all. Sometimes he joined in a conversation which interested him
them aloud. Bagration bowed his head and listened:
them and never resists the laws of gravity or impermeability once he
them appropriated several houses, chalked their names on them, and
them at a moment of difficulty.
them down. When they've been put down, the war with Buonaparte will
them for having destroyed his Orphanage; now claimed the glory of
them for their boorishness.
them good service with his troykas. More than once when Anatole's
them had ever been. They set off in caravans, bought their freedom one
them in a stern and threatening attitude.
them in flight or captivity alike.
them in his study before having a nap.
them in the thick fog, the Russians exchanged shots with the enemy
them in till we reached the place. The devils took us there in three
them it was difficult to get out again. One was shouting, "Get on! Why
them naked; smoked, picked out and baked sprouting rotten potatoes, told
them not because of his own intellect, feelings, or knowledge--he did
them now! And yet really the anxiety is greater now than the joy. One is
them occasionally rings a little bell to inform the catcher of his
them of the Bourbons and because they saw that he was a great man. The
them off, inviting them all to dinner.
them off: we can hardly do it. But theirs,' he says, 'are white as paper
them on some errand. She seemed to be trying whether any of them would
them on the window sill, though it was already quite light. Dolokhov's
them or make them move. On the one hand, the chief steward put the state
them proper protection. She handed this to the princess.
them rest and leisure?" said Pierre, hurrying and lisping. "And I have
them rode the King of Naples himself accompanied by a numerous suite.
them searchingly, stopped his carriage, and inquired what regiment they
them some of the plate and bronzes that were in the drawer, moved
them something funny and kept them amused, while he watched the young
them sounded quick ringing bells and they caught confused glimpses of
them strangely of the little princess. But what was still stranger,
them that when they have thought of two or three contingencies" (he
them the traits of character the old prince called boorishness. Various
them threw down its arms and surrendered as it had long been anxious to
them to get him the book and put it under him.
them to go no longer existed. The history of the Godfreys and the
them to his cheeks.
them together--their great numbers. As with the physical law of gravity,
them we find; and each separate cause or whole series of causes appears
them when he heard a familiar, lisping, voice behind the shed.
them with his hand.
them with his whole heart and felt a desire somehow to explain to them
them with the other squadrons.
them you want--three if you like."
them!" he repeated to himself with inward rapture, feeling that these
them!... Really now, in our own yard--we asked them in ourselves and
them) but on what reminded them most closely of him--his body. Both felt
them) were to be tried for incendiarism. On the third day he was taken
them, and all four, looking round at the carriage, ran in dismay up the
them, and considers no one among you his enemy except those who disobey
them, and feeling all the strength of her love for them. When they
them, and reads those from the Emperor addressed to others. 'Ah! So
them, and so he had left them and wished to pay them out. He said that
them, and understood that it was useless and even cruel to insist.
them, and will send these visitors to the devil. I will come back to
them, but burned it instead.
them, but suddenly stopped and, clutching at his hair, burst into sobs
them, he rejoiced as though seeing all this for the first time. What for
them, his mind had penetrated to those distances and he had there seen
them, neither do I condemn them. Only it seems to me that Christian
them, went to the back porch and out through the gate.
them, with the evident intention of giving battle and checking the
them--her father, mother, and Sonya--were so near to her, so familiar,
them--the French stumbled upon Neverovski's division and reached the
them.
them.
them.
them.
them.
them.
them.
them. All the powers of his soul, as of every soldier there, were
them. And among all these faces that he found so tedious, none seemed
them. And they began telling what each was suffering for, and how they
them. At Kamenka a relay of horses was to wait which would take them to
them. It was not merely Dimmler and the Rostovs she failed to recognize,
them. Marya Dmitrievna talked to the count about something which they
them. On my word I'd give five years of my life for it!"
them. Still slapping his pockets, he kissed the hand of the countess
them. The blacksmiths from a neighboring smithy, hearing the sounds of
them. The dragoons were now close at hand. On seeing the hussars, the
them. There were wounded in the yards, at the windows of the houses, and
them; they felt that it could not be otherwise. The most compassionate
them; we call those forces gravitation, inertia, electricity, animal
them? Can the French be so enormously superior to us that when we had
them?" exclaimed Prince Andrew in a shrill, piercing voice. "Ah, my
themselves along the Vozdvizhenka, the Nikolski, and the Tverskoy
themselves and the connection in which the historical persons stood to
themselves be tricked at the crossing of the Vienna bridge, you are
themselves carried goods away with the help of their assistants. On the
themselves giving it a thought, yet in Petersburg their circle of
themselves in an indissoluble alliance to uphold the cause of justice
themselves in most depressing conditions to have a justification for
themselves in their carriages and drove off.
themselves losing four, so that on the one side four and on the other
themselves naked to steam the lice out of their shirts.
themselves off and that all necessary preparations should be made to
themselves or lifted their thin yellow faces, and all looked intently at
themselves over there and one can't make anything out."
themselves quite innocent, and since that day when he was overpowered by
themselves there from the Rostovs' and from neighboring houses where
themselves to Tushin in all their horror. He had been so excited that
themselves to someone younger. On all these faces, as on the faces
themselves, and Pierre saw that one German was badly wounded on the head
themselves, and the reading of the church service, the subdued chanting
themselves, but merely gazed at her. Natasha lifted her frightened eyes
themselves.
themselves.
themselves. The deeper we delve in search of these causes the more of
themselves; I have already told them..."
then Napoleonic France itself. To strain the facts to fit the rules of
then a gleam of bayonets; to the left beyond the village similar masses
then addressed Pierre.
then again at his feet. The former and the latter were alike familiar
then all will be right, as our bear huntsman at Kostroma used to tell
then already it bore within itself the germs of inevitable ruin. How
then appointed to supervise the enrollment decreed throughout Russia.
then at Tsarevo-Zaymishche, but it happened that owing to a conjunction
then back again, re-entering, he by the front and she by the back porch.
then because on the Rostovs' being announced, the old prince had shouted
then both voices together with glad intonations, and then footsteps.
then brought back to the general circle.
then calmly and seriously sat back in his chair. Anna Pavlovna waited
then chosen (she was firmly convinced she had done so) and of finding
then coming into vogue. He laughed at theoretical treatises on estate
then concealed the unknown was lifted from his spiritual vision. He felt
then detached ideas and impressions from the world of reality shot
then footsteps were heard. Natasha was looking at the mirror, but did
then four more appeared and then from each, with the same
then have dismissed them with horror, but now they are very clear and
then having subjected to criticism the explanation of "power" that
then he had a second and final stroke.
then himself to be a Napoleon; then to be a philosopher; and then
then insisted on a delay of a year and now already six months, half of
then not be able to marry Princess Mary as they would be within the
then particularly strong.
then paused. What more could she write after all that had happened
then return again to his own thoughts. But Prince Andrew's mind was not
then said--that he turned to look at her and smiled and was covered with
then she is pretty, uncommonly pretty, and agile--she swims and rides
then she thought this would be rude after what he had done for her; then
then so, do you see?" and he pushed Anatole's head forward to meet the
then suddenly during a period of fifty years is transferred to the
then suddenly his whole face expanded into a beaming, foolish grin,
then that happy moment, that Toulon for which he had so long waited,
then that same battle will not soon be over."
then that same face pale, quivering, and suffering, as it had been when
then the officers, and after them with excited faces, pressing on one
then there are you and the children and our affairs. Is it for my own
then tidied up the things on the table and in his own corner, and,
then touching with his own under the clavichord. Mademoiselle Bourienne
then went up to the table where Prince Andrew, evidently not wishing
then why was Napoleon I? Why was Napoleon III a criminal when he was
then with remarks which showed that he was in a good temper.
then!"
then, after I met her under such circumstances--so strangely, the idea
then, again rustling, pass into the anteroom, put on cloaks or mantles,
then, and already I, with my petty understanding, begin to see clearly
then, but knew that it was not true, and I felt so uncomfortable."
then, directly I saw him I felt something peculiar."
then, had listened with an amused smile to their conversation and now
then, smiling at his own sensations, stood still. The smoke, rendered
then, suddenly spread out in the sunlight, far-distant objects could
then, testing her strength, ran upstairs again, observing the result.
then, was a rubbishy German, that Denisov was a hero, the esaul a hero,
then..."
thence to Moscow. Princess Mary, alarmed by her father's feverish and
theorist in whom all the characteristics of those others were united to
theorist, self-confident to the point of despising everyone else) was
theorist-generals whom Prince Andrew had seen in 1805, but he was more
theory arrived at by years of toil, should be carried out. He was
theory by a huge experiment and proving its soundness to the whole world
theory can always say that such and such a person took the lead because
theory.
theory. If the conditions under which power is entrusted consist in the
there and fire the bridge or will the French get within grapeshot range
there and found two thirds of the men and horses knocked out, two guns
there and sat dozing on the rolled-up bedding, evidently exhausted by
there are children, turned to Prince Andrew's little son, caressing him
there are most provisions; and even a dull boy of thirteen could have
there are officers among them.... You know, I think, my dear... let them
there are some semi-private, long-established jokes and amusing
there are spirits, and that in this world there is truth."
there are things in it difficult for the feeble human mind to grasp, it
there at his bidding, nothing happened. It is obvious that there would
there await the enemy. It was plain that Armfeldt had thought out that
there be in a matter in which, as in all practical matters, nothing
there be in it if unfortunate people, our serfs, people like ourselves,
there but that no shots were being fired from the battery. He had no
there had seemed no escape. She wrote that the last unfortunate
there he could see churches that had not been burned. The Kremlin, which
there in which he had now no part could perturb him. He shut his eyes,
there is a floor littered with bits of wax, excrement, dying bees
there is a yet sharper division of those who, because their activity is
there is and can be no beginning to any event, for one event always
there is any misunderstanding and discord between you and Mary, I can't
there is little need for discussion. The Emperor has deigned to summon
there is no Petersburg for me, and that that must be settled first of
there is no complete inevitability but a certain measure of freedom
there is not a single Russian in command of a column! The commanders
there is nothing in life but you, and to suffer with you is the greatest
there it was. And what seemed still more terrible to her was that since
there must be some linen left over.
there only to witness the execution. With ever-growing horror, and no
there or not going there; here there were not twenty-four hours in the
there over the whole of that blue expanse, to right and left of the
there receive a place I dare not hope for myself. But not to speak of
there saw that she was pretty, very pretty, she felt even more sad, but
there she would have perished at the hands of the mutineers and of the
there still remained for an instant a faraway dreamy expression remote
there then, and now too, I don't know what would have become of me,
there too sat the members of the family, and Pierre and Helene, side by
there was a crush. Halfway across stood Prince Nesvitski, who had
there was a place left for him in the small dining room and that Prince
there was a tattered sofa, a worn carpet, and portraits of Suvorov, of
there was a white patch that Rostov could not at all make out: was it
there was an order to the contrary, but that if she stayed they would
there was danger, he had hopes of the effect of this last medicine and
there was little talk or thought of Moscow, and when they caught sight
there was no reason why it should not reach the Pavlograd regiment,
there was none he would so much like to have for a friend as that very
there was not a single battle. The French did not move. As a bleeding,
there was nothing between the squadron and the enemy, and again that
there were a couple of dozen men in Paris who began to talk about all
there were five Russians for every Frenchman. Not on that day alone
there were important reasons for so doing, nodded slightly to the lady
there were no answers to these questions he made haste to turn away
there were no political difficulties in Europe and no real war, but
there were other hours he had to spend somehow, and the habits and
there were secret reasons he could reveal only to her--but that if
there were seven of us. We lived well. We were real peasants. It so
there were the campfires; the lice that devoured him warmed his body.)
there will not be a happier man than you."
there would be least danger.
there would be no restrictions. Rumors of the war with Bonaparte and
there would be nothing I could reproach you with," said Anna Pavlovna,
there would probably be an engagement that day or the next, and giving
there!" he shouted. "Why have you shut it?"
there's a tavern where ours have already gathered. We can at least get
there's no end to it. Russian wenches, by heaven, so they are! In
there's nothing left for you and me but to sip sweet wine, my dear,
there's this recruiting. My father is chief in command of the Third
there's to be an Extraordinary Meeting of the nobility, and they are
there, God only knows what would have happened! You know, Uncle promised
there, I should be ready to begin again. I pity those who did not see
there, Prince, and scare them a bit. It won't take a moment."
there, and this, together with his past and his intellect and his
there, drank a bottle of wine, and then set off alone to the Guards'
there, it's awful! Two bands and three sets of singers!"
there, just fancy! Those three got hold of a bear somewhere, put it in a
there, or even Ilyin, who's a stranger to me but a nice lad, but would
there, she glided up to him with a sort of amble, not exactly bowing yet
there, we wanted to get away from the battlefield as soon as we could.
there," and he pointed to the village in front of them with the white
there," he pointed to a sutler's tent, "they crowd in and sit. This
there," said the officer, pointing to the village of Hosjeradek, and he
there--and seize it by the throat in a death grip!" A thousand times
there--those stockings are to be a surprise for me."
there--whether Arakcheev is bad, and all that? What business was it of
there.
there.
there. Boris, hearing a strange voice in the anteroom, came out to meet
there. Do come, dear countess, and give me this flower as a pledge!"
there. From time to time he heard a soft rustle and at times a sigh.
there. He stood still, looking silently around. He had not at all
there. In his person, honor was shown to a simple fighting Russian
there. Then, as happens to people of weak character, he desired so
there. They say he has been acting as minister to some ruling prince in
there... both playing the hero... Ah, Vasili Ignatovich... How d'ye do,
thereby extended the frontiers of France) talked in Vienna and by
therefore 4x = 15y. Consequently x/y = 15/4. This equation does not
therefore better to disregard what is painful till it comes, and to
therefore cannot be defined. Those words only denote a certain stage of
therefore could not do so. "Russia and summer weather are not bound
therefore could not serve as material for science.
therefore fought against Napoleon. In 1807 he suddenly made friends
therefore have struck him all the more pleasantly, but he still felt
therefore met with unaltered looks the angrily inquisitive expression of
therefore most terrible thoughts--would give him no peace. He knew that
therefore necessary that everyone should be able to satisfy his passions
therefore never be at peace. A stern expression of the lofty, secret
therefore one should not trust them absolutely, but should also listen
therefore so long as not all the conditions influencing men are defined,
therefore there can be no such thing as a military genius--now appeared
therefore valued most highly. He tried to picture what would happen were
therefore was what an ukase emanating from the highest authority should
therefore when describing some single state they assume that particular
therefore you seek wisdom and virtue. Is that not so?" said the Rhetor,
therefore--this is between ourselves--I instinctively feel that we are
therefore--to see it and enjoy its contemplation--he naturally threw
these actions.
these adaptations the reference to spring (vesna) matched the impression
these balls with an air of condescension and found them most enjoyable.
these conversations made the nations happy or unhappy. Suddenly the
these days. I said so even at the time when everybody was in raptures
these despised God's folk who, wallet on back, come to me by the back
these did not meet with success either. The theaters set up in the
these documents, and he wrote to the German that, despite his heartfelt
these explanations had waited in silence for him to finish speaking, but
these formed the entrance and vestibule. The trench itself was the room,
these if one has any feeling?" said Anna Pavlovna. "You are staying the
these infinitesimals) can we hope to arrive at the laws of history.
these last days. It was decided that the count must not go, but that
these maneuvers that enabled us to escape him. Buxhowden pursues us--we
these men who were right in the heat of the battle acted according to
these men. They evidently all made an effort to hold themselves at the
these nestlings are growing up," and she pointed to the girls. "You must
these other madmen to be free."
these peasants, who were evidently still amused by the novelty of their
these people sans foi ni loi * can give it him--people who recklessly
these people what they were, but it will be clear that all those small
these pictures of the future had given him pleasure. But with Princess
these poignant joys and sorrows. You are fortunate, for the latter are
these quests and experiments had failed him. And now without thinking
these rooms. Anna Mikhaylovna, addressing a maid who was hurrying past
these sayings and doings "the Revolution"; then they give a detailed
these suffering men, and he felt afraid--afraid not for his life, but
these things, but Nicholas and Natasha always brought him back to the
these things.
these topics were not merely uninteresting to Natasha, she positively
these transfers, a more than usually complicated play of parties
these two essential questions of history:
these two glanced vainly at the onlookers with only a silent appeal for
these two things and took more fortresses than Kamenski and made them
these unfortunates.
these words as a direct challenge to the Emperor. He knew how Alexander
these words pained her for a moment. She remembered her brother and his
these words she greeted Prince Vasili Kuragin, a man of high rank and
these worlds, but each had its own special reasons to rejoice or grieve
they afraid of sinning?..." said the same mob now, looking with pained
they all gave, and transmitted, orders as to how to proceed,
they all jostled one another, began to grow angry and to fight, white
they all shunned one another's eyes--only a de Beausset could fail to
they all three went along the corridor to the first row of boxes.
they also stepped on the raft.
they appear.
they are fattened, they will at least know that all that happened to the
they are quite different. That must be true. Really he is quite unlike
they are ready to sacrifice everything for their neighbor, but they
they are to cross last and to fire the bridge as I ordered; and the
they are, there... you can see them."
they are. But how cast off all the superfluous, devilish burden of my
they avoid anything relating to him who was dead. It seemed to them that
they be before the faces of Thy faithful warriors as dust before the
they be ensnared when they know it not, and may the plots they have laid
they became silent, and Pierre thought he saw the princess hide
they both retired into the pavilion. Since he had begun to move in the
they both tried to listen to the stern and dreadful choir that still
they brought him news that Murat had been taken prisoner, and the staff
they called "Jackdaw," a thin little fellow with a sharp nose, rose
they came out on a glade where troops of Tuchkov's corps were stationed
they caught at his hand and kissed his shoulder he patted their backs
they command and the fewer of them there are; rising in this way from
they could be seen running back past it carrying their wounded on
they could not fail to vanquish anyone, be it whom it might: so thought
they could not see (he lay wrapped in a greatcoat) rose and whispered
they crossed the Virgin's Field.
they defeated the Spaniards. My brother Masons swear by the blood that
they demanded contributions of fuel.
they descended into the hollow where the Cossacks awaited them.
they did Anatole. Dolokhov could play all games and nearly always won.
they did catch me they'd string me up to an aspen tree, and with all
they did not convey the passionately poetic feeling she had experienced
they did not heed her, and at last succeeded in making them believe her.
they did not interest him now. He sat on his elevation--the pedestal of
they doing? What are they doing?" he murmured to himself, still not
they don't agree to leave Bogucharovo as you ordered."
they don't help at all. What can doctors cure? One can't cure anything.
they don't see it!" came identical shouts from the ranks all along the
they drink, pressing his spurs mercilessly into the sides of his good
they embraced Cossacks and hussars.
they got to Moscow.
they had been--the one seven and the other five years before. At Anna
they had gone by, the same stream of soldiers followed, with the same
they had looked at it from the hill, the officer had pointed out as
they had looked at the regimental commander, seeming by their expression
they had retreated they would have withdrawn from that too.... Officer!"
they had revealed. He was now concerned only with the nearest practical
they had started. The colonel and some of his men got across and with
they have behaved."
they have combined.
they hope to recover. During the last few days many of the men have been
they hoped to find many domestic serfs and pretty girls, they questioned
they looked at her careworn, despairing face, felt sure she would fall
they lost their discipline and rushed about according to the chance
they made a dash for the Kaluga road, and (after a victory--for at
they make a man commander in chief who cannot mount a horse, who drops
they make me Governor of India, Gerard, I'll make you Minister of
they might be who were to blame for the false and ridiculous position in
they might not stink. Thiers alone dedicates a few eloquent lines to
they must go away, sorry as they were to abandon their property
they ought all to be happy.
they played some tricks on a policeman, didn't they do it together?
they put the hounds into a ravine thickly overgrown with young trees.
they quite understood one another as to the first part of their romance,
they ran out into the porch and reported what was taking place in the
they reached Borodino, seventy miles from Moscow. From Vyazma Napoleon
they rose up hungry, joking about their nasty food and their hunger. As
they sang their soldiers' dance song.
they say."
they should leave her alone.
they should trouble about these things now when it can no longer be of
they sprang from their ambush and, chirruping something in their shrill
they still brought up the charges, loaded, aimed, and applied the match,
they stumbled and panted with fatigue, perspiring and stained with blood
they surrendered, Dolokhov dismounted and went up to Petya, who lay
they think that this maneuver was calculated to save Russia and destroy
they thought were mere phrases) about a "golden bridge," about the
they took the Saltanov dam or not, as we are told was the case at
they want me to learn. And I will learn. But someday I shall have
they wanted to show they were drunk and on a spree. One, a tall,
they watched their young people executing their newly learned steps, and
they were accommodated, entreating the servants to try to get them
they were all hurrying when they had nowhere to hurry to and were
they were false) paid to him in advance for hay.
they were firing at could not be seen for the smoke which there was no
they were going or why. If they regretted having to retreat, it was only
they were judging, what with one thing and another, filling in the
they were leaving or that to which they were going.
they were meaningless.
they were not Christians, but they too have souls. It's what the old
they were offered enormous sums of money for them. Not only were huge
they were ordered not to do so, as it was a noxious plant. That spring a
they were over. After his liberation he reached Orel, and on the third
they were ready to go to all lengths--which found expression in the
they were saying was amusing, but because she felt happy and was unable
they who had suffered from the trampled beds.
they woke late and were again delayed so often that they only got as far
they would again fall in love with one another, and that Nicholas would
they would all be enrolled as Cossacks; at another of a new religion to
they would have been made public," he said with warmth and haste. "I do
they would unharness the horses. Alpatych had gone out to admonish them,
they're engaged...."
they're getting it frightfully hot."
they're sorry for it afterwards. I don't like that."
thick bones. Tikhon with equal accuracy would split logs with blows at
thick spot of paint representing the highest light in the portrait,
thick, shady, and dense, and the young firs dotted about in the forest
thick-set general with grizzled eyebrows and whiskers, and wider from
thief?"
thieves among the Pavlograd officers!' But it's not all the same to us!
thigh broken by a shell splinter, had been carried into the kitchen.
thigh with its teeth and would not let go. I began to throttle it with
thin face. Her eyes, always sad, now looked with particular hopelessness
thin legs, went up to Kutuzov.
thin lips grew white, though her eyes did not change, and her voice
thin lips interrupted Weyrother, wishing to say something. But the
thin little shoulders, Natasha's eyes and laughter, Denisov with his
thin, with sunken cheeks and a dull expression. The officer walked in
thin. Steam rose from them. Clothes, saddles, reins, were all wet,
thing I have faith in! Our good and wonderful sovereign has to perform
thing I was thinking of. Yes, Na-tasha, sabretache, oh, yes, yes! That's
thing and carry her to the sleigh."
thing and not at all worse than a swallow-tail or frock coat. "Uncle"
thing for the Rostovs, they are said to be utterly ruined."
thing in the capital though new to them in the provinces.
thing left--to go away, but where could I go?"
thing of you, cousin," she went on, "arrange for me to be taken to
thing really."
thing that rarely happened with him.
thing that was destroying the French army, the booty on which the
thing you're going. That's it! Come on!" (This was "Uncle's" favorite
thing--to be perfectly good--so he could not be afraid of death.
thing--to carry away and eat those green plums without being caught--and
thing. He, the sensitive, tender Prince Andrew, how could he say that,
things about Bonaparte, but understanding that he was wanted as a peg on
things and one doesn't care to listen, but this one talks rubbish yet
things and to question Pierre. The questions put by these two kept the
things are done."
things as impossible. The small bands that had started their activities
things compared with the heights to which his soul had just been raised.
things could be said, and was at the same time sorry to have now to
things each from his own point of view. This legitimate peculiarity of
things had to be. From the passage they went into a large, dimly lit
things have to be put in order, and we will deal with villains in our
things he did wrong at this period of his reign.
things in my bedroom," said he to the servant who was ushering Bolkonski
things into his mother's language, "Prince Alexander Golitsyn has
things like daggers in their hands. They began waving their arms. Then
things not belonging to them. Crowds of the kind seen at cheap sales
things packed. But of late Sonya had been particularly sad and silent.
things possible which the commanders of the big detachments did not dare
things that can be bought but think what being left behind means to
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
things the old count sent to his son.
things to such a pass that there are no carts or anything!... There it
things trying for you, doesn't it?" Prince Andrew asked suddenly.
things were going in the army, the rumors of the discovery of spies in
things, lacking coherence, presented themselves one after another to
things, yet she felt that they were closer to one another than she had
things. "These aren't needed," said she, putting aside some plates of
things. Dolokhov was counting the money and noting something down.
things. I absolutely must see him, however painful it may be for me. I
things. She did not reply, but looked at her seriously.
things. To her other defects (as most people thought them, but which
think about entirely apart from general questions. Two days previously
think about it.
think about what is pleasant. In solitude a man generally listens to
think and can't help thinking, just as he can't help plowing and mowing;
think he would get it to you so quickly.... Well, how are you? Been
think how to address the reply! If not as 'Consul' and of course not as
think it must be dull for you only seeing us."
think nothing of an extra seventy miles to come and see you at the same
think of Karataev who grew weaker every day and evidently would soon
think of her as a rival, so they began dressing her with perfect
think of how many men would be missing tomorrow but ought not to speak
think of luring Napoleon on, but quite the contrary. The luring of
think of nothing to say.
think of us!" cried his wife, referring to the rumors of war and the
think of what awaits them, but pass by, winking at the wounded. Yet from
think of yourself, but with my love for you I must do so.... Has
think so much about what he was doing, or reflect on or command what
think so," and so on.
think that I cannot know it; so I do not try to know it and I talk about
think that their disagreements are the cause of this fresh pressure
think the battle will be lost, and so I told Count Tolstoy and asked
think we thoroughly understand.
think you remember that, your excellency?"
thinking about the strangeness of what had occurred.
thinking about you. Why are you going?"
thinking about you."
thinking about? Why is she so glad?"
thinking aloud in his wife's presence now that they had made it up.
thinking of so painfully to the exclusion of all else.
thinking of that.
thinking of till now?"
thinking without doing anything (which seemed to them incomprehensible),
thinking, mechanically broke the seal and read a love letter from
thinking--especially at that moment. It suffused him, seized him, and
third company he suddenly stopped. His suite, not having expected this,
third company!"
third couple. Boris, coolly looking at Helene's dazzling bare shoulders
third day when something could have been done, that army was already two
third!"
thirdly by the fact that a large Russian army was following the French,
thirteen more men he will be three times as strong as I am.
thirteen others was led to the Virgin's Field. It was a fine day, sunny
thirtieth he attacked Mortier's division, which was on the left bank,
thirty dogs and twenty horsemen.
thirty thousand rubles a year and always occupy a prominent position in
thirty years, and understanding the mood he was in expected a pleasant
thirty-five feet long and seven feet high, moved forward along the
this Pierre was very sensitive.
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
this aim, we occupy ourselves either with the mystery which in our
this and guessed its reason.
this big, stout, quiet man, wondering how such a clumsy, modest fellow
this bit of boastful patriotism slipped out at the end.
this bombardment.
this bone--a bill for thirty thousand rubles--to the poor princess that
this boy during that conversation, and remembering all he had said he
this character--though not lacking in virtue (the historians do not
this chit of a girl, Natasha, who not so long ago was playing with dolls
this condition of stupor since the morning, when Sonya, to the surprise
this conjecture was confirmed by the sad tone in which her elders spoke
this consciousness of mismanagement became a general conviction, but as
this couch will be my grave?" Natasha, flushed and eager, seeing
this crazy world."
this debauchery, dissipation, and the rest of it!"
this desperate and provocative proposition his extreme youth and his
this diminutive expressing his affection and the hopes he placed on this
this doubt to him. "Now who could decide whether he is really cleverer
this dreadful, inextricable position!" he suddenly began to pray. "Yes,
this end?" thought Rostov, looking at the changing shadows before
this enemy of decisive action, gave battle at Borodino, investing the
this event was accompanied by its justification in the necessity for a
this expectation did not upset the regular routine of life in the
this extraordinary gathering not only of nobles but also of the
this force as a power inherent in heroes and rulers. In their narration
this fortified camp constructed by Pfuel, and till then considered
this general deception which everyone accepts, accustomed as he was to
this great grief; that she felt herself blameless in regard to everyone,
this he replied that one should not deprive a wife of one's embraces and
this he started for the country next day.
this heart, so kind and generous? Say 'perhaps'... The future is so
this instant!" thought Rostov.
this interview between the two Emperors, and having succeeded in this,
this is a dinner for recreation, with not a word about business!" and
this is absolutely true.
this is really beyond anything, my dear count," said she to Count Rostov
this is what I was proud of! I then thought that I did not understand
this is what we'll do: I have a good friend, an adjutant general and an
this kept him in a state of excitement bordering on insanity.
this life I did not and do not understand."
this life temporarily; but then he was shocked by the thought of how
this life to love her husband, her children, little Nicholas, and all
this love affair which might hinder Nicholas from making a brilliant
this lowest-grade greeting, a look of anxiety and fear, as at the sight
this man and that man, did not execute such and such maneuvers...
this man receives a daughter of the Caesars into his bed; the Pope, the
this man. When she turned away she feared he might seize her from behind
this matter is merely to serve as an instrument for the illumination
this moment of happy, rapturous excitement. She gazed at him, not taking
this moved, or seemed to move, as the smoke and mist spread out over
this movement means, what caused it, and what force produced these
this movement of the transport and of the whole army, had to remain
this movement, by what laws was it governed? asks the mind of man.
this murder? Either I shall kill him, or he will hit me in the head,
this murderer and villain! We alone must avenge the blood of the just
this name day of hers had been one of the pleasantest she had ever had.
this new sorrow brought them still closer to one another. Princess Mary
this new, terrible state of things begin? What marked the change? I sat
this news stifled all sympathy for the man they both liked.
this of Thee, but for God's sake do let the old wolf come my way and
this one."
this opinion, but as soon as he expressed it Karp and others attacked
this or that figure comes out not because the color was laid on from
this or that? Why did he not take up a position before reaching Fili?
this party belonged the foreign nobles, Wolzogen, Wintzingerode, and
this party were those who had demanded an advance from Vilna into Poland
this party, wrote a letter to the Emperor which Arakcheev and Balashev
this passage and will hold her back by force and will and not let the
this peasant, it was reported to him that Tikhon had attached himself
this place which teemed with life, nor could he even distinguish our
this poetic and pure intimacy, were what my heart needed. But enough of
this progression to infinity, do we reach a solution of the problem.
this question, observed:
this refined selection of society Anna Pavlovna's receptions were
this resemblance he was exceedingly ugly. His features were like his
this same idea. This idea is le bien public, the hypothetical welfare of
this same irresolute and undiscerning Dokhturov--Kutuzov hastening to
this secrecy?"
this side or in that way, but because it was laid on from all sides over
this small circular drawing room with its mirrors and little tables.
this so strongly that the outward and terrible side of death did not
this strange incident, and then shrugging his shoulders went to the door
this strange, unexpected happiness of meeting again the very man she had
this strong, brave man, this model son and officer that, judging by this
this subject which irritated Denisov. "Now, why have you kept this lad?"
this terrible cudgel which regardless of the rules of military science
this third party.
this thought to no one but to her confessor, Father Akinfi, the monk,
this time, he repeatedly says that he was then actuated by two important
this time.
this to express a consciousness of the airiness and purity of what she
this to his daughter, but Natasha noticed her father's nervousness
this very day," he murmured to himself.
this victory to the Austrian court, now no longer at Vienna (which was
this waiting and I shall cry in a minute!" and she turned away from the
this war was that the old prince never spoke of it, did not recognize
this was not enough. She knew that, and asked herself, "What next?"
this was not so but that on the contrary the French had run away. He
this will oblige one half the army to shoot the other."
this woman (who was "Uncle's" housekeeper) trod very lightly. She went
this woman, who was so beautiful and so kind. Helene for her part was
this would happen."
this young Jacobin was not so terrible as his words suggested. All were
this! The chief news, about which all Moscow gossips, is the death of
this, and he received two decorations for the Finnish war also. In
this, but Prince Andrew was firm. He came every day to the Rostovs',
this, but in the second year of his marriage his view of that form of
this, showing all the news we have had of the movements of the Austrian
this, such was his state of forgetfulness, had he not halfway up the
this, then: whatever may happen to you when I am not here..."
this, will they let it pass? He, your father, I know him... if he
this, your excellency!"
this," cried Prince Andrew in a shrill voice that seemed to escape him
this--sheer robbery! If you please, could not guards be placed if only
this.
this. "Without a name and without means... And it really..." But he
this. This secret correspondence... How could you let him go so far?"
this: "It was an awful sight--children abandoned, some in the flames...
this? But she does dance splendidly."
this?" But these doubts only lasted a moment. Pierre glanced at the
those Kuragins and leading that sort of life. It suits you so badly--all
those conceptions.
those confined there were awaiting a decision which might come any day
those conflicting opinions, were able to take a detached view of what
those days, the absence of wine and cigars, his dirty unchanged linen,
those defended by two such brave armies may feel assured of victory."
those doubts was to be found within himself. But now he felt that
those dreadful, wicked temptations, was a torment of joy and terror.
those first steps. Both had changed greatly since they last met and both
those forests and fields, the bright, oscillating, limitless distance
those hands with their short reddish fingers and hairy wrists, which
those he termed they), and he heard those people, Anatole and Dolokhov,
those human wills, man's mind postulates arbitrary and disconnected
those in closest attendance on the Emperor, went up to him and contrary
those in front had halted. All remained where they were in the middle of
those inimitable and unteachable Russian ones that "Uncle" had expected
those leaders?
those of Bald Hills. They differed from them in speech, dress, and
those of higher ranks in the Order.  3. Morality.  4. Love of mankind.
those old men! Eh?"
those on foot, collapsed in a great mass, and some forty men who were on
those richer and more powerful than himself and he had rare skill in
those used in churches. Two of the brothers led Pierre up to the altar,
those who committed them did not at the time regard as being crimes.
those who examine the actions of any government have always said since
those who lagged behind. Pierre felt that that fatal force which had
those who stood in the most prominent position--the heroes of history.
those who were disputing honestly.
those who were guiding him.
those who were holding him under the armpits, and of his gray, curly,
those who, as he imagined, understood the real meaning of life (that
those wills first tolerated and then destroyed them.
those words Kutuzov looked round. He was listening to the general's
those words, that is to say, so utterly impossible that if any senseless
thou hast lost."
thou noticed that my face is different?" I looked at him, still holding
thou, and why did the whole world, conceive the idea of the existence
though Anna Pavlovna felt sure he would say something inappropriate, she
though all Pierre's interest was now centered in that house, by the
though all were in a conspiracy of silence. The men who set the tone in
though embracing her.
though from Prince Andrew's letter it was evident that to remain at Bald
though he is a rake and all that, still I like him; so you see I do
though he knew it could not be helped.
though he smiled delightedly. He ran up to them.
though he tried hard to hide it in order not to sadden his dying father.
though he was evidently in high good humor, and he ordered these words
though he wrote in French and used French jests and French idioms,
though it knew that the time of its destruction was near when the
though it was not at all the time for tea.
though many fell near him. He looked about him with a smile which did
though many of them knew that what he was saying was a lie devoid of any
though not big, had been a successful engagement. The men and officers
though now it was certainly not an expression of curiosity or gratitude,
though of this Prince Andrew said nothing to his sister, was that in the
though offended. "Yes... no... to Petersburg? Tomorrow--but I won't say
though only one artilleryman survived out of every three, and though
though she was lying on the ground--she grabbed at some biscuits but
though she were grown up, was evidently very proud of this but at the
though the big hospitals and the houses in Krems converted into military
though the question he was about to ask was the chief motive of his
though there was a ford one third of a mile away, were proud that they
though these themes were not yet termed questions as they are now; but
though they were on springs.
though this feeling of his was subject to the law by which the force of
though undone is but one,' as the proverb says, but with thirteen in
though whenever he offered it Pierre always declined it.
thought Bagration. Prince Andrew, without replying, asked the prince's
thought Bolkonski.
thought Natasha--"is it possible that I am now to be the wife and the
thought Natasha. "And what do his father and sister matter to me? I
thought Pierre, "and how little attention we pay to it!"
thought Pierre. "But this man knows the truth and, if he wished to,
thought Prince Andrew, "so it will not do to present my proposal for
thought Prince Andrew, not yet clearly grasping what he saw before him.
thought Prince Andrew, watching his old acquaintance with a smile
thought Rostov driving his spurs into Rook and letting him go at a full
thought Rostov.
thought a diplomatist, glancing at the happy faces of the lovers.
thought about Sonya. He had pictured each of those young ladies as
thought about their next pay, their next quarters, of Matreshka the
thought about this for a long time, and at last made up her mind that,
thought about yesterday's ball, and after his morning tea he set to
thought again now. "Now he will never tell anyone what he had in his
thought also of her own children. She did not compare them with him, but
thought and which had formerly seemed to her so far away and improbable,
thought could not occur to the doctors (as it cannot occur to a wizard
thought had occurred to him and so it belonged to her also. And he told
thought he (he had said so to Tuchkov at Smolensk). From that point of
thought he heard a strange noise through the door. He was seized with
thought he remembered that some other fellow had got mixed up in it, but
thought he, "all such 'words of honor' are conventional things with no
thought he, "if she saw me here now on this field with the cannon aimed
thought her too fashionably dressed, frivolously gay and vain. She did
thought independent of her sister-in-law's words. In the midst of a
thought it his duty to assure him that he was not French and wished to
thought much of him."
thought my Bolkonski would not approve of or understand our gaiety. But
thought occurred to him just because he himself desired a victim,
thought of Natasha and of her own youth, and of how there was something
thought of everything, considered everything, and did everything the
thought of his friend and how much he expected of him in the future.
thought of what she would be like when he was an old man, taking her
thought of, all the same the young people might be brought together and
thought only of one thing, her sorrow, which, after the break caused
thought out his plans beforehand he could not have been so natural and
thought she, recalling all the signs that clearly indicated that Natasha
thought that came into his mind was that today he had to be presented
thought that he, an exemplary officer of many years' service who had
thought that this man did not, and never would, know any of those who
thought the officers were beginning to look at him and Dolokhov with
thought the overseer, "the storm has blown over!"
thought this, and at the same time remembered that people were looking
thought this, but still sat in the same place. A strange feeling of
thought turned to her sister-in-law with a tender glance at her figure.
thought which history must adopt are being worked out simultaneously
thought which tranquillized Rostopchin was not a new one. Since the
thought) their exalted feelings by words; but this silence about him had
thought, "I must remain free."
thought, as he listened to voices in Kutuzov's courtyard. The voices
thought, expecting every moment to meet the monarch, and conscious of
thought, glancing at the lady in the black dress.
thought, he called Tikhon and began to undress.
thought--referring to the little princess who was not in the dining
thought.
thought.
thought. "He had always thought what he said then." And she recalled in
thought. "The slur on my name and honor--that's all apart from myself."
thought. "Well, if need be, I shall do it no worse than others."
thought. Having wept, talked, and wiped away their tears, the two
thought. The minister drew the remaining papers together, arranged them
thought: "Is it possible no one will ask me, that I shall not be among
thought; "but I know you wish to avoid any pretext for finding fault
thoughtful expression of his face.
thoughts (which he would not have told to his mother, his sister, or
thoughts and anxieties as to be oblivious of his presence. He looked
thoughts and feelings that had formerly seemed so important. It did
thoughts and hopes, contrary to the whole tenor of his life, that unable
thoughts came to him in bed. So he called Tikhon and went through the
thoughts come and I can't sleep but toss about till dawn, because I
thoughts he expressed in conversation supposed his wishes to be. And she
thoughts he had had when lying there. It was unsatisfactory everywhere,
thoughts he has dreamed of for nights, but looks around for help or a
thoughts occurred to him, he would ask in a particularly calm and
thoughts that had first come to him as he lay gazing at the sky on the
thoughts were centered on one subject--the irrevocability of death and
thoughts were preternaturally clear. Sonya was sitting by the table. He
thoughts with the bitter conviction that he would not be understood.
thoughts, and memories suddenly arose within him that he could not fall
thoughts, for in such matters, too, he had gained experience. He knew
thoughts.
thousand Austrians, with a hundred thousand Russians, were to operate in
thousand allied troops rose from their bivouacs to the hum of voices,
thousand and a French army of a hundred thousand have met to fight, and
thousand as well. Yes, yes! Kiss me."
thousand feet between Borodino and Bagration's fleches. Beyond that
thousand men is moving on Dmitrov. A third has advanced along the
thousand men is moving on the Petersburg road. Another corps of several
thousand men, reached Napoleon at Orsha with only one thousand men left,
thousand men. Despite all Kutuzov's efforts to avoid that ruinous
thousand rubles a year and brought in nothing.
thousand rubles a year for this art.) Everybody in the stalls, boxes,
thousand rubles for the forest."
thousand rubles quitrent received from Pierre's peasants, which the
thousand rubles--to serve, as he said, as samples of his remounts.
thousand run from eight thousand, as at Austerlitz. What science can
thousand strong, to the right across the hills from the Krems-Znaim to
thousand, that's war! But the enemy has lost masses...
thousand-ruble horses, only eighteen were left after the charge.
thousands of bees sitting back to back and guarding the high mystery
thousands of others those few commands which were consistent with that
thousands such as I in Russia.'
thrashed him because he had to get on as quickly as possible. And I,"
thrashing the laboring sides of his chestnut horse with his whip as if
thread. A third with pins in her mouth was running about between the
threatened by the French) but at Brunn. Despite his apparently delicate
threatening Bald Hills--even then I wouldn't serve in the Russian army!
threatening and forbidding movement of her head.
threatening gesture. "If the purse isn't found I'll flog you, I'll flog
threatening her son would not soon be over. Shinshin, with a sarcastic
threatening the empire and of the hopes he placed on the Moscow
threateningly toward him.
three daughters besides a son for whom she had longed and whom she was
three days to forget everything and so..."
three forms.
three great sorrows of his life held his attention in particular: his
three hours. Eh?"
three months ago, draw fresh moral strength from your look, so gentle,
three officers of Denisov's band were converting a door into a tabletop.
three officers quite easily, but Zherkov, pushing Nesvitski aside with
three parts of that army were sharply distinguished: Kutuzov's fighting
three roans and Dozhoyveyko, his quartermaster, and to wonder anxiously
three services in their own house, but as Agrafena Ivanovna did, by
three sides. The most vigorous attack came from an old acquaintance,
three tents with flaps turned back, pitched at the edge of a birch wood.
three times and Natasha fell ill from despair, Pierre one day told her
three weeks of their journey and life at Yaroslavl.
three weeks surrounded by a court that included princes, dukes, kings,
three-pronged fork will be best of all: a Frenchman is no heavier than a
three-year-old girl in a pink dress was lying under a seat.
threes and fours, and then Cossacks: some in felt cloaks, some in French
threes, and reckoning them off on his fingers. Mentally addressing the
threescore and six.
threw his stick at Philip, and instantly gave instructions to have him
throat and another... that'll do!" And seizing her mother round the
throat with the other. The officer, dropping his sword, seized Pierre by
throats and wiping the hoarfrost from their faces in the vestibule,
throne of my ancestors, then after exhausting all the means at my
throne with her hair down. She sang something mournfully, addressing the
throne, and the Fatherland! We must cease raving if we are sons of
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
through Medyn and Yukhnov, but the one thing he could not foresee was
through Moscow, nobody came to the count any more for instructions.
through Napoleons, Louis-es, and writers; but we do not acknowledge such
through consciousness does he know himself.
through him: "No, better not look," he thought, but having reached the
through his black coat. The dust always hung motionless above the buzz
through his general, he could and would intercede with the Emperor on
through his lorgnette, suddenly turned completely round toward the
through his spectacles, but that his wife's connection with Dolokhov was
through his thin compressed lips, "I will throw him down there. Now
through in their ball dresses with diamonds and pearls on their bare
through it.
through my friendship?" demanded Napoleon, shrugging his shoulders
through openings in the earthwork.
through so much in life. I am afraid for you, you do not yet know
through the clear morning air penetrating streaks of rosy, golden tinted
through the closed doors came the sound of difficult passages--twenty
through the conservatories, the serfs' quarters, and the outbuildings,
through the door on tiptoe. He could not walk well on tiptoe and his
through the door. Prince Andrew got up, went to the door, and tried to
through the naive and intelligent count and played with him as with
through the night, he had crept by day into some bushes right among the
through the open doors into the two adjoining rooms saw the same thing
through the rooms a long time considering what she should do. Toward
through the same sufferings..."
through the screen of its hot fine particles one could look with naked
through the snow into a birch forest to the right of the village, and
through the town of Enns on both sides of the bridge.
through the wood and lay down." (He suddenly lay down on his stomach
through the woods was dangerous and might disorder the division.
through you and three yards into the ground under you," he continued,
through your performance."
through, and realized that he could not stop halfway. He was aghast
through," and she sympathetically turned up her eyes.
throughout an army one and the same temper, known as "the spirit of
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
throughout the whole cavalry division as Vaska Denisov. Cadet Rostov,
throw up everything and come myself to Bald Hills."
throw up everything and fly to you, to press you forever to my ardent
throwing everything superfluous, made the eyes smart. It was cold and
throwing out his chest.
thrown away.... I shall not be able to equip him."
thrown back. His whole short corpulent figure with broad thick
thrown down their muskets and run. Dolokhov, running beside Timokhin,
thrown the reins of the snaffle bridle over the horse's head. It was
thrust en prime, and so on--the cudgel of the people's war was lifted
thrust his head out of the door, that warlike feeling of hostility which
thrust into his bosom. "My mistress, daughter of General in Chief Prince
thud of the enemy's cannon balls, from the flushed and perspiring faces
thud. Denisov rode past him, leaning back and shouting something. Rostov
thumb to the room where Telyanin was sitting, he frowned and gave a
thumping the table; "and ve must tie for our Emperor, and zen all vill
thunder, and he looked round. There was some smoke, and the Frenchmen
thwee hundwed men to town under escort, instead of staining--I speak
thyself whether thou art content with thyself. What hast thou attained
tidied themselves up after their journey, Marya Dmitrievna kissed them
tidied up."
tidiness and good management. Some domestic serfs Pierre met, in reply
tied round his head, was stronger. He raised his companion and said
tighter. The Frenchman was about to say something, when just above their
till he has read what he had already bought--Sismondi and Rousseau and
till his curly hair touched his shirt collar, and the hand holding the
till its coat shone like satin and every hair of its wetted mane lay
till she was twenty, and arranged her life so that her whole time was
till tears started to his eyes.
till ten o'clock.
till that moment he had not been thinking of Kuragin, all his unexpended
till the eve of the enemy's entry into the city.
till the whole invasion had perished.
till then constituted an army, flowed all over the wealthy, deserted
till then. Their powers of reasoning, feeling, and observing immediately
till two in the afternoon and bore away with them the wounded and the
tilted to one side, disclosed his curled and pomaded hair besprinkled
tilting yet further back. "Why is it so long?" thought Pierre. It seemed
time a ball flew past. Rostov on the left flank, mounted on his Rook--a
time all that pure, spiritual, inward travail through which she had
time and does not condescend to prepare what he has to say but is sure
time are wanted. Kamenski sent soldiers to Rustchuk, but I only employed
time before the dragoons could extricate the bleeding youth, beaten
time but its historic results.
time but talked in low tones of other matters.
time did not let him go. When he released him Prince Andrew saw that
time for Prince Andrew's return and marriage was approaching, but his
time he joined the army. He rode across one of the swaying pontoon
time in reading what is unintelligible and can therefore bear no fruit.
time in the gateway, Petya tried to move forward in front of the others
time in the shop.
time is infinite, and so in this respect too there can never be absolute
time longed with all his heart to establish a republic in Russia;
time of his activity utter one word inconsistent with the single aim
time prove Napoleon to be a product of the Revolution, of the ideas of
time she has talked of him like that."
time that day to inspect the fortifications of the Drissa camp, of the
time that evening, vainly expecting someone, now smiling at someone, now
time the majority of so-called advanced people--that is, the crowd of
time to be polite to everybody who has business with me. My head is
time to begin a general engagement, withdrew their left wing from the
time to realize who these men were. He saw the senior officer lying on
time to reply to all the questions about Moscow that were showered upon
time to say them.
time to waste. On the fifteenth, the day of the old prince's death,
time turn out to be mistaken in his view of what is good for humanity.
time was glad he had surprised her at it and that she would now have to
time!"
time!" he said with a grim look, evidently not wishing to continue this
time, Anna Mikhaylovna sent someone to call her son, and went into the
time, and nothing can be done now!" he replied to someone else.
time, had begun to sound like a sad reminiscence to Natasha's ears. She
time, hearing the lighthearted French conversation from the next room.
time, in the second case it is the origin); and the question of how
time, muttering to herself.
time, my honored benefactor," wrote Prince Vasili. "My son Anatole is
time, seemed to him unnecessary and horrible.
time, they will do it all. But the advisers n'entendent pas de cette
time, to talk about not wishing to cringe to anybody and not be anyone's
time, went to present himself to the authorities.
time, wondered at his enjoyment and regretted that there was no one to
time," she added, giving Pierre to understand that they were busy, and
time," she said, giving Natasha a significant look. "The old man is here
time-worn face) and boldly began to expound his plan of cutting the
time.
time.
time.
time.
time. And suddenly, in the most casual tone, which made him feel ashamed
time. But Pierre was so absorbed that he did not understand what was
time. He no longer seemed stout, though he still had the appearance of
time. I hope, my dear friend, you will carry out your father's wish?"
time. Sonya alone directed the practical side of matters by getting
time. The Guards had already left Petersburg on the tenth of August, and
time."
time.... But what about me? You might at least have shown consideration
times as strong, who would hem him in from two sides.
times before: how the late princess had given birth to Princess Mary
times by the tears that dimmed her velvety black eyes--she wrote that
times has been presented in its whole tremendous significance.
times in succession and march as if on parade. Fine fellows! Our King of
times parts of the Pavlograd regiment had exchanged shots with the
times repeated--of a sonata by Dussek.
times repulsed. In the center the French had not got beyond Borodino,
times there radiated from them shafts of warm light)--were so beautiful
times to wake Petya that he might eat something, but he only muttered
times unexpectedly interrupted. Once he stopped it by shouting: "The
times which could never return, tears of vexation that she should so
times!"
times, then paused, drew from his pocket a gold snuffbox, lifted it to
times--till I get what I want. I don't mind what they think of me."
timid smile.
timidly from behind the backs of the generals. As he stepped past the
timidly to the corner where Denisov sat. She saw that everybody was
timidly when all this happened before," thought Natasha, "and in just
tingling. By that shriek she expressed what the others expressed by all
tiny limbs she had felt twenty years ago within her, that son about whom
tip, and on arriving he ran breathlessly, like a boy, up the steps of
tipsy rage when a man does not know what he is saying. He saw that his
tiptoe and listened, as he lighted one pipe after another.
tiptoe to the countess' door and paused.
tiptoe, leaving the great man to himself and his emotion.
tired and panting and evidently thought of declining, but immediately
tired of being run after by women, his vanity was flattered by the
tired out and already dressed in shawl and bonnet for her journey,
tiresomely familiar faces of the men of the first battalion, and
title of Emperor and showing him every respect, though five years before
to 1812 (of which young Nicholas had formed a vague poetic picture from
to Africa. Again so-called chance accompanies him. Impregnable Malta
to Anna Mikhaylovna, answering her query by a movement of the head and
to Bagration which the old countess at Anna Mikhaylovna's advice had
to Balashev and informed him of the Emperor Napoleon's wish to honor him
to Bennigsen (who reported separately to the Emperor) the following
to Bolkonski with his customary smile and looked at him in silence.
to Boris, repeating word for word a passage she had copied from a book.
to Borodino (he could not have seen that position because it did not
to Borodino, so that Napoleon could not see what was happening there,
to Brunn. At the door he found a vehicle half full of luggage. Franz,
to Catholicism, to obtain money from her for Jesuit institutions (as to
to Count Arakcheev. One general (an important personage), evidently
to Count T., Prince V., and others. Then he bursts into one of his wild
to Denisov almost simultaneously, requesting him to join up with their
to Dolokhov. "Will you believe it, Theodore Ivanych, those animals flew
to Dresden, could not help having his head turned by the homage he
to Erza.
to God, while cruel, useless, harmful persons, or such as are a burden
to Grunth to find Prince Bagration. He heard the cannonade behind him
to Himself, for in Him alone is truth and peace," said she in a voice
to Hippolyte in the drawing room and which was so plainly ill-suited
to Julie. I am so fond of Julie that I should be sorry for her. What do
to Kuragin demanding an explanation? But what is there to oblige him
to Kutuzov's quarters where the council of war was to be held. All the
to Kutuzov. The plan was based on the fact that the French line
to Kutuzov: if the defense failed, to throw the blame on Kutuzov who had
to Likhachev; then he flourished the saber, tested it, and sheathed
to Miloradovich who was near him.
to Moscow it was necessary: (1) that they should form themselves into
to Moscow that the wine was drawn and must be drunk. Had Napoleon then
to Moscow the effect Natasha had on him made him hasten to carry out
to Mozhaysk on the twenty-fifth and to make his way to the very thick
to Napoleon again, to Charles X, to Louis Philippe, to a Republican
to Napoleon by the daughter of the Emperor of Austria, the boy whom for
to Napoleon in 1806? Was the will of the Russian people transferred
to Napoleon in 1809, when our army in alliance with the French went to
to Napoleon to demand reinforcements.
to Napoleon) only for the purpose of securing an armed peace, the
to Natasha and Sonya his fiancee's invitation to her wedding, and
to Natasha who had come out with him and looked shyly at her with his
to Natasha, took her by the hand, and said with a deep sigh:
to Nicholas, "his friend Boris has become an officer, and so for
to Otradnoe... and wait there."
to Petersburg to confer on some important questions that were being
to Petersburg, she was received by all her acquaintances not only
to Pierre as he kissed her hand. She had known him as a child, and now
to Pierre that he grew embarrassed. Pierre himself grew still more
to Pierre were qualities) of untidiness and neglect of herself, she now
to Pierre, he diligently followed all that went on, received many books,
to Poland, forming the Holy Alliance, entrusting power to Arakcheev,
to Prince Bagration. On the salver lay some verses composed and printed
to Prince Vasili and answering his imploring look. "Yes, or no?"
to Prince Vasili. "It's not as at Annette's * receptions where you
to Princess Mary came to a halt by the doorpost.
to Rostov's face, and his sobs were audible.
to Rostov's inquiry where he was going, he answered vaguely and crossly
to Rostov, rode up to Napoleon in an orderly's jacket and on a French
to Russia after him, but all the same he knew that however long it might
to Ryazan he found the country dull; his former pursuits no longer
to Smolensk, beyond Smolensk, beyond the Berezina, beyond Vilna, and
to Smolensk, from Smolensk to the Berezina, and from the Berezina to
to Sonya for all she was doing for his mother and greatly admired her
to Tikhon he asked about me twice. He wanted to see me, and I was
to Toll, Paulucci suggested an advance and an attack, which, he urged,
to Toll, and others again to Alexander himself--pointing to notes,
to Toll.
to Tushin's battery had been moved away in the middle of the action
to Weyrother sat Count Langeron who, with a subtle smile that never left
to a ball.
to a company, and though the French availed themselves of every
to a conflict with him--he knew that when he did meet him he would not
to a different world and who could not know and understand his past. As
to a long-standing impression related to his innermost feelings, had its
to a man's face, to say what the other, whoever he might be, did not
to a newly initiated Brother to present to the woman he loved.) "I...
to a patriotic temper. A good many people had already arrived, but Anna
to a whole series of events but always to one moment only of an event.
to accept their services. He took the glove in silence from the
to add:
to address him. (Boris understood that Arakcheev envied Balashev and
to admit so infinitely small a remainder of inevitability as equaled
to agree to run away with him, was something Pierre could not conceive
to agree to the truce but also to offer terms of capitulation, and
to all those rules. She felt that the allurements instinct had formerly
to alter it...."
to an old Russian general with decorations, who stood very erect, almost
to an unnatural rapture of married bliss, Boris could not utter the
to and fro all over the occupied space where the snow had been trodden
to and fro, and dispatching of adjutants--was confined to the Emperor's
to another woman. Her father objected to this because he wanted a more
to another, which is like the safety valve of a boiler that allows
to answer it.
to answer to our offended country for the loss of Moscow. You have
to anybody, and especially to him, whether or not they found out that
to anyone that the wounded should be left behind and the goods carted
to anyone who found a hare.
to anyone, took his cap and left the house by the back door, trying to
to anything around him, if we see his connection with anything
to appear calm added: "And don't imagine I have said this in a moment of
to apply to you..."
to approximate, are significant from the fact that after seriously
to arrange for departure of the prince, the princess, his son, and the
to ask for himself, he became chary of using his influence. But in
to ask for strawberries and fresh pineapples.' We can't get them from
to ask whether a cart was sufficiently loaded, and whether it might
to attain this mystery, and thereby to render them capable of receiving
to attend to the business himself and so he disliked it and only tried
to avoid compromising her went away to Moscow.
to avoid his old acquaintances with their commiseration and offensive
to avoid obeying Sonya beckoned to Andrew to follow her quietly and went
to avoid seeing what was going to happen. Suddenly a crackling, rolling
to balance himself. One of the footmen who had stooped to pick up some
to be Poles--all under the Russian crown--but here they're all regular
to be a matter of indifference whether we understand the meaning of
to be able to take a serious part in it. Every sphere of work was
to be allowed to pass as they were blocking the way. As soon as he
to be always surrounded by gentlemen-in-waiting) that he, Count Rostov,
to be an insignificant chip fallen among the wheels of a machine whose
to be called cowards, ashamed to leave, but still they left, knowing
to be carried into the hut after his caleche had stopped at Mytishchi.
to be conscious. He did not like to agree with him in everything and
to be cunning and cruel."
to be dealt with, the prisoners and guns secured, the booty divided--not
to be devastated by the Cossacks, the peasants in the steppe region
to be done in these circumstances? To favor revolutions, overthrow
to be excused some work; why he, that kind Nicholas, should obstinately
to be free it was necessary that it should encounter no obstacles. To
to be grew stronger, and he meekly followed Anna Mikhaylovna who was
to be happy, and now I do believe in it. Let the dead bury their dead,
to be his old schoolroom, and looking into Natasha's wildly bright eyes,
to be in both the Russian capitals by the autumn, and the talk of the
to be in time for the governor's party.
to be late, and the huntsmen had not yet reached their places when Count
to be limited just because he is not conscious of it except as free.
to be married at twelve or thirteen."
to be more economical this time. Nicholas had replied that it would be
to be opened. Everywhere he saw the stewards' accounts, according to
to be parted from her husband and be left alone in the country, in her
to be present, were still hurrying to get dressed.
to be quite alien to her when they met. Just then Julie, who by the
to be repeated.
to be seen in gray coats, with closely shaven heads. Two officers, one
to be severe, found nothing to say; the others did not venture to
to be spoken at a moment of victory and triumph, generally when he was
to be taken out and given some tea. The pain caused by his removal into
to be the cause of every manifestation of my life.
to be the reading of a letter from His Lordship the Bishop when sending
to be unusual, even more unusual than what he was seeing. A skull, a
to be."
to become a beautiful little cat. She evidently considered it proper to
to beg him to buy them, and long after his death the memory of his
to behave with her. The evening before, in the first happy moment of
to blame. All that he had been specially put in charge of, the state
to blame. They did not talk seriously to him; when reporting to him or
to block its path. This was shown not so much by the arrangements it
to bore him so much as that of his pretty wife. He turned away from her
to build a new chantry to the church at their own expense in honor
to business in front of a map, where he would feel at home. He nodded
to buy back Otradnoe--that being his pet dream.
to buy his house and his estate near Moscow, but it drags on and on. He
to call him but changed her mind. "Let him look for me," thought she.
to call them back.
to carry out the count's wishes, seeing clearly that not only would the
to catch a swallow if it settles on one's hand. Men can only be taken
to cause unpleasantness and anxiety to the court circle of which Anna
to cause you annoyance if only you will allow me to act as your escort."
to celebrate the signing of peace with the Turks, and the crowd rushed
to change his former way of life, but his strength failed him. He walked
to cheer the men but merely carried out the orders), yet the troops
to clear out that the prince could hardly stop them. He decided that he
to collect our things. We ran out just as we were.... This is what we
to come that evening to a consultation at a watchman's hut in the forest
to come to dinner next day, Sunday, and bring a copy of the manifesto
to come to his study.
to compare his impressions with those of others. They were all looking
to compensate for that expenditure, the intoxicating honors he received
to compliment the usurper."
to confide her sorrow, and much sorrow fell to her lot just then. The
to consider my project, so he alone can get it adopted," thought Prince
to contemplate. The Cossacks and peasants who crept in among the French
to continue his military service, and when the war recommenced
to control her joy which expressed itself by laughter.
to control herself any longer, she jumped up and rushed from the room as
to court etiquette stood near him while he was talking to a Polish
to court society's favor. Now he alone was blamed for what had happened,
to credit what he says to you, especially when he expresses the
to cross the ditch on foot. The Emperor, wishing to rest and feeling
to cruelty with his subordinates, and went into everything down to the
to cry.
to cry. Her tears were those of an offended child who does not know why
to cut off showed itself particularly whenever the Russians stumbled on
to cut off, to seize, to capture, and to overthrow the French, and all
to danger as seldom as possible, and after an action greeted his safe
to deal with. A young officer of the Horse Guards, Kutuzov's orderly,
to defend Moscow was a physical impossibility in the full meaning of
to defend the left flank.
to defend the town against Napoleon's whole army. In Smolensk, at the
to demean his dignity and felt the necessity of replying; but, as a man,
to describe the horrors and sufferings he had witnessed he was
to describe the same event, the replies they give immediately lose all
to destroy the French, and despite all the nonsense Rostopchin wrote in
to destruction. They went away without thinking of the tremendous
to die. I love life--I love this grass, this earth, this air...." He
to die. There is no other way for me," the letter began. Then he went
to dine with the Emperor and the court footmen who served at table,
to dinner all who came "to congratulate." The countess wished to have
to discipline who on duty at the word of command kills a defenseless
to discuss several interesting questions with you. I beg your Highness
to discuss with her how to arrange a meeting. When Pierre returned home
to disperse among the wealthy and deserted houses, the army was lost
to disperse.
to disperse. It was already late, and Petya had not eaten anything and
to dissatisfaction, contempt, and ridicule, more and more strongly
to distraction! One learns many things then," she added with a certain
to do anything you disapproved of. I believe in you completely. You
to do if I love him and the other one too?" she asked herself, unable to
to do it that it seemed to him as if it had really happened. Perhaps
to do so. He could not have said by what standard he judged what he
to do something for them, a desire for their approval.--So I lived for
to do what had been done with him at Austerlitz and with Barclay at
to do with Sergey Kuzmich--a smile of bashfulness at their own feelings.
to do with her? She is like a mad woman when you are away. Doesn't see
to do with myself?" And tapping with her heels, she ran quickly upstairs
to do with this man?" he added, addressing himself to Pierre as to a
to do with you and you are no longer my friend, no longer my 'faithful
to do, my dear?"
to double the three thousand just put down to his score, when Dolokhov,
to drag their legs went to the front rather than to the hospitals.
to dress in here; and that Andrew had quite changed, and that Kitty
to drive on the carts that blocked the way.
to drown his voice. Napoleon was in that state of irritability in which
to each other simply because the masses involved are equal or unequal.
to elope with a blonde lady.
to embrace the countess at the appropriate moment.
to end the conversation. She knew her remarks sounded unnatural, but
to enliven him and amuse themselves. But their gaiety seemed to Prince
to enter a family against the father's will, and that she herself wished
to enter anyone's head, he tried to be as cheerful as befits a good
to enter into conversation with this old man, but, submitting to him
to enter that temple of virtue to a vision of which I attained in my
to enter the Russian service.... "Wonderful!... Were the Potemkins,
to enter the circle. Prince Andrew was one of the best dancers of his
to entertain so freely as when the count had been Marshal, and life at
to escape from all this horror and misery; but on the one hand the force
to escape, or to trick us, now that we certainly have him in our hands!
to everyone that there was no merit in his kindness. Sometimes Natasha
to evil and death?--death which ends all and must come today or
to exchange the current paper money for the real gold of actual
to experience, but in fact such subjection does not exist and is
to explain frankly to some gentleman-in-waiting (he imagined the Emperor
to explain his condition to himself he lay down and fell asleep at once.
to explain the facts of history without introducing the conceptions of
to express his own views, as young people are fond of doing.
to express our sincere views on that subject, and can only say to the
to extend his line, but he welcomed every step forward as a triumph and
to exterminate these scoundrels. We too will take part..." the reader
to extinguish the fire, to prevent looting, and to reassure the
to fetch and another had hastily covered with a rug. An immense and
to fight, in order to get food and rest as conquerors in Moscow. So it
to find and execute the incendiaries. And the scoundrel Rostopchin was
to find seemliness, happiness, and peace in everything, and I should
to find some occupation the more easily to bear the danger. To Pierre
to find that this inner freedom, which was independent of external
to fly as fast as possible along the nearest, familiar road. Napoleon
to foot uncertain with which to start, then settled down, galloped past
to forbid the soldiers to express their love of him by such shouting,
to force their way in too and a fight in the porch had resulted.
to forget it all and not let anyone see that something had happened.
to forget them. He frequented every kind of society, drank much, bought
to free himself but that Prince Vasili (who had rarely before given
to frown.
to gain her end.
to gallop--the other sleighs followed. The shaft horse swung steadily
to get at his snuffbox.
to get away as soon as Mademoiselle George's performance was over.
to get away on foot and had no means of obtaining a conveyance. Rostov
to get away: at that moment she hated the stiff, elderly princess, who
to get himself killed. Tell me what this wretched war is for?" she
to get married," he added rather more quickly, as if pleased at having
to get more money from the traveler.
to get past them quicker, quicker!"
to give by the clock, the warm drinks, the chicken cutlets, and all the
to give full play to her feeling for her brother. That feeling was so
to give further orders for the sake of killing time, for the orders had
to give her friend the pleasure of dandling the little angel--as she
to give in money and work all that other people's serfs gave--that is to
to give up all he possessed.
to give you a piece of advice. When you reach the capital, first of all
to give you the love you do not feel, and your prayer would have been
to go and bury themselves in the steppes when the French army is
to go armed to the Three Hills tomorrow, and that there would be a big
to go back as it was too dangerous to remain where they were. "Please,
to go home on leave. Why he had to go he did not know; but after his
to go on insisting day after day and hour after hour, and even to make
to go to Moscow. But the countess' health obliged them to delay their
to go to Petersburg, and even to re-enter the service, kept springing
to go. I knew you'd let them come!" she said quickly all in one breath.
to go?" thought Nicholas, and went again into the dancing room where the
to grasp what was said. He looked at the count.
to hand over the supreme command of the army into the hands of a better
to hang, were as little voluntary as the actions of any soldier who was
to happen? Everyone has left Moscow and the people are rioting. How is
to have a good style," returned Count Rostopchin.
to have already entered Vitebsk, the old prince remembered his son's
to have been complete, and some even spoke of Napoleon's having been
to have happened, to me. Stepan Stepanych also instructed me how I ought
to have them decently dressed and tidied up before taking them to the
to have you like our silly ladies. Get used to it and you'll like it,"
to hear him in the study talking in a loud animated voice about some
to hear something very profound. At last he came up to Morio. Here the
to hear the voices of well-known men. The largest circles formed round
to hear the words she had uttered and to see before him her eyes, her
to help at any point where the conversation might happen to flag. As
to help feeling sad? Moscow--she's the mother of cities. How can one see
to help him but could not.
to help with the harvest or to dig ponds, and ditches, but he disliked
to help young men, was flattered by being asked for his assistance and
to her and what she would say to him, and these words sometimes seemed
to her father unobserved by her mother. The dark-eyed little girl boldly
to her husband. "I have just been told that nothing is ready yet.
to her it was a matter of routine. Her ugly old body was washed,
to her lover, even now agitated the captain, though it was the memory of
to her mother.
to her neck and shoulders while Nicholas was speaking.
to her nephew who had entered the room.
to her now.
to her on the day of his death. "Dear-est!" she repeated, and began
to her own question. "But no, no, he must... Yes, Mary, He must...."
to her that someone was there standing behind the screen in the dark
to her the acme of musical delight.
to her the best in the world, so also that song, at that moment, seemed
to her the whole evening.
to her while she knitted. She rarely made an exception and went out to
to her, and now that Anatole had appeared it just grouped itself around
to her.
to her.
to her. Napoleon Bonaparte was despised by all as long as he was great,
to hers. A woman came from the bedroom with a frightened face and became
to herself, and rushing at him embraced him, pressed his head to her
to herself.
to hide such a big pistol even under his wide coat. He could not
to him a perfectly novel one, that every moment of his life belonged to
to him about politics. Prince Andrew and the others gathered round these
to him alone some half-dozen times and always with a specially joyful
to him an obvious truth. "What theory and science is possible about a
to him and disputed with one another who should bring him his tea,
to him and took the letters.
to him at once began speaking like a man who values every moment of his
to him but obey him like a corporal, though I am his senior. This is
to him by the officers, and, like a man desperately insisting on having
to him fell against the rails with a groan. Rostov ran up to him with
to him from the time of his rescue till his illness. He remembered
to him of the effect those batteries produced.
to him presented a majestic and agreeable spectacle. But the visitors
to him quite possible.
to him that it could not be otherwise, and that it would be a bad thing
to him that more than half an hour had elapsed. Suddenly Dolokhov made
to him the horses were not moving at all. At last the sleigh bore to the
to him to bring several batteries of artillery up to those heights to
to him was solely due to Napoleon.
to him, but there was such confident tenderness in his affectionate look
to him, trying not to be overheard, and that all through dinner she was
to him, wishing also to break up the circle of restraint he disliked,
to him.
to him. He could not tell them simply that everyone went at a trot and
to him. He declared that he did not wish to remember her existence and
to him. He made haste to finish buying the horses, and often became
to him. Of all that Napoleon might have done: wintering in Moscow,
to him. We search, but none are to be found. The field marshal grows
to him:
to him: "I hear you are refitting your Petersburg house?"
to himself at each alternate step, "Left... left... left..." A fat
to himself that he would not abandon his intention and was doing all he
to himself! What if he gave me a place near him? Oh, how I would guard
to himself, but which formed the whole interest of his life,
to himself, with a sorrowful sigh, one morning, feeling that Pierre
to himself. It was around him that the people chiefly crowded, expecting
to himself. Karataev had no attachments, friendships, or love, as Pierre
to his army at the beginning of the campaign, and they awoke in him
to his beautiful sister, but yet more by the fact that in spite of
to his betrothed.
to his cheek. But she stepped back immediately. All the force of the
to his father with a very flushed face and said in his breaking voice
to his father. He had not done so for fear Princess Mary should ask her
to his former chief with an order from the commander of the rear guard.
to his horses, he began to pass the first sleigh.
to his inn. The paper handed to him by the Governor said this:
to his knees, bowed to the ground, and for a long time tried vainly to
to his leg a narrow unsheathed sword (small, curved, and not like a real
to his master and looked at him scornfully. This scorn was not offensive
to his master. Nicholas knew that this Daniel, disdainful of everybody
to his method of conducting war? Believe me, he is afraid, afraid of a
to his own Milka.
to his own.
to his people in Germany; and he felt greatly offended when the butler
to his person, the little man in the gray overcoat got up and, having
to his sister, "he could go out in his smock, but as it is cold he must
to his son's education by finding a tutor and putting the boy in his
to his study with the wet nurse and little Prince Nicholas (as his
to his surprise, Balashev received, through Duroc, an invitation to dine
to his taste as a daughter-in-law and makes a proposal to you on his
to his trap muttering something to himself as he went, and took his
to his troops.
to hold herself with particular dignity, and always spoke rapturously
to hold him down. One large, white, plump leg twitched rapidly all
to hope from him--especially as he did not know how, and did not wish,
to how he would speak of his wife, "but her death shocked me terribly.
to hunt with your dogs? But what is to be done, old man? Just see how
to inflict severe punishment for the nonperformance of military duties
to influence Alexander, and Pfuel's whole plan was abandoned and the
to inform the commander in chief of this and, availing himself of
to ingratiate himself so well that the old prince in his case made an
to inquiries as to where the prince lived, pointed out a small newly
to interfere, and what did the young men do? They tied a policeman and
to it were his inertia and a wrinkle on his brow indicating prolonged
to it! But they... they were steady and calm all the time, to the
to it, from Borodino to Utitsa, at the very place where the battle was
to its neck in a table napkin and poured out wine for himself and for
to its utmost limit.
to join in the conversation, was looking over the papers his father
to join some Swedish forces at Stralsund; how two hundred and twenty
to kill me." But at the same time, his left arm felt as heavy as if
to kiss his white hands, graciously conversed with Tutolmin. Then, as
to kiss your hand. I'm here on business and have brought my girls with
to know as plain Monsieur Pierre, has become Count Bezukhov and the
to large spoonfuls and chewing one after another, his face was lit up by
to laws which determine that life. But the same man apart from that
to leave that seclusion where they three were shut off from all the
to leave the children such beggars as I was."
to leave the city, others on the contrary said that all the icons had
to left across the road. One of them fell in the mud under his horse's
to left as if drawn by an invisible hand, and the hill opposite, with
to let her pass. She let the girl go in, and then listening at the door
to let him die on the road. "Would it not be better if the end did come,
to let me go, I'll stay. But I know I am no use anywhere except in the
to let them have the grain."
to let us close the shop...."
to live this earthly life. And the more imbued he became with that
to look at her now, and she glanced round quite disconcerted.
to look for them, arrived to fetch Natasha and Petya. The count and
to looting by the Russian troops. At the end of the report the general
to love..." said Prince Andrew with an unnatural smile.
to ma chere, ma tendre, ma pauvre mere * --he decided that he would
to maintaining an argument, he began in low but distinct tones:
to make Prince Auersperg's acquaintance.' In a word, those gentlemen,
to make her look pretty. She was so plain that neither of them could
to make some preparations and to be ready to receive the sovereign.
to make some rejoinder hastily interrupted him.
to make something out of your company?"
to man which he had first experienced at the first halt outside
to me free; but asking myself whether I could raise my arm in every
to me fully the meaning of the Great Square of creation and pointed out
to me insincere, and all the time I stood alone with him in the dark
to me that the numbers three and seven are the basis of everything. He
to me to be good or bad, I must admit that besides these things the
to me." And Princess Mary uttered aloud the caressing word he had said
to me? Nothing! I have done nothing, I didn't lead him on at all. Nobody
to me?"--said her charming, pathetic, dead face.
to meet Kutuzov at the castle where the latter was to stay. In undress
to meet a wounded French colonel on the road, Rostov had maintained with
to meet him. I embraced him and kissed his hands, and he said, "Hast
to meet that man whom I despise, so as to give him a chance to kill and
to men who do not admit that Russia was formed by the will of one man,
to mention the historians' contradictions as to the nature of this
to moan.
to move her shoulders or bend her arms when turning, or stamp her
to my bivouac; let my doctor, Larrey, examine their wounds. Au revoir,
to my rudeness while I on the contrary nourish contempt for him. O God,
to myself the condition of my inner man and the grace of God sanctifying
to no time, my lad, you're here today and tomorrow you'll be appointed
to obey the summons. "Send Dmitri to me!"
to obey. You said the bridge would be burned, but who would it burn, I
to obtain a transfer from the militia to the active army. Sonya was in
to occur because it had to. Millions of men, renouncing their human
to occur. The superior officers all wanted to distinguish themselves,
to offer him his daughter in an illegal marriage. The Spaniards, through
to offer their services. Most of those present were elderly, respected
to on the sly" (she meant that they would be kissing), "but as it is,
to one and the same threefold end: (1) to brace all his strength for
to one another freely, but another motive was to avoid the danger of
to one another, and the old servant who was holding the count's hand got
to one of pleasure at his admirable domestic arrangements.) "And it's
to one side he gracefully held a gold lorgnette to his eyes and looked
to one side in his saddle. His horse, having galloped up to a campfire
to one side, and--"puff" (with a pause)--"puff, puff!" three and
to ordinary conditions of life and sleep quietly in a room in his own
to others for any weakness, passion, or temptation--the possibility of
to our Petersburg lodge, of the bad reception I had encountered, and of
to our fathers, and let not the scepter of the wicked be exalted against
to our places and won't budge."
to overtake my regiment, which must by now be getting near the Rogozhski
to pace up and down the room. "I always thought it.... That girl is
to pass. The Uhlans started, the streamers on their spears fluttering,
to pay seven rubles a cartload to Dorogobuzh and I tell them they're
to peasants evoked no response. There were no industrious workmen, and
to persuade her to get away as quickly as possible, and the head of the
to physical causes; but Princess Mary thought he wished to tell
to pieces without me--everyone was pulling his own way. But I succeeded
to pieces, their proximity now seemed so awful that he could not believe
to pinch his neck. Those who entered went up one by one to the field
to places where valuables were to be had for the taking. The officers
to play until that score reached forty-three thousand. He had fixed on
to please the Emperor, he alone--incurring thereby the Emperor's
to present itself was the will of the gods and, after that, the will of
to present the regiment in parade order, on the principle that it is
to preserve certain proprieties while affording satisfaction to
to press so painfully on her heart, it gradually faded into the past,
to pretend to the steward that he was attending to it. The steward
to propose.
to prove anything to him. When Count Rostopchin at the Yauza bridge
to public affairs, or possibly to family concerns.
to question him, and immediately after the elder had given a few replies
to raise him" (pointing to a peasant who passed by them taking off his
to raise its voice. This was the party of the elders, reasonable men
to re-establish ordinary trading.
to reach the boundary strip in sixteen paces. A whizz and a thud! Five
to read the appeal.
to recognize his genius as the only explanation of the war carried on
to recognize in this robust, motherly woman the slim, lively Natasha of
to recollect something. Prince Andrew stepped forward from among the
to refuse a suppliant, and ought to reach a helping hand to
to remain for a few weeks longer in the house she so loved and where
to remain so for a hundred years; but the moment comes when the lever
to remain with his regiment. And since it had to be so, Nicholas Rostov,
to remember what they hear to enrich their minds and when opportunity
to remorse troubled her when she thought of her visit. Though she had
to render his words more comprehensible by contorting them.
to renounce forever these vile fancies, so as peacefully to fulfill
to reply, took the repetition for a denial, the more readily as he knew
to reply? Write to Pierre, as Prince Andrew asked me to in case of some
to report and explain, and to his headquarters where he had dictated
to rest after their hard marches.
to retire from the army and return and marry Sonya, Nicholas, serious,
to retreat to Sventsyani and destroy any provisions they could not carry
to return the young count's compliment, Ilagin looked at his borzois
to revolve faster and faster, levers and cogwheels to work, chimes to
to rid himself of this staff officer's company, "please don't trouble
to right and left of him soldiers continually groaned and dropped. But
to rotate on one spot. The historical figures at the head of armies,
to rumors, knew how apt people who desire anything are to group all news
to run into some expense for the sake of good society--that Pierre could
to satisfy all requirements.
to save her, and even more certain was it that he was a man of lofty and
to say and begged to be restored to his favor. To this letter the old
to say next to introduce a fresh subject. Princess Mary was silent. It
to say that a nap "after dinner was silver--before dinner, golden.")
to say!"
to say, and sometimes questioned her carefully about the Penza and
to say, and then choose a middle course. They insisted on the retention
to say, have now assembled in council. No one knows what is coming. But
to say. He did not venture to repeat what he had said at his first
to say. So little was his rejoinder appreciated that Napoleon did not
to say: "I said then that it would be so," quite forgetting that amid
to see Vogel and his wife who lived on the upper story.
to see him and be with him," she said, trembling, and breathing quickly.
to see the action of the farthest gun and looked at him with curiosity.
to see the great balloon Leppich was constructing to destroy the foe,
to see them was glad to see only one person, Pierre. It would have been
to seek or plan anything, that his rut had long been shaped, eternally
to seek. Had my benefactor been here he would have told me what to do.
to seem to have some generally say. They said that undoubtedly war,
to serve him. Rostov patted the horse's neck and then his flank, and
to show from behind the lime trees, a fresh white dewy mist began to
to show that they are not at all impatient for their food. The host and
to show the Austrian general the wretched state in which the troops
to shut yourself up. Even if you are engaged, I am sure your fiance
to side from habit, but her eyes, feverishly wide, looked fixedly before
to side till Anatole's face showed a sufficient degree of terror.
to signify his approval of them all, and the group increased, dispersed,
to sit down and make themselves at home, and then went out of the room.
to slash at and drown one another. They killed the king and many other
to sleep in their covered cart, or everything in it would be stolen.
to sleep, but he knew he would not be able to and that most depressing
to sleep, but some remark would arouse him and conversation would be
to smile but could not: his smile expressed suffering, and he silently
to smile but dared not even think of doing so. He made a piteous,
to snatch from the other a boot they were both holding on to.
to snatch it from one another. The expression on all their faces
to soften down what he had said; but Natasha interrupted him to show
to speak he seemed not to know how he would conclude.
to speak openly; and to him he told all that was in his soul. Now he
to speak severely to him about it. Pierre felt that she was right, and
to speak, turns to Auersperg with feigned astonishment (he is a
to start her gambols again and display her kittenish nature.
to stay another day. That day he did not see his father, who did not
to stay longer at Anna Semenovna's, and he departed.
to stop, knew the danger of his extended position, and knew that the
to stop. The lunatic's solemn, gloomy face was thin and yellow, with
to strike him, and on being led out had rushed into the office and given
to struggle desperately forward, and from between the backs of those
to such effect that he pushed Petya into a very filthy corner of the
to such trifles!' The Emperor did not condescend to reply. At the next
to suggest that Russia had saved Europe) "do any harm? The Tugendbund
to supply it. Others in that heat and crush racked their brains to find
to swim the river with his Uhlans instead of seeking a ford. In evident
to tactics to have attacked in mass, but in fact they split up
to take advantage of this chance to capture some horses, but one of
to take from him a fox-fur coat, he vaguely understood that looting was
to take him from me, and he laughed, shut his eyes, and clung to me. I'm
to take me as an aide-de-camp...."
to take only two thousand and leave the rest to repay the debt to his
to take such a step without father's or mother's consent! And now she's
to take such provisions as remained at Bogucharovo before the French
to take their leave.
to take up only second-grade posts in the lodge, to try, while
to talk to Tikhon who did not understand him. I remember how he began
to tear open the veil of convention that separates a commander in chief
to tell contained the chief charm and the whole meaning of his story:
to tell everything to Pierre. He is kind and generous. It would be a
to tell him. He gathered up the papers and with a bow to both, stepped
to tell of my experiences. In general I have noticed that it is very
to that burnt-cork mustache, that he had fully learned to know her. And
to the Austrian Emperor and smiled.
to the Emperor Francis; he remembered the Minister of War, the polite
to the Emperor after his death.
to the Emperor and that the latter disliked his face and personality
to the Emperor shocked Rostov. Rostov saw how the Emperor's rather round
to the Emperor's will had decided on the abandonment of Moscow, now
to the Emperor.
to the Emperor. You know the Emperor spoke to him most graciously.
to the Emperors that Rostov, standing in the front row, was afraid he
to the Empress) and at the same time to console him, so she said:
to the French and had been given a special name. They called it limonade
to the French camp with me? I have brought a spare uniform."
to the Kremlin. Among the Old Guard disorder and pillage were renewed
to the Legion d'honneur of the great Emperor Napoleon, not harmful
to the Nizhni fair with a companion--a rich merchant.
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
to the Red Square where some instinct told them they could easily take
to the Rostovs that the prince was not receiving, but that the princess
to the Russian line to announce the peace negotiations and to offer the
to the Russians as the Knoll Battery or Raevski's Redoubt, and to the
to the Russians, as soon as that change occurred the need of attacking
to the Tsar or to Kutuzov, even if they were alive and unwounded?
to the accompaniment of various knockings with mallets and swords. As he
to the air of My Lady, with trills and variations. "Uncle" sat
to the ambassador's entertainment; she wore a ball dress and her badge
to the big table. Not only was Pierre's attempt to speak unsuccessful,
to the boy. He grew silent, and quiet ensued for a moment, terrible to
to the carriage. Pierre, evidently engrossed in thought, could not at
to the carriages, the caleche, the phaeton, and back again.
to the church of St. Nicholas on the Arbat, where he had long before
to the commander in chief--a post his father had procured for him--and
to the condition of the troops on their arrival, and the letters that
to the conversation. Magnitski starting quizzing Stolypin about his
to the cottage he occupied with Denisov.
to the count who was going to kiss her hand. "You're half frozen,
to the countess' cruel words, without understanding what was required
to the deceased filled the house rented by the Rostovs. All these
to the destruction of Moscow--which we feared more than anything in
to the dogs; one in a red cap, the other, a stranger, in a green coat.
to the door of the conservatory where he slept that night had listened
to the door. Sonya went away by another door. From the room in which
to the dressing station."
to the effect that the Duc d'Enghien had gone secretly to Paris to visit
to the essence of man's free will but its manifestation in the past and
to the factor does not yield results which accord with the historic
to the family circle of which Pierre was almost a member. "Today when I
to the farther side of the bridge and stopped the infantry. Beside the
to the fire sent to ask his colonel whether he would not take a French
to the fire, hoarsely uttering something in a language our soldiers did
to the footman who was helping him on with his cloak, listened
to the fords and the boats. Kutuzov himself had driven round by side
to the former belief in the direct intervention of the Deity in human
to the fox which began to dodge between the field in sharper and sharper
to the front of the regiment and examined it from a distance.
to the front porch, saying he felt too hot. The crowd of people really
to the frontier. Our dear Emperor has left Petersburg and it is thought
to the gate on seeing the carriage driving up. Two women ran out after
to the gate. A retreating regiment, thronging and hurrying, blocked the
to the general next in seniority, Count Buxhowden, having sent him my
to the gentleman ranker, he addressed him with the cordiality of an old
to the godmother, Princess Mary. Prince Andrew sat in another room,
to the greater or lesser interval of time between the commission of the
to the house when there was a girl of seventeen there, for fear of
to the house, questioning him as to the state of affairs. It appeared
to the house, she saw Mademoiselle Bourienne--who had remained at
to the island of St. Helena. And the exile, separated from the beloved
to the left, and among the orange-colored Uhlans on chestnut horses and
to the left, cut off the Vice-King (Murat) and capture him.
to the merchants' hall--"but our business is to supply men and not spare
to the movements of Mademoiselle Bourienne's little foot, which he was
to the neighboring houses, from which wounded men began to come into the
to the old conditions of life, Nicholas found it very pleasant to be
to the orderly. (This was Shcherbinin, Konovnitsyn's adjutant.) "I've
to the palace, however, an official came running out to meet him, and
to the place where they were all to meet. The hounds had killed two of
to the power he felt irresistibly carrying him he knew not where. He
to the ram that was fattened. Even if they do not know for what purpose
to the ranks along which shots crackled now here and now there, drowning
to the reception room where they had left Prince Vasili and the eldest
to the removal of the guns.
to the review, reaching the field at Olmutz by ten o'clock.
to the right and who to the left? It is only because military men are
to the right nor to the left but along the old--the worst--road, through
to the second of September, that is from the battle of Borodino to the
to the servant and got up. All rose and continuing to talk loudly went
to the shanty.
to the story of the struggle between love and duty, Pierre saw before
to the subject of "advisers" which evidently occupied him. "Ah, those
to the table, set down the tray, and with her plump white hands deftly
to the table. Pressed by the throng against the high backs of the
to the unknown general and blocking his way to the door. "Whom shall I
to the unknown place where he was going, many more of our men were going
to the vestibule. There an old footman and two young ones were playing
to the views of the old generals Kutuzov and Prince Schwartzenberg, it
to the watchhouse. In the twilight saddled horses could be seen, and
to the west, slaying their fellows.
to the window of the first house, when a familiar voice called him by
to their camps, and the householders seized all they could find in other
to their chatter. Anatole kept on refilling Pierre's glass while
to their companies, the sergeants major began bustling (the greatcoats
to their party and asked to be allowed to remain with it. Denisov gave
to their places one after the other before the service was concluded.
to their questions, and that the sole object of that assembly was to
to them are the parts of the mechanism which the impulse has not yet
to them was the chief cause of the liberal movement at the commencement
to them--that is to say, to a crowd of Frenchmen stark with cold,
to them. Down below, a man wearing something red was running through the
to them: "I know you, I know you, but why should I bother about you?
to themselves and to others, are left living. The first death I saw,
to then been in regular order and silent began to sway and stretch and
to these questions, as was only too evident, did not interest him.
to think about it," she said to herself, and sat down again smilingly
to think of the impression he makes on others, but is occupied with
to think, as he listened to Zdrzhinski. But he did not express his
to thirty rubles received for the most part in promises from a dozen
to those who knew the indubitable truth.) He forgot what the seventh
to time she smoothed the folds of her dress, and whenever the story
to transfer him to the Western Army. Kutuzov, who was already weary of
to trying to do his duty and not to be unfair.
to turn away when the old man, opening his eyes, fixed his steady and
to turn it back again.
to understand that they did not yet know where they were going, and that
to understand that this council could not alter the inevitable course
to understand what they wanted or how they could go on living without
to understand what was revealing itself to me in my dream. One second
to unite. Thoughts cannot be united, but to harness all these thoughts
to unload the muskets, explode the ammunition, and all return home as
to unravel. He had gone to Joseph Alexeevich's house, on the plea of
to upbraid the general who had won from her.
to us equally valid in itself and equally false by its insignificance
to us, let yourself be guided, and you will at once feel yourself, as I
to us, though already questionably, to be the outcome of their heroes'
to use her vital forces. A peculiarity one sees in very young children
to utter (to her everything seemed funny). She leaned against her mother
to visit the kitchen, came up to his officer.
to wail like a baby without knowing why, except that Sonya was crying.
to wait for; and what is not ready I'll send after you. Though I don't
to walk with the sedateness and deliberation of a man. As he approached
to wear at the meetings, and finally of the third, a pair of women's
to wear the uniform. If it has come to this--we must fight as long as
to weep. Now it happened that in the group was the very man who had
to west and for the refixing of national frontiers as Kutuzov had been
to what Pfuel's opponents and practical men of experience in warfare had
to what regiment he belonged. Dolokhov, as if he had not heard the
to what the speaker was saying. The retired naval man was speaking very
to whatever nation you belong, you are called on to carry out the
to where the horses stood saddled.
to which Pierre did not agree. On the other hand, Pierre demanded that
to which Pierre had pointed, and for the first time since Austerlitz saw
to which in every domain of thought man's reason arrives if it is not
to which she herself was indifferent.
to which, as he said, all possible dances could be danced, and they felt
to who he might be--perhaps a very important person--and hostility as a
to whom Denisov had had some mutton and vodka given, and whom he had had
to win him to his side, showed off his dispassionate calm reasonableness
to work two cases were standing open in the ballroom, one almost full
to write to the governor.
to you on my honor that Napoleon was in such a fix as never before and
to you!" And Marya Dmitrievna touched her arm. "Listen when I speak!
to you? Leave me in peace," his looks seemed to say.
to your ex... len... len... lency!" and again all became silent. At
to, or what dowry he could give Vera. When his daughters were born
to--Pierre and Helene. Prince Vasili mimicked the sobbing of Sergey
to--you or Mademoiselle Julie Karagina. He is very attentive to her."
to. Is it true, as they tell me, that I can't even go away?"
to. We were terribly absurd. I had a funny doll then and wanted to give
to. Weyrother had been twice that evening to the enemy's picket line to
to; however, if you've promised--go. It will divert your thoughts," she
to? Gently!... They've crushed him, crushed him!"
toast, the count took out his handkerchief and, covering his face, wept
today agree with Pfuel, tomorrow with his opponent, and the day after,
today for the Emperor." Dolgorukov smiled significantly.
today, and that his excellency was not receiving anyone.
today. He has been here on leave and is taking Nicholas back with
today?" was his first thought. "And I did not know this suffering
together and a report spread that they were ordered to halt: evidently
together anxiously and privately and heard suggestions of selling the
together as they approached it as if passing through a funnel. At last
together everyone kept silent. Sometimes the others would get up and
together in a mass. Such action always occurs in wars that take on a
together into one mass, and so went on to the end. Berthier wrote to his
together is what we need! Yes, one must harness them, must harness
together out of range of the shots, watching, now the small group of
together to overthrow Thy kingdom, to destroy Thy dear Jerusalem, Thy
together were pale and perturbed. They were not alarmed by the fact
together with the heaviness of his head and the news that some twenty
together with the latest of Vasili Lvovich Pushkin's bouts rimes.
together!"
together, Prince Vasili announced his hopes and wishes to the old
together, and Daniel rolled her over once or twice from side to side.
together, and made some steps on the very tips of her toes.
together, thundered on the right and in the center, while the capotes of
together," he thought, repeating words of Karataev's which he found
together.
together.
together; and "boom, boom!" came the sounds confirming what the eye had
toil, clinging to one another's legs and drawing out the wax, with a
toilet. Slightly snorting and grunting, he presented now his back and
toiling, suffering, struggling, and harming one another, to obtain that
tokens of base metal that have no value but merely jingle. As gold is
told Balashev to repeat to Napoleon. Balashev remembered these words,
told Pierre why she had sent for him. She was afraid that the count or
told about that affair!"
told after his rescue, about the death of Prince Andrew, the death of
told everyone that she did not believe either in friendship or in
told her of external social events and of the people who had formed
told him that he had been pardoned and would now go to the barracks for
told him that he should try to do nothing to stain the whiteness of that
told him the case was dangerous."
told him the whole affair, asking him to intercede for Denisov, whom the
told him the whole field could be seen. Here he dismounted, and stopped
told him to expect.
told him what he had seen.
told his comrades how he had almost fallen into the hands of the French.
told his wife (who had ceased to smile so happily, and looked at him in
told me all about it."
told me to ask,' and come and tell me her answer."
told so (on the contrary their superior officers, and Napoleon himself,
told stories called it Femgalka; Karataev and others called it Gray, or
told that the French had been repulsed, the fleches had in fact been
told the count such vile, disgraceful things about us, especially about
told the truth.
told them all that.
told them how afraid she had been of Nicholas because he had on a corded
told them that the affair was likely to take a very bad turn: that a
told to repeat a lesson he has not learned. Spots appeared on his nose,
tolerate mysticism in anyone now). "He seeks only for peace, and only
tomb of the little princess, and in this chapel was a marble monument
tomorrow such and such decrees and orders to the army, the fleet, the
tomorrow what am I to tell him? Eh?"
tomorrow you'll die as I might have died an hour ago. And is it worth
tomorrow!"
tomorrow's action, and new men would come to the front. So Boris was
tomorrow's battle would be the most terrible of all he had taken
tomorrow, that no one would deprive him of his warm bed, and that he
tomorrow--at any rate, in an instant as compared with eternity." And
tomorrow..." he began, but Natasha interrupted him.
tomorrow?"
tomowwow?"
tone of a man dealing with a subject quite familiar to him.
tone only used by persons who are certain that those they call will rush
tone to Prince Hippolyte who was blocking his path.
tone, "my dear," whether they were above or below him in rank--"I thank
tone, and especially in that calm, almost antagonistic look could be
tone.
tone. "Everything seems funny to you, but this isn't at all a joke...."
tone. "On the eve of a day when God alone knows who of us is fated to
tone. "What has been decided? They have decided that Buonaparte has
tone."
tones and looks more than in the substance of the speeches--infected him
tones.
tonight and there'll be some people, and if you don't bring your lovely
tonight or early tomorrow morning."
tonight to my friends--come to the English Hotel.
too are the forces.
too long.
too many of them are written or because in his simplicity of heart
too must give expression to her feelings.
too remembered the word pink being used, and saw in this the most
too should have had my Congress and my Holy Alliance. Those ideas were
too strong for us, General."
too that day indicated the state of affairs. The price of weapons, of
too was in high spirits and far from being offended by the brother's
too well not to detect that (while hiding it from others) at heart
too"--different voices were saying in the crowd, as the men looked at
too, am well now: one of my eyes was sore but now I am on the lookout
too, might have their own interests. But all he said was so prettily
too, were flowers and grass, but it stood among them scowling, rigid,
too, who were pleased and flattered that a passing officer should joke
too, without ever being wronged."
too.
too. And he said, "Tell me frankly what is your chief temptation? Do
too. He did not renounce his opinions, but felt himself in some way to
took a dozen bounds, not very quickly, letting the borzois gain on him,
took a few hasty steps toward Prince Kozlovski, the commander of the
took a great liking to you," he went on simply and calmly, evidently
took a horse and a Cossack from a Cossack commander, and hungry and
took from it the bottles and various hors d'oeuvres and dishes and
took her hand and begged her forgiveness, without knowing what for.
took her old ball dress, and fell into a reverie quite unrelated to what
took her sister-in-law's arm and drew her into another room.
took him along with him.
took him unawares and he suddenly felt the ground slip away from under
took his hand and kissed it. He took this as a sign of approval and
took his orders from Barclay, but, having submitted, agreed with him
took his seat and told the coachman to drive him to his country house in
took leave of her.
took no part in the conversation which again became general. The looks
took place and was reported to him was exactly what he had foreseen.
took place. The new decoration of the Premises contributed much to the
took possession of him, and all the unlucky accidents that might destroy
took that letter, and Rostopchin also gave him the Emperor's appeal to
took to be the enemy. Shots could be heard, but some way off.
took up a Cossack whip and went to the bridge where he began with shouts
took up a candle, carried it out, and returned, seating herself quietly
took up her work.
took), nothing more stupid or disastrous can be imagined than what he
tools laid ready to hand and shavings scattered around--all indicated
tools; and, as they say, one needs a tool even to kill a louse," said
tooth or hair remained.
topic--making fun of the military men of the day, and more particularly
tore it in doing so, and threw it away. An aide-de-camp behind him
tormented by jealousy of her daughter, and now that jealousy concerned
tormented by the consciousness of his own weakness. The few glasses of
tormented her incessantly. His letters for the most part irritated her.
tormented her.
tormented himself and her--knew how not merely to hurt and humiliate
tormenting fear of death--the end--but now he no longer understood that
tormenting him without reaching a conclusion. He feared to give way to
tormenting oneself, when one has only a moment of life in comparison
tortoise, the tortoise has covered one tenth of that distance ahead
tortured each other either because Napoleon was ambitious or Alexander
tossed aside each time like a cork thrown out of the water, and he could
total of his losses on it, then he looked round for aid from the other
totally different from Armfeldt's or Pfuel's plan of campaign. In answer
touch it with one's hand.
touch. Mademoiselle Bourienne stood near them pressing her hand to her
touched Pierre's sleeve, saying: "I hope you won't say that it is dull
touched her hand as she did not reply.
touched him was sent flying.
touched it for a long time. That's it--come on! I've given it up."
touched on this topic with his mother, he discovered, to his surprise
touched with her lips a white forehead, over which was beautiful
touching Natasha's shoulders. "Come, lie down."
touching his arm, but when he saw Pierre's beaming face he gave him an
touching his breast. "We can no longer both reign together. I have
touching his horse's side with his foot, or, without turning round,
touching it with her lips.
touching letter the arrival of which had so amazed Nicholas.
touching some nasty little animal. But he made an effort not to throw
touching thanks of deputations of serfs in their full-skirted blue
tousled hair and a happy smile new to Sonya. She ran rapidly toward him.
toward Kutuzov's bench. But a militiaman got there before him. It was
toward Rostov, she paused.
toward evening. Denisov had not yet returned. The weather had cleared
toward her which she could not overcome.
toward her, and in their midst several men were supporting by
toward him whom He may give me for husband.
toward him with a terrific whizz, and then he shuddered and sat up. He
toward him with a theatrically solemn countenance, when Julner, the
toward him. "They will help me!" In front came a man wearing a strange
toward it and you cannot persuade me that it was not a good action,
toward me? What do you think? What do you think?"
toward the Znamenka.
toward the balcony.
toward the count.
toward the door without raising his eyes. Denisov paused, thought a
toward the door.
toward the fire.
toward the government?"
toward the ryefield and away from Nicholas.
toward the sofa she had indicated. As soon as Anna Mikhaylovna had
toward the wood, just as Karay had run to cut the animal off. As a
toward those Pratzen Heights which were being more and more denuded by
toward which he moved throughout the whole war. Obviously in spite of
toward you. He is an invalid and an old man who must be forgiven; but
tower from which, if he fell, he would have to fall for a whole day or a
town and attracted little attention from the inhabitants. The town was
town and was returning to the inn. The groom recognized Pierre in the
town next day. Pierre still considered that it would be a useful and
town past the cathedral on the right, where a service was being held and
town," said Pierre, "and that the position..."
town--was one it was more flattering to be received in than any other.
town.
towns in the interior. You will be responsible if the enemy is able to
towns thousands of people met him with excitement and enthusiasm.
townsfolk to turn into the yards and to draw up at the entrances of the
toys, some in horses, some in politics, some in sport, some in wine,
trace of you remain here!..."
traces broke, and lungs were strained with shouting. The officers
traces of their horses with trembling hands.
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
tradesman angrily. "Please step inside, your honor!"
tradesman's wife standing beside Petya sobbed, and the tears ran down
tradesmen, women, and officials, looking silently at one another. The
tradespeople, ran hurriedly from the entrance and hid in the shadow of
traditions and customs, and (3) that during their military movement they
traditions, and a man was produced who would stand at the head of the
trailed twisting along the ground. The crowd shrank back from it.
trailing their lances and advancing one after another as if poured out
train bands under the walls of the capital, but that he still could not
train had not yet got out of Moscow and reached the Kaluga road when
trains before and behind them. To the right, where the Kaluga road turns
traitors were, but feeling it necessary to hate those traitors whoever
traitors," he added, with a look of gloomy dignity and a fine energetic
tramp of feet, and incessant shouts of anger and abuse. Pierre stood
trampled mud and gazed with that particular feeling of ill-will,
trampled them underfoot instead of keeping them, and on arriving at
trampling through the deep snow, and muttering incoherent words:
tranquil look on his handsome, plump, white face. It was one of the
tranquillity and ease of mind he had formerly striven in vain to reach.
transfer would give the countess the consolation of seeing at least one
transferred him instantly to another, a brighter, realm of spiritual
transformed.
transformed. He put on the air of a subordinate who obeys without
transient and incomprehensible--but he remembered her as he had last
translated it, and translated it abominably, because you don't even know
translated the articles of the Roman and French codes into Russian,
translated what the German said to the captain and gave the captain's
transparent air in most delicate outline and with unnatural clearness.
transparent drops which fell on the freshly fallen leaves. The earth in
transport soldiers.
transport, having to accept battle on the march against an enemy three
transports, and the guerrilla war were all departures from the rules.
trap, and a baggage cart. With her traveled Mademoiselle Bourienne,
trap, while Nicholas rode with Natasha and Petya to "Uncle's" house.
traps. Natasha and Nicholas got into the other. "Uncle" wrapped
travel, and chatted carelessly, as a famous, self-confident surgeon who
traveled in its orbit with inconceivable velocity through immeasurable
traveler, also detained for lack of horses.
traveler, having packed his things with his practiced hands, began
treachery. But it is a turbulent crowd, your excellency--I hardly
tread of the soldiers who were keeping step with him. He carried close
treasure they possess in Natasha; but they are kindly folk and form
treat Marya Dmitrievna in this fashion.
treat to her guests. As a clever maitre d'hotel serves up as a specially
treated Bonaparte as an equal and that the latter was quite at ease with
treated her coldly, avoided her, and during his stay in Moscow attached
treated her husband in a friendly and conspiratorial style, as if,
treated not as a sovereign, but as a criminal. Quite lately, happening
treated only with internal and external applications of vodka) was the
treated them with absent-minded contempt.
treatment and did not value her life.
tree of knowledge of good and evil.... Ah, well, it's not for long!" he
trees cawing impatiently. Around the tents, over more than five acres,
trees grewsome kind of lush, wet, bushy vegetation with silver-lit
trees in tubs some were overturned and others dried up. He called for
trees on each side, following the infantry and a battery that had gone
trees, and the hissing of the saber, "Ozheg-zheg-zheg..." and again the
trees.
treetops and bluish gorges. The turrets of a convent stood out beyond a
trembled, "but God had already forgiven him--he was dead! That's how it
trembled, and tears instantly appeared in his fine blue eyes.
trembling hands turned toward himself the bloodstained, mud-bespattered
trembling in the rays of the evening sun. Neither gnarled fingers nor
trembling lips--came out and passed through the waiting room, clutching
trembling voice to his coachman. The caleche flew over the ground as
trembling with emotion, solemnly holding up in both hands before her
tremendous fortune... and what is his life worth? It's a burden to him,
tremor in his voice.
tremor of the speaker's voice--which sometimes almost broke--or those
tremulous voice to read the sheet from the beginning.
tremulous voice with folded hands. "Russia is saved. I thank Thee, O
tremulous voice, and in the weary eyes that looked over her spectacles
trench was dug three and a half feet wide, four feet eight inches deep,
trepidation in his benefactor's lifetime. The room, dusty and untouched
trickled down his neck, listened inattentively, with an occasional
tried hard to give the old energy and fire, but which sounded like an
tried to conceal them.
tried to excuse Pierre and suggested reasons for his delay in returning.
tried to get as much taken away with them as possible.
tried to hurry, but his legs refused to move and he knew he would not be
tried to pretend not to know; no one spoke of it, but apart from the
tried to remain tranquil, she knew that she would be unable to look at
tried to rise on his forelegs but fell back, pinning his rider's leg.
tried to rise, but the borzois stuck to her. Daniel rose a little, took
tried to say more, but faltered.
tried to swim on, some in the saddle and some clinging to their horses'
tried with his lips whether the child was still feverish. The soft
tried, flogged, and sent to serve as a soldier.
trifle to let a wagon go past. After he had gone, two soldiers rushed to
trifles, but did not seem so to the mother or to the father either, now
trifles, you are welcome to anything--we shall be delighted! Pray!...
trigger, as he had not before held a pistol in his hand--a fact that he
trilled, and their voices reverberated now near, now far away.
trim, almost like that of peacetime maneuvers, but with a shade of
tripping rapidly across in her little shoes trimmed with bows, ran
triumph.
triumph.
triumph? How long shall they wield unlawful power?
triumphant, cheerful face.
triumphantly and gaily.
triumphantly secured the mop and still did not realize what awaited him,
triumphantly, and to have the last word she promptly changed the
trivial but even amusing. What concern was it of his that somewhere or
trivial that it will not grow to infinite proportions if one's entire
trodden down by the cattle, and against the pale-yellow stubble of the
troops advanced on Borodino from their left.
troops and begged for seats on the gun carriages. The jaunty infantry
troops and guns, and came to a high knoll where militiamen were digging.
troops below the hill and fell far short of the enemy, a little smoke
troops fought, and are fighting, as never before. With fifteen thousand
troops from Prussia, especially when that demand became generally known
troops from Russian territory, I will regard what has passed as not
troops from attacking.
troops from the enemy's.
troops in close proximity to an enemy is always dangerous, and military
troops in turn should enter Moscow a la maraude * to obtain provisions
troops on this and that side in a certain known locality, and begin our
troops that had entered Forminsk that day were the vanguard of the whole
troops to cross it? Napoleon gave orders that the troops should form up
troops were moving in the distance, and he listened to the sounds of
troops were no longer moving, but stood with the butts of their muskets
troops were rearranged too near the enemy..."
troops were running onto the bridge, was about to fire, but Lannes
troops who had for a time lost touch with the Russians, and projects
troops, which had not yet advanced into action but were standing
troops. Beside the cannon a cart was standing to which two horses were
trot along the narrow road. While they drove past the garden the shadows
trot to escape from the poisoned atmosphere of these latrines.
trot. The expression on all faces showed the tension people feel at the
trouble, and silently fixed his eyes on Bagration as a schoolboy who has
trouble, but the Mason told him that was not necessary and gave him
trouble. You'll see what a mess there'll be tomorrow."
troubled by anxious curiosity and irresistibly attracted to the ruling
troubled face.
troubled the French. They imagined it to be a call to arms. A few
troubled was Rostov's face.
trousers of a battalion marching to parade, the rattling of wheels on
trousers, over which were pulled his thin, dirty, trodden-down boots.
trousers--furtively tried to pull them down under his greatcoat so
trousseau had to be ordered and the house sold. Moreover, Prince Andrew
trowel, a rough stone and a squared stone, a pillar, three windows, and
trowel, he told him to toil with it to cleanse his own heart from vice,
true Gascon) and says: 'I don't recognize the world-famous Austrian
true and appropriate, yet, strange to say, everyone--the visitors and
true had it not referred to his wife. He involuntarily remembered
true love. What do you think, Prince?"
true or not should make no difference to you, because..."
true that we are not conscious of our dependence, but by admitting our
true you shall have a hundred gold pieces!"
true. From the very first days of their married life Natasha had
true. I pity Prince Vasili but am still more sorry for Pierre. So young,
true. No one had taken any notice, for everyone knew the sensation which
true... He's lying... Natasha!" she shrieked, pushing those around her
trumpets of the first cavalry regiment played the general march. It
trunk on the narrow footboard behind a carriage. "We must keep at least
trunks to the storerooms. When they understood that order the servants
trustee. This Marshal was Count Ilya Rostov, and in the middle of May
truth of his statements.
truth of life has been revealed to me only to show me that I have spent
truth, because you know Andrew is risking so much doing this against his
truth, too remote from everything human, for him ever to be able to
truth--science--which he himself has invented but which is for him the
truth. In the first place I like her very much, I feel drawn to her; and
truth: what sort of girl is she, and what do you think of her?--The real
truthfully.
try to escape that force, to address entreaties or exhortations to those
trying in vain to find the answer to some question.
trying not to lose a word of the speech which was incomprehensible to
trying only to be ahead of the others; but just at the bridge, not
trying through the Dowager Empress Marya Fedorovna to secure it for the
trying to attract as little attention as possible, he left the room.
trying to bar the road. Infantry regiments, we are told, advanced to the
trying to drive that face from his imagination. But the face remained
trying to get something out of the rich man?"
trying to give an expressive intonation to his voice.
trying to him, and the freedom and independence he had once prized
trying to imagine Karataev's opinion on the subject. "He would not have
trying to imitate the prince now, lifted the hat from his bald head and
trying to prove by physiology and comparative zoology was not merely
trying to prove that the Russians had surrendered and had fled all
trying to quiet him.
trying to smile though tears were in her eyes.
trying, and had grown quite reconciled to her lot as a sterile flower.
trying," said Prince Andrew, apparently speaking lightly of their father
tucked up, without a coat, pale and with a trembling jaw, came out
tuft of plumes in his cocked hat worn on one side with its corners front
tumbler with tea for himself and one for the beardless old man to whom
tune in which the weary musicians blundered, and while tired footmen and
tune, like the song of a bird, was extraordinarily good. Natasha was in
tune, played with precision and in exact time, began to thrill in the
turn at the rows of pomaded heads in the stalls and then at the
turn away to the portrait of his dead Lise, who with hair curled a la
turn into vexation and anger at the stupid arrangements and at the
turn now, but that he will do all he can to let his turn come as late as
turn the broken ring on his finger and would drop his eyes before the
turn the count's heavy body toward the wall.
turn..."
turned angrily away.
turned angrily in his caleche and gazed sternly from side to side.
turned angrily to her husband.
turned as loosely as ever. A solitary tallow candle burned in the
turned away as if to hide from Michaud the tears that rose to his eyes,
turned away from him and glanced at her younger brother, who was
turned away.
turned his horse on the officer.
turned on the box toward his master.
turned on the subject Nicholas liked best--recollections of 1812.
turned round. The officer evidently had complete control of his face,
turned sharply to the left, and Pierre, losing sight of him, galloped
turned the heads of the Moscow ladies, especially by the fact that
turned their horses away. The accountant stopped, facing the Cossack,
turned to Berthier and said he wished to see how the news that he was
turned to Pierre with the beautiful bright smile that she gave to
turned to Zherkov. The nervous irritation aroused by the appearance of
turned to a thin, dirty little artillery officer who without his boots
turned to him expecting his sympathy in their disapproval of the
turned to leave the room, but Pierre held her hand.
turned to me." And when saying this she herself fancied she had really
turned to speak to his daughter, the beautiful Helene.
turned to the right and reached Malo-Yaroslavets, again without
turned toward her brother, and through her tears the loving, warm,
turned toward the women, and while the vehicle was passing at foot pace
turned up in the evening that he was applying for leave and was going
turned up. One's quite frozen and the other's an awful swaggerer. He's
turned upon her, ran away into the dancing hall, whirled round it at
turning again to the narrator he began to laugh afresh.
turning away and continuing to read. But Julie did not flatter her
turning away as if from a shameful aspersion. "It is not from friendship
turning for a moment to the front line, and slightly swinging his arms,
turning his partner round to her seat, he executed the final pas,
turning mockingly to Ramballe.
turning to Anatole, "come here, let us talk and get acquainted."
turning to Magnitski and interrupting his story. "We have agreed that
turning to Natasha and looking at her with eyes full of tears.
turning to Natasha.
turning to Princess Mary for support.
turning to Rostov.
turning to Sonya and indicating by this French greeting her slightly
turning to her mother, who was tenderly gazing at her daughter and in
turning to look at the hussars starting in the darkness behind him, rode
turning to the count. "Zat is how ve old hussars look at it, and zere's
turning to the sergeant major. "Tell them to send me to hospital; I'm
turning, shouted something loudly to a comrade farther back. Rostov
turns out that we have landed ourselves in war, and what is more, in
tutor for Prince Nicholas. Then if your love or passion or obstinacy--as
tutor, Prince Andrew again joined warmly in the conversation about
twelve men in garments like those he had already seen. Some of them
twentieth time and finding some peculiarly deep meaning in each word of
twenty men were gathered round a table at which Dolokhov sat between
twenty thousand strong, might easily have made that effort. The French
twenty thousand; afterwards little more than fifty thousand against a
twenty wagons, not more than sixty now remained; the rest had been
twenty years in vain. He was a model steward, possessing in the highest
twenty-fifth and twenty-sixth were not completed, and secondly, by the
twenty-fifth of August, 1812, did they think that a battle might be
twenty-fifth, in the position we intended and had fortified. But as the
twenty-five-ruble assignat and hastily handed it to him.
twenty-fourth, and obviously led to the loss of the one fought on the
twenty-fourth, and part of the line--the left flank--had been drawn
twenty-ninth of July Kutuzov received the title of Prince. This might
twenty-one.
twenty-seven; red-faced, with a particularly red thick neck, glittering
twenty-sixth, attacked the whole Russian army, which was in position on
twenty-sixth--there are no words worthy to do it justice! I tell you,
twenty-sixth.
twenty-three years. The peasants feared him more than they did their
twenty; Sonya a girl of sixteen with all the charm of an opening flower;
twinkled and looked out straight.
twist about as you may, you will have to come to Bennigsen eventually.
twisted upwards, sat the ruddy Miloradovich in a military pose, his
twitched her hand, and his brows and lips quivered angrily.
twitched nervously. The general looked the captain up and down as he
twitched, ugly wrinkles gathered round her mouth, and covering her face
twitching fingers to prop up his pipe in a corner, but finally
twitching, and it was impossible to tell whether he understood what was
two Cossacks.
two Russians, Miloradovich, and Dokhturov, and there would be a third,
two almost sleepless nights passed on a short sofa without bedding--all
two at a time. "In couples," replied the officer in command in a calm
two battalions of the Sixth Chasseurs in fine order. Before they had
two candles. On the table was a pile of gold and paper money, and he was
two days, and that that success had increased our strength tenfold. He
two glasses with wine.
two hostile armies was all the more clearly felt.
two hundred men, was moved forward into a trampled oatfield in the gap
two ladies, he whispered to Helene that he meant to choose Countess
two languages could be heard. They were looking at the glow seen in the
two loquacious talkers at one another.
two minutes and it is certain death," thought each one.
two o'clock and you dine at four. There will just be time."
two officials a thrashing, and dislocated the arm of one of them.
two or three days' march. They are almost disbanded. Scarcely a quarter
two passions and consequently two joys--her nephew, little Nicholas, and
two people. They were the yard porter Ignat, and the page boy Mishka,
two richest heiresses, Julie and Princess Mary. Though Princess Mary
two squares, your excellency."
two thirds of a mile away, and it was more than a mile as the crow flies
two thousand rubles, and asked him what he thought of doing with it.
two very interesting men tonight, le Vicomte de Mortemart, who is
two wagons loaded with cavalry saddles, which had stuck in the mud not
two years before. There were also present a very distinguished dignitary
two years, and he did not know how the rest, about 100,000 rubles, was
two young side horses with the bay in the shafts," he went on, turning
two!..." said Pierre, and a silence followed: "three!" and a rapturously
two.
type, and a young woman. That very young woman seemed to Pierre the
typical than any of them. Prince Andrew had never yet seen a German
ultimately vanquished, attack of terror before the unknown.
un moment je suis a vous," * he said, answering someone who called him.
un-Petersburg-like about her that distinguishes her." That was all he
un-Russian shouting at their horses which were straining uphill with the
unabashed.
unable to execute complicated maneuvers," said he to Miloradovich who
unable to find a way out of all these surmises and had given to all
unable to overcome or conceal his groundless antipathy to the man.
unable to realize where he was.
unable to understand all the complex significance his words had for
unacceptable and had not come off. He grew confused.
unaccustomed brightness, but he was looking not at his sister but over
unaided. They all took up their places.
unattainable in this life and of which she involuntarily thought at that
unattractive.
unbearable! I don't want... to be tormented? What am I to do?..."
uncertain whether to stop or to play something else.
uncertainties of the position, with the menace of serious danger giving
uncertainty and hurry... There--they are shouting again, and again are
unchanging smile.
unclean." While the Grand Master said these last words it seemed
uncomfortable and cast down his eyes.
uncomfortable and in great pain. The doctor and valet lifted the cloak
uncomfortable and was a man mounted on a horse, while looking at the
uncomfortable in the role of her benefactor.
uncomprehended, and terrible, was becoming unbearable. Those standing
unconciousness and oblivion which in the opinion of Napoleon's doctor,
unconditionally transferred to the ruler or rulers they have chosen, and
unconscious little princess, he shook his head reprovingly and slammed
unconscious of his existence, as he might brush a chip from his path,
unconsciously and quite forgetting her condition, prepared for the
unconsciously bent on avoiding the contemplation of the horrors of their
unconsciously carried away and began speaking with the suppressed
unconsciously felt that a quite different, firm, French order had been
unconsciously lifted the upper lip of his pretty little mouth just
unconsciously put out her tongue as if chiding herself. Seeing that
unconsciously, she opened and closed her hand in time to the music,
undecided as to who ought to be appointed commander in chief. One of the
undecided on the matter himself, eventually left the visitor to settle
under an obligation to him because when he was sent to make peace
under any external impulse as people in the full vigor of life do,
under any pretense. (3) Sunday and Wednesday of each week are appointed
under certain conditions.
under cover."
under discipline and under the influence of that discipline led them
under fire already?" asked Boris.
under fire. But despite himself, on his face too that same indication of
under her brows at the young men.
under her curls and boisterous, childish laughter, as he had known her
under her little feet to keep them from the damp, another hung his coat
under her white cotton cap, knelt sighing and groaning on a rug and
under his leadership will be directed against the redoubt and come into
under his pillow a paper he had received from the commission and the
under his weight alone. The men looked at him and pressed to the
under present circumstances a formal betrothal was, of course, not to be
under the apron of which his feet were sticking out, and in the middle
under the former order of things--threatening to give a serious turn
under the icons, sat Barclay de Tolly, his high forehead merging into
under the icons. "Granddad" himself, as Malasha in her own mind called
under the wet and glistening leather hood of the doctor's cart, from
under those definitions, history should deduce a definition of the
under which she felt that she could not think, but would only be able to
under whom he had served in Turkey, galled him), but he was convinced
under whose banner it is very easy to use words having a still less
under you," he repeated, knowing that his skill in beekeeping, his
undercurrents were acting strongly and nearing an eruption.
undergrowth and the gully with its water-worn side and "Uncle's" cap
undermining C, and so on in all possible combinations and permutations.
understand all, that it is only necessary to believe and to commit
understand for a long time, till at last Tikhon understood and repeated
understand her but simply loved her.
understand him, but he did, not speak it very well--"I bet fifty
understand his aims. To judge a man who is in disfavor and to throw on
understand how a man of his immense intellect can fail to see what is
understand it so differently. He collected all his strength, to stir and
understand it--in the bright light of the emotion that shone within
understand it.... Sonya, wait a bit, sit here," and Natasha embraced and
understand only because I love. Everything is, everything exists, only
understand that he was saved, that he and the rest had been brought
understand that she could be outwardly so calm and natural.
understand that."
understand the self-abnegation of our Emperor who wants nothing for
understand the significance of this war, which seemed to her like all
understand them, and she always dreaded being a hindrance to him in such
understand what was being read. He managed to follow only the last words
understand why he suddenly felt all alone in the world.
understand you" (she looked down). "Don't imagine that sorrow is the
understand!" said Pierre.
understand, agitated her. She said nothing but looked about uneasily as
understand, but as people hurry to finish a necessary but unpleasant and
understand, made Natasha's breast heave, and a joyous but oppressive
understand. "So others are even more afraid than I am!" he thought. "So
understand. I don't know how to put it... with this one everything is
understand. I was there all the time giving orders and had only just
understand. Perhaps Princess Elizabeth and Princess Mary know. I don't
understand. She kissed his rough curly black head. At this instant, they
understand."
understand.... Bezukhov, now, is blue, dark-blue and red, and he is
understand? I love him!"
understand?" she cried.
understanding and expressing each other's thoughts in ways contrary to
understanding but not wishing to appear to do so. The princess as usual
understanding in life, because... because I was happy."
understanding it, flushed with pleasure and began to kiss the boy with
understanding of her condition expressed.
understanding of his employer's happiness.
understanding of phenomena. I do not know why a certain event occurs; I
understanding of power for true gold.
understanding of the causes that led to the action.
understanding of the meaning of the scene he had witnessed between
understanding the folly of the rest of mankind and the reasonableness
understanding--how am I to put it?--I am afraid my way of looking at the
understood Natasha, and she kept saying that she had always known that
understood all the difficulties of the Russian army's position, and
understood all the gravity of her friend's trouble.
understood and condemned.
understood anything of what went on before her. She only felt herself
understood differently, yet looking at Sonya she agreed with Natasha's
understood her," he thought. "I not only understood her, but it was
understood him. The old man got up and gave the letter to his son.
understood him. Why didn't I enter the room?" she thought. "Perhaps he
understood himself. Princess Mary well knew this mood of quiet absorbed
understood his commander's wish.
understood it all, and at the same time followed a train of personal
understood it as an expression of weariness.
understood it.
understood love for a women somewhat differently. He said that in all
understood nothing of the present, and all he saw and heard appeared to
understood that she was being asked to entertain this young man, and
understood that some fool there is doing things all wrong but that
understood that this woman might belong to him.
understood that.
understood the Revolution and quelled it, and so for the general good,
understood the meaning of the council differently. It seemed to her that
understood the whole meaning and importance of this war and of the
understood them, but loved and lived affectionately with everything life
understood this not merely from the attitude of the court. He saw on the
understood this.
understood what had happened to him two days before. In his words, his
understood what was happening as little as he did.
understood without naming.
understood, that he could not answer him.
understood.
understood... yet perhaps he would."
undertake a task that is impossible for them not because of its
undertake the theater, I society, and you, Hippolyte, of course the
undertaken something new. But after a four days' halt the mob, with no
undertaking a single serious battle, they fled still more rapidly back
undeservedly cold and then to mean too much. More than anything she
undisturbed litter of wolf cubs.
undo the buttons of his clothes and undressed him. The doctor bent
undressed, ran off to clear the men out of the pond.
undressing, tugging at the tapes of her petticoat.
undressing, while--instead of Mademoiselle Bourienne--a serf boy read to
uneasily as if preparing to resent any slight that might be put upon the
uneasily from Natasha to Anatole.
uneasiness in her manner and was about to add something, but Pierre
uneasy curiosity men feel when they see an alien form of life that has
unembarrassed smile, "I was just trying to explain our position to
unexecuted. All the impossible orders inconsistent with the course of
unexpected and childlike pleasure in this purchase of presents for
unexpected by her that in her presence Princess Mary felt that she had
unexpected impression on Napoleon who usually liked to look at the
unexpected!"
unexpected, chance of saving the army. On receiving the news he
unexpectedly again began to cry.
unexpectedly before them, sometimes rushed back and sometimes forward,
unexpectedly died.
unexpectedly finding himself in the front line had narrowly escaped amid
unexpectedly kind and pleasant smile.
unexpectedly through his mind.
unexpectedly to go into action. Rostov without hearing Boris to the end
unexpectedly, with a kindly and foolish smile.
unexpectedly.
unexpectedly. Everybody looked at him, understanding what he meant.
unfaithful wife, a retired gentleman-in-waiting, fond of eating and
unfamiliar Polish accent and not realizing that the interpreter was
unfamiliar faces and both were perplexed at what they had done and
unfinished bit of nibbled sugar, and asked if anything more would be
unfinished entrenchments, but the disadvantage of that position was
unfinished novel, Les Chevaliers du Cygne by Madame de Genlis.
unfolding of the oak buds is the cause of the cold wind, for the
unfortunate and charming woman! Don't mention him before her--please
unfortunate, but even silver lost its value in relation to gold.
unfriendly now became gentle and affectionate. The angry eldest
unfrocked priest was in readiness to perform a marriage ceremony over
ungainly Russian princesses, would fall in love with her and carry her
unhappy her father would be if Andrew left without being reconciled to
unhappy!... Sonya, dovey, everything is as it used to be. If only he
unharnessed cart where there was nobody. Tucking his legs under him and
unheard-of, and impossible event of a Russian defeat, everything became
unhesitatingly believed him.
unhooked his saber. He came out from behind the chairs, clasped his
uniform an officer, was going at a gallop, crouching on his gray horse
uniform as to a review, expecting to crush the French gallantly; but
uniform living waves of soldiers, shoulder straps, covered shakos,
uniform rushed on him sword in hand, shouting something. Instinctively
uniform that had become too tight for him. He was agitated;
uniform that looked strange among the Russian black ones. The caleche
uniform with one epaulet and a shoulder knot. He moved with a restrained
uniform with plumes in his hat went up to Kutuzov and said something
uniform. He had on a shabby cadet jacket, decorated with a soldier's
uniforms advanced toward the bridge at a run. Smoke appeared again
uniforms and at the streets and houses where the Russian and French
uniforms, mounted on black horses, trotting straight toward him and
uniforms, with smartly dressed bandsmen in front mounted on black, roan,
unimportant matters.
unimportant matters. Distressed, offended, and surprised by all this,
unimportant matters; he admired her shy grace. In the middle of the
unimportant, all of whom he knew, as if they were all equals, while his
uninitiated, the reserve of the initiated, the hurry and preoccupation
uninterrupted shaping of events the commander in chief is in the
union all is filled with deceit and falsehood and I agree with you that
union with her have only a spiritual aim. That is what I decided, and
unite he was displeased that Smolensk was abandoned and burned without a
unite the meaning of all. To unite all?" he asked himself. "No, not
united whole, though each of the groups was rapidly melting away.
unites the deepest bass with the shrillest tenor, and round the corner
units concerned, without asking either Ney, Davout, or Murat, much less
units it takes, we feel that to take any unit disconnected from others,
units. The first method of history is to take an arbitrarily selected
unity, in patriotism, in the balance of power, or in civilization? So
universal favorite: a very pleasant position, and intoxicatingly so
universal historians sometimes, when it pleases them and fits in with
universal sway, which should be diffused over the whole world without
universe, and of the courage with which he should endure toils and
unjust as to say that he had brought his troops to Moscow because he
unjust to the Austrians and especially to Weyrother. What exactitude,
unknown and undefined misery. That could not be, yet he awaited with
unknown essence of life while that essence itself can only be the
unknown factor--the spirit of an army--is a problem for science.
unknown, infinitely small, elements.
unknowns. And by bringing variously selected historic units (battles,
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
unless a prompt remedy is applied the troops will no longer be under
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
unlicked bear! A perfectly absurd and stupid fellow, and a gambler too,
unlimited power, in time when they grow more irritable, become cruel and
unloading, once started, could not be arrested. It seemed not to matter
unlucky." Memories of Austerlitz and of Dolokhov flashed rapidly and
unmarried, liked him because without making love to any of them, he was
unnatural and dreadful in this impending marriage of Natasha and Prince
unnatural expression as soon as she looked in a glass. She went on
unnatural smile. "I expect you have guessed that Prince Vasili has not
unnatural way, he stretched out his hand for Alpatych to kiss, and then
unnaturally.
unnecessary crockery should not be taken at all. When everything had
unnecessary. They were not in the least abashed. The old woman, lowering
unnoticed by others, never for an instant ceased to observe the Emperor
unnoticed glance at little seven-year-old Nicholas, who was sitting in
unoccupied and to place troops below it. Some of the generals expressed
unpaid. Nicholas accepted thirty thousand rubles offered him by his
unplaited, replaited, and tied up her plait. Her head moved from side
unpleasant impression at first. The soldiers looked askance at him with
unpleasant things to everyone and upset them. Let's go to the nursery."
unpleasant to Prince Andrew to meet people of his own set in general,
unpleasant to people! Go and flirt with Berg as much as you please," she
unpleasantly and he replied hastily.
unpleasantly excited expression.
unraveled. I have a solution ready, but have no time now--I'll think it
unreal immobility in space and to recognize a motion we did not feel;
unreasonable character.
unreasonable than a little child, who, playing with the parts of a
unreasonably angry with his servant and squadron quartermaster.
unrestrained irritability to which spoiled people are so prone.
unsatisfactory, but worst of all was his customary couch in the study.
unseen hand directed his actions.
unshakable. We pass the time as we can, but in war as in war! The
unsteady steps and returning to his room lay down on the sofa and
unsuitable now, just because he plans out everything very thoroughly and
unsymmetrically, and its gnarled hands and fingers, it stood an aged,
untied the ropes. The body collapsed. The soldiers dragged it awkwardly
until you have ceased to love the woman of your choice and have seen
untilled, houses were burned, trade changed its direction, millions
untrue and irrational, but contrary to all human reality. To the
untruth and was becoming entangled. She began to cry.
untruth. A fine lad, a fine lad!" repeated Nicholas, who at heart was
unusual was happening around him, did not realize that he was
unwell, sat down under an apple tree and von Toll remained beside him.
unwinding his scarf. "It's he! It's really he! He has come!" she said
unwinding the band on the second leg. In this way, having carefully
unworthiness, and in Thy great goodness and Thy many mercies regard not
unwounded, with frightened faces, dragged themselves back to Mozhaysk
unwounded--it was they who were crushing, weighing down, and twisting
unwounded. The soldiers were ascending the hill breathing heavily, and
up Moscow like this? They told you that for fun, and you believed it!
up a threatening finger. "He is such a worthy and excellent man, our
up after four o'clock. The people did not at once realize the meaning of
up again.
up against him. He wrote "800 rubles" on a card, but while the waiter
up and asked him what was the matter. He did not answer and looked at
up and began watching the movements of our troops below, as plainly
up and change, but up to the first of September nothing had done so.
up and down his room, now turning his thoughts on a difficult problem
up and down the room past Alpatych who stood by the door, he gave his
up and down the room, and smoke one pipe after another. He seemed
up and flew to her.
up and looked out of the window. An enormously long row of carts full of
up and said much that was unpleasant and even rude to him. He became
up and said something to the ladies. Anna Mikhaylovna stepped forward
up before him, who all presented arms with their eyes fixed on their
up childish and mendacious plans of how he would have made mankind happy
up feet and all in the corner of the sofa, tearing and twisting
up for lost time.
up from the sofa, seized Boris under the elbow in his quick, clumsy
up from the villages and armed, and wrote a letter to the commander in
up high on one uplifted hand.
up his eyes as if dazzled by the sun. He was entirely absorbed by two
up his face and as soon as the last figure of the ecossaise was ended,
up his table napkin he pushed back the tumbler and wineglass standing
up in his mind. He could not now understand how he could ever even have
up just then. "I sent to ask for news, and hear that she is a little
up myself.' And so it was reported to the count, who sent for the man.
up round her head, leaving only a little of the face uncovered. "And
up the Arbat. When they reached the end of the Vozdvizhenka Street they
up the Frenchman had already fallen. "Too late again!" flashed through
up the numbers got 671. This was only five too much, and five was
up the scrap of a grenade that had killed an aide-de-camp standing near
up the steps to where the coffin stood, to give her the farewell kiss.
up the total of Rostov's debt, breaking the chalk as he marked the
up the whole of her thin, sickly face and made it beautiful. Her brother
up their knapsacks with a jerk of their shoulders and pulling the straps
up their position and seeing troops before them, thought they were
up their positions were clearly audible.
up there, and some open portmanteaus and trunks stood about. Prince
up to Denisov's squadron and rode at a footpace not far from Rostov,
up to Denisov.
up to Pierre, pale and with shining, radiant eyes.
up to Tushin.
up to her and falls down and says, 'Make me whole,' says he, 'and I'll
up to her daughter and touched her head with the back of her hand as she
up to him.
up to the appearance of the pauvre mere; they understood that they had
up to the eleventh of July no manifesto or appeal had been received,
up to the hothouse; some of the glass panes were broken, and of the
up to the knowledge of the most complex economic and historic laws).
up tomorrow. But you will see everything for yourself when you get to
up very much."
up when he left Moscow--as a child wants the floor on which he has
up when she heard Natasha say, "Of course she will!" She did not wish to
up with a click of his spurs and bowed to her, Natasha did not even make
up with crockery, the other with carpets. There was also much china
up with fear as if he every moment expected another blow, gazed up at
up within twice the range of a musket shot. The general in command of
up without reason, addressing her stiffly as "my dear," and using the
up, and near the next hut two officers and a cadet were playing svayka,
up, begging a little fire for the infantry.
up, blushed with pleasure, forgot the official manner he had been
up, but even he was ordered out of Petersburg."
up, first blue and then red, Shcherbinin lit the tallow candle, from
up, glanced at what had been done, and with horror, reproach, and
up, he said: "I lay down and curled up, I get up and shake myself." And
up, now vanishing, now trembling, they were busy whispering something
up, or preparing to take up, their positions for the polonaise. Natasha
up, ran off in all directions, abandoning cannons, muskets, and horses.
up, sighed, and sat down again on his heap of straw. "That's the way.
up, they became convinced that Moscow would be surrendered, and then
up, was hastily writing at a tub turned bottom upwards. Kozlovski's face
up.
up.
uphill where the clay had been liquefied by the rain, past strips of
uplifted whip meant that he saw a sitting hare.)
upon her. Later on she recalled how she had asked her father to let her
upon him he read sympathy with what he had said. His face grew brighter
upon him, passed splendidly, lifting his feet with a high and graceful
upon him. What is conscience and the perception of right and wrong
upon it, the more Masonic ground on which he stood gave way under him.
upon the Danube and the dark hills around it. It was calm, and at
upon the Russians, carried forward by the force of its own momentum now
upper floor of this big house and am experiencing a happy feeling of
upper lip and her half-open mouth--seemed to be her own special and
upright figures; he emptied the glass of warm champagne that was handed
upright on the sofa and listened with sparkling eyes. She tried several
upset when I told him people had come to ask what was the matter with
upset you? No, really, have you anything against me?" he asked Pierre.
upsetting a driver or running down a pedestrian, and flying at full
upside down and placed a nibbled bit of sugar beside it, and sat
upstairs in a shabby dressing gown, copying out the original transaction
upwards, in the way affected by the Emperor Alexander, and, having
urged on his already weary horse to get quickly past these crowds, but
urgently than anyone begging Louisa Ivanovna not to refuse.
urging of horses, and the swearing of soldiers, orderlies, and officers.
urging on his horse, which ambled smoothly under his weight, and he
us about it."
us and the merchants. Millions will pour forth from there"--he pointed
us and we humbugged them. They plunder other people's houses, issue
us assume that this program was possible and had then been formulated,
us better than that. We took Vienna, Berlin, Madrid, Naples, Rome,
us for my father. This is the one matter in which she disobeys him. He
us in verse and prose, but of Dokhturov scarcely a word has been said.
us like this, I seem lost and can't do anything. Now do I love my
us on the victory! Admit that more irritating news than yours could not
us pass!... Stop there, you devil with the cart! I'll hack you with my
us soldiers!" he added, smiling, after a momentary pause. "So much
us talk sensibly while there is still time, be it a day or be it but an
us that from the commencement of the campaign a Scythian war plan was
us three times in three years. We take up their cause, but it turns out
us to do?" he repeated and his eye shone with a deep, shrewd look.
us, for instance, the position of the army at Fili and assume that the
us, somebody," she muttered between her sobs. "My girl... My daughter!
us--doing it very badly, I think, but still he is defending us. But
us.
us. Well, you want an argument," he added, "come on then."
us."
us..."
use of him for his own ends.
use of whatever interest he had to offer. He himself carefully scanned
use will peace be when he is no longer here?" Princess Mary murmured,
used by the Vienna cabinet," said the Danish charge d'affaires.
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
used to be. Don't judge Lise harshly," she began. "She is so sweet, so
used to being under fire (one cannot grow used to danger), but because
used to it or getting to love it, I shall go farther. I will go on till
used to it, but you, sir, will blister your hands." He spoke as if those
used to it. She will retaliate. And she has been fooled in the first
used to like to spend them, or to open his mind by intimate talks with
useful only because he had a Russian name.
usefulness did not depend on making the patient swallow substances for
useless and harmful.
useless condemnation and anger directed against people accused of
useless, everything is being accomplished of itself better than we could
useless, feeble man.
uselessly have ruined her young life which might have been so happy.
uselessly in the same place.
uselessly in the same place.
uselessly.
usual and awaited his son with great impatience.
usual effect on Kutuzov and he gave a sob.
usual formalities he left the lodge and went home.
usual in French, and as if after long self-restraint she wished to make
usual jokes, but noticing that what he was saying redounded to the glory
usual tone of indifference.
usual, in their spare time, they lit bonfires, steamed themselves before
usual.
usual. The members who were assembling for dinner were sitting about
usual; but she, stepping up to him, stopped, breathing heavily, her arms
usually attended her had entrusted herself to some Italian doctor who
usually in a bad temper) lost control of himself. Another lately added
usually known to him, and by this means he rose higher in their
utter a sound. He feebly moved his leg and uttered a weak, sickly groan
uttered French phrases between his teeth. Every muscle of his thin face
uttered them.
uttered those solemn words about saving a child; they saw in him only
uttering a gentle, piteous, and childlike moan.
uttering only the first words amiably and then--again without looking
uttering the word amant as casually as any other word, "and you believed
vague idea that he was L'russe Besuhof who had the number of the beast,
vaguely conscious that he might be the cause of the sadness her face
vainly suffered all the dread that precedes a battle and had spent that
vainly trying to master her agitation.
valet had set down the coffee things and left the room. Pierre looked
valor," he went on rapidly. "General Barclay de Tolly risked his life
valse and as they danced he pressed her waist and hand and told her she
value her pure affection and devotion to me?" She went up to her and
value of paper money arise either because, being easy to make, too much
value this mystic power and glory that is floating here above me in this
valued his success in the service, to be at Tilsit on the occasion of
vanished as soon as he returned to the customary conditions of his
vanished from his face.
vanished into the darkness.
vanished--disappeared altogether and dissolved into nothingness.
vanished. He waited for the first pause in the conversation, and then
variety of medicines for all the diseases known to them, but the simple
various officials, old and young, military and civilian, who were there.
various operations on the French who were running away as fast as they
various uniforms on the fields and meadows belonging to the Davydov
varnish.
vehemence. Gervais intervened with a joke, and the talk reverted to its
vehement, but almost always did become vehement, scolded, and sometimes
vehicles packed with china that had been captured from him at Borisov
veil from the secret of the countess' malady, an unwary young man
velocity of a falling body increases as it approaches the earth. Behind
velvety softness, which so mingled with her lack of art in singing that
veneration could such a man as my father evoke? And I am so contented
veneration--especially of an evening when he came in to tea in his
vengeance, or any feeling of that kind, but everything in Voronezh
venomously retorted on the inexperienced young man, "but I know on good
vent it.
vent to a little abuse, and at last gave it all up and went forward,
vent to her anger against Anatole in words of abuse, Marya Dmitrievna
ventured to ask him what her father was doing.
ventured to draw the Emperor's attention to the devotion of the Poles
ventured to express surprise that well known doctors had not been called
verbal activity.
versa, and insisting on his declaring himself to Princess Mary. For this
verses in the bosom of her dress close to her bony little chest, ran
verses, bowed to Bagration. Everyone rose, feeling that dinner was more
very angry, was saying.
very briefly and vaguely, that after brilliant engagements the Russians
very clearly revealed something unexpectedly coarse and unpleasant.
very day he gave the village Elder orders to collect carts to move the
very day you first came to Otradnoe I have loved you," she cried, quite
very easily and quickly on three legs, as if disdaining to use all
very evening--again presented itself to her and her agitation increased
very favorable.
very glad to do all in my power both for you and for this dear young
very good spirits on this fifteenth of September, prepared to go out
very good thing, but not for you--I don't suppose you ever had anyone
very hour that Kutuzov was reviewing the troops for the first time. He
very idea of marrying for money is repugnant to me."
very important matter."
very important personage, had been sent on a very important mission to
very instant a cloud of smoke spread all round, firing was heard quite
very little--but his looks and manner gave that impression. The princess
very moment they heard through the darkness the challenge: "Qui vive?" *
very much.
very muscular men, and on the night of the battle, having arrived at
very next morning after the battle, the French army advanced of itself
very numbers and their crowded and swift movement deprived them of that
very pleased. Vasilich, you'll see to it. Just unload one or two carts.
very pretty and rosy, though rather too plump for her age. The third
very simple hard sofas, armchairs, tables, and chairs made by their own
very still. Just before the window was a row of pollard trees, looking
very strictly to social distinctions and rarely admitted even important
very susceptible." This return to the subject of Natalie caused Prince
very tails, and a watery light showed itself through the bare branches.
very unhappy with her father. She is a relation of yours, Princess Mary
very wealthy. She was by now decidedly plain, but thought herself not
very well be that he was not sitting on a wagon but on a terribly high
very well for Rostov, whose father sends him ten thousand rubles at a
very well..."
very worst dispositions and orders seem very good, and serious people
vestibule to inform Kutuzov, who was waiting in the hall porter's little
vewy well--only not for those who get it in the neck. So you are Pwince
vex her), "I have been on my feet since six this morning. Tomorrow I
vexations he derived from that world, to her so remote and alien. She
vibrating ball without fixed dimensions. Its whole surface consisted of
vice versa.
vicious and unfortunate people whom he would assist by word and deed,
vicious life!" but dared not break the silence.
vicomte and from the vicomte to their hostess. In the first moment of
vicomte continued, with the air of a man who, in a matter with which
vicomte's story. Prince Vasili's words frightened her, an embittered
victims of the plague.
victories brought the French complete destruction, while the series
victories of the French at Jena and Auerstadt destroy the independent
victory is not a matter for great rejoicing and that you can't be
victory, especially on this day when what is at stake is the honor of
vieux!" * added he, clapping the scared and silent Gerasim on the
view he gazed at the Oriental beauty he had not seen before. It seemed
view of the common calamity, the same feeling that had caused him to go
view of the impending difficulties. It was not a council of war, but,
view prevailed expressed by Bilibin--who now in Petersburg was quite
view--to lead the troops into action in the order prescribed by the
view--to take Murat prisoner; nor the result of immediately destroying
vigorous and alert, entering Potemkin's gaily colored tent, and a
vile, infamous paper, but I thought the thing was invalid."
vileness, horrified that the former purity of her soul was again lost to
villa at Sokolniki. The anteroom and reception room of his house
village Elder, so Alpatych had not managed the prince's estates for
village again, but Tushin's guns could not move, and the artillerymen,
village and had already been sent for.
village and stacked its arms in front of the last huts.
village in the vicinity of the camp, the immense number of generals and
village joined the haulers, and the wattle wall, which was about
village of Pratzen. But neither they nor a single commanding officer
village of Rykonty, on the Russian side of the Niemen, by dawn. There he
village street, swaying, pressing upon and cutting the shoulders of the
village streets when we are marching against the enemy?"
village the sentinels of Davout's infantry corps detained him as
village, outside the drink shop, another meeting was being held, which
village. "Very good!" said Bagration in reply to the officer's report,
village. Tell it to stop and await my orders."
village. The Russian Cossacks and bugler and the French hussars looked
village. The colonel said that the commander of the division was a mile
villages on both sides of the river, over a radius of six miles. Barclay
villages were in a state of the greatest poverty. He did not know that
vindicating her husband, "but only after they are a year old or so..."
violence to the inhabitants or any looting, and announcing a roll call
violence.
violet into gray and milky white, and "boom!" came the report a second
violins played very shrilly and merrily and one of the women with thick
virtue and vice, are only greater or lesser degrees of freedom.
virtue the victory over vice. This aim was that of Christianity itself.
virtue was and could not recall it.
virtues--love of his neighbor, and especially generosity.
visibility is infinite, and cannot be imagined otherwise. (2) Time is
visible as if but a stone's throw away, and the movements of the
visible in the snow and a shovel had been left sticking in one of the
visible through the smoke, make out moving masses of infantry and narrow
visible, but they reappeared a few minutes later. In front, at a weary
visible. Suddenly something like a birch broom seemed to sweep over the
vision. Now that she knew that the renewal of Natasha's relations with
visit him in Moscow or at Bald Hills later on; and if not, the wedding,
visit his neglected estates at the same time and pick up his son Anatole
visit to Potsdam, and of how the two august friends had pledged
visit, "is it true that the Dowager Empress wants Baron Funke to be
visit, and I came in such a costume only to see my daughter. I beg
visit--that not by gunpowder but by those who invented it would matters
visit. "I am starting on a journey of inspection, and of course I shall
visited the English Club, and was on intimate terms with a colonel of
visited the Foundling Hospital and, allowing the orphans saved by him
visiting all the places he meant to go to and where he had been invited,
visitor alluded to, though she had already heard about the cause of
visitor could not help joining in.
visitor she added: "She is my youngest girl."
visitor. "And to think it is Cyril Vladimirovich Bezukhov's son who
visitors and arranged about refreshments for the gentry and the serfs,
visitors on his right. Midway down the long table on one side sat the
visitors settled themselves, some in the two drawing rooms, some in the
visitors, Nicholas knew he would have to exchange his Tartar tunic for
visitors, and before the visitors I tell you that in future you are
visitors, usually spoken of as "a man of great merit," having described
visitors. They now, stretching themselves after sitting so long, and
vivandiere, and like matters.
vivants. Napoleon rode up the high ground at Semenovsk, and through the
vivid and precious memory and the personification of everything Russian,
vividly did he recall that hospital stench of dead flesh that he
vividly imagined what awaited it and the part he would have to
vodka a quarter of an hour before, he saw everywhere the same rapid
vodka for the men from me," he added so that the soldiers could hear.
voice Natasha had known previously, but the one that had sung As 'twas
voice addressing the publican. "What have you killed a man for, you
voice and mustache, and Telyanin and all that affair with Telyanin and
voice and the rustle of a silk dress behind the door. Several times on
voice calling him by name.
voice from heaven. How gladly would he have died at once for his Tsar!
voice from the next room.
voice higher and higher.
voice interrupting them both. "Of course you artillery men are very
voice not his own, gripping Karp by the collar. "Bind him, bind him!" he
voice of the commander in chief was heard. The regiment roared, "Health
voice quivered like that of a child about to cry.
voice saying:
voice she has; though she's my daughter, I tell the truth when I say
voice suddenly shrieked: "but if I hear that you have not behaved like a
voice that the whole house heard it with horror. God knows what he would
voice to the men to look to their pistols. He rode up to Kirsten. The
voice to which he tried to impart a dashing note, ill suited to his weak
voice trembled. "I don't know why," she continued, recovering herself,
voice were at once heard from there.
voice, "I see you are all right there."
voice, "would you like to see little Nicholas? He is always talking
voice, "you were pleased to send me to Captain Tushin's battery. I went
voice, and he began scraping his dirty feet on the threshold.
voice, and it was that affair and this soldier that were so agonizingly,
voice, apparently to preclude the possibility of not being heard, and
voice, as he pulled together the shirt which gaped open on his chest,
voice, clear, not grandiloquent but mild, in which only the Slav clergy
voice, obviously so elated by the sound of firing, by the prospect
voice, popped her head in at the door.
voice, so high pitched and irresolute. His face grew more and more
voice, with its incorrect breathing and labored transitions, was
voice.
voice.
voice.
voice.
voice.
voice.
voice.
voice. "Here is our commanding officer... ask him," and he pointed to a
voice. "I have had so little happiness in life that every loss is hard
voice. "I only came across Pelageya in Yukhnovo..."
voice. "One is afraid of the unknown, that's what it is. Whatever we may
voice. "She is living in Moscow and you are here. Remember, dear boy,"
voice. Prince Andrew, however, did not answer that voice and went on
voice. There was a stir in the ranks of the soldiers and it was evident
voice. To fresh questions as to the firmness of his resolution Pierre
voice. When Pierre saw the Emperor he was coming out accompanied by two
voices and laughter filled the air round the tables in the square.
voices at once began answering the interpreter. A French officer,
voices began speaking at the same time, the door was flung open, and
voices of the crowd that filled the whole Kremlin.
voices were but feebly heard amid the uproar and one saw by their faces
voices were saying.
voices.
voila done enfin, cette fameuse ville! Il etait temps," * said he, and
vot'e homme!" *
vouchsafe its revelation to us through His divine Spirit.
vulgarity of the expressions that were natural to her, though she had
waddled out into the porch. He put on his hat with its peaks to the
waddling gait to the porch. "Whew... whew... whew!" he whistled, and
wag.
wagged his head approvingly.
wagon.
wagons moved noiselessly through the deep dust that rose to the very
wagons, and crowds of orderlies and sentinels. The commander in chief
wagons, drawn by French horses and by saddled Cossack horses that had
wagons, soldiers, gun carriages, carriages, soldiers, ammunition carts,
wagons. He halted irresolutely, not knowing whether to return or go on.
wailing and lamenting as they said good-by. A small watchdog ran round
wailing.
waist in the water joyfully wriggling his muscular figure and snorted
waistcoat, smoothed his hair, yawned, and followed Alpatych into the
waistcoat. "It's the saute, most likely," she added with a smile. "Well,
wait and endure. He did not again go to the sick man, nor turn to look
wait before we rejoice."
wait for him and rode to the spot where the enemy's, Ilagin's, hunting
wait only two hours, when, come what might, he would let his excellency
wait. For instance, on the twenty-eighth it is suggested to him to
waited impatiently for Prince Andrew's return from the commander in
waited to know anything of all this. He was in a fairy kingdom where
waited. "Here it comes... this one is coming our way again!" he thought,
waiting at the porch," said the adjutant.
waiting by the door.
waiting for a vacancy to command a regiment, and have the happiness to
waiting for him to say a word and cross a certain line, and he knew that
waiting for something else before advancing had been so completely
waiting for the beat. Only on horse back and in the mazurka was
waiting for the game to end.
waiting for the ladies to appear, Prince Andrew set off for home.
waiting for--some important relation who has not yet arrived, or a dish
waiting for." And bursting into tears she hid her face in her
waiting to see what he would do. He stood a little while before the
wake the captain first."
walk in Thy paths, (1) to conquer anger by calmness and deliberation,
walk, we are unconscious of any contradiction. The degree of freedom and
walk. That morning she had returned to her favorite mood--love of, and
walk?"
walked among the crowd with rapid steps, scanning the various faces he
walked on either side of the vehicles seeing the travelers off.
walked on.
walked slowly without raising his pistol, looking intently with his
walked without feeling the pain, though at night his feet were more
walked--as women can walk--with the more repose and stateliness the
walking through the rooms. In cellars and storerooms similar men were
wall of a shed, the roof of which had already been removed.
wall of the sick hive, instead of the former instant unanimous
wall. The red-faced man was still twitching, but they did not carry him
walls hung round with Persian carpets. The part of the room behind the
walls of Smolensk.
walls of forsaken, agitated Moscow. Occasionally she leaned out of the
walls. In the middle stood what were probably a king and a queen. The
wander in hempen rags from place to place under an assumed name, doing
wandered--evidently herself experiencing all that he described. Not only
want a sacrifice from her son, she herself wished to make a sacrifice
want anything!" he shouted.
want him." (He looked at his blushing daughter.) "Are you unwell today?
want only that!" thought he, straining eyes and ears and looking to the
want the whole nation to fall on them." The sight of these bearded
want to dance well. Her enormous figure stood erect, her powerful arms
want to know!"
want to know."
want to make an end of it."
want to make him what I am, without giving him my means. Then you say,
want to, but because it could not be done. All the generals, officers,
want?"
wanted here? Go to the other girls, or..."
wanted liberty, but Buonaparte has destroyed it."
wanted most was to convey his thought to others just as he himself
wanted nothing more.
wanted to cry. Peronskaya had left them. The count was at the other end
wanted to kiss him. Dolokhov kissed him, laughed, turned his horse, and
wanted to show him that his losses were an achievement that made her
wanted to sleep. The gay triumphant shouting of the enemy army had a
wanted to thank you himself."
wanted to, and perished because Alexander desired his destruction, and
wanted, tell me! I will do anything," said she, catching his eye.
wanted.
wanted.
wanted.
wanted. He was lifted up, carried to his study, and laid on the very
wantonly abandoned. I, for my part, begged him personally most urgently
wants to go to the war," replied Pierre, addressing the princess with
wants to have a place rubbed that has been hurt. A child knocks itself
wants to see you particularly. He asks you to come to him at once on a
war and the peace that had been concluded. "Yes, I have been much
war came contradictory news, false as usual and therefore variously
war had terminated so fortunately. Pfuel barely glanced--not so much at
war has deprived me of one of the associations nearest my heart. I mean
war on our own frontiers, with and for the King of Prussia. We have
war or politics but related to high society, to certain women, and to
war that everyone expected and to prepare for which the Emperor had come
war the most deeply considered plans have no significance and that all
war was being discussed had turned from his partner with eyes and ears
war was the Continental System which was ruining Europe; to the generals
war was the violence done to him; to businessmen that the cause of the
war, and like everyone else unconsciously exaggerated their sorrow about
war, even here amid fieldwork and the calm of nature--which townsfolk
war, with the air of a man who knows beforehand that all will go wrong,
war.
war. He evidently listened only because he had ears which, though there
wardrobe in which Pierre noticed garments such as he had never seen
wards of the city. You will recognize them by the white ribbon they will
wards, consisting of three rooms, the doors of which stood open. There
wares, especially a pair of goatskin slippers. "I have hundreds of
warfare seemed to him absurd and barbarous--monstrous collisions in
warm themselves, gathering round the fires throwing into the flames the
warmth in his body, an amiability toward all his fellows, and a
warmth when he was cold, of talking to a fellow man when he wished to
warn me of the humor my father is in. I do not allow myself to judge him
warned her not to dare to let him see her. The fact that he did not, as
warned him that with his corpulence wine was dangerous for him, he
warped steps of the familiar staircase. The well-known old door handle,
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
warrior in our valiant ranks has perished. From this you will see that
wars, revolutions, and conquests--are presented by these historians
wars. Send it to the Academy. Here are some jottings for you to read
was Helene. Natasha had not time to take off the bodice before the door
was Mademoiselle Bourienne. She greeted the father and daughter with
was Napoleon's ambition; to the Duke of Oldenburg, that the cause of the
was Napoleon--his hero--but at that moment Napoleon seemed to him such a
was Pierre pleased and the more evident was it that the catastrophe he
was Rostov) moved nearer to the Emperor. Stopping beside his horse, with
was Smolensk, toward which all their desires and hopes, enormously
was Sonya, and that Sonya was certainly his future happy and loving
was Vasilisa, the wife of a village elder, who slew hundreds of the
was a Pole, disputed with the commissariat officer, arguing that he was
was a bottle of herb wine, different kinds of vodka, pickled mushrooms,
was a boy of fourteen, and had quite forgotten him, but in his usual
was a brisk little man, very simple and affable. He indicated the stud
was a certain uneasiness and occasional discord, which there used not to
was a combined service of prayer on the occasion of the Emperor's
was a cross laid upon her by God. Prince Vasili expressed his opinion
was a deafening report, and all were enveloped in a cloud of smoke. The
was a lie, and worse than a lie? I am guilty and must endure... what?
was a lubricant the wheels of her machine needed to make them run
was a misfortune but it turned out a blessing! If it had not been for
was a passage in which a partition with ragged curtains could be seen.
was a piece of tow in one of them, could not help hearing; but it
was a profound one. And it is even more difficult to understand just why
was a second staircase leading to the back entrance. He went down that
was a sinner who loved her father and little nephew more than God.
was a stroke of genius. Prince Auersperg feels his dignity at stake and
was a traitor and a spy. I could not let him go unpunished and so I have
was a unique chance to show his devotion to the Emperor and he had not
was a very simple and agreeable business.
was a victory, and repeated this both verbally and in his dispatches
was a victory, despite the assurance of generals that the battle was
was a weary and famished, but still a fighting and menacing army. But
was able to buy a small estate adjoining Bald Hills and was negotiating
was about and if others did not understand him it was so much the worse
was about as five to six, but after that battle it was little more than
was about to be decided. But Prince Andrew did not see how it ended. It
was about to cross the space between the barriers, when Dolokhov cried:
was about to expand her dresses into a balloon and sit down. They were
was about to leave: "Mathematics are most important, madam! I don't want
was about to run on, thinking that the farther he went to the front the
was about twenty-five. Like all infantry officers he wore no mustache,
was abroad; so Pierre had not the opportunity to spend his nights as he
was absolutely necessary.
was accompanied by phrases about the glory of France, the baseness of
was accustomed to understand him. He led him to the desk, raised the
was afraid of doing so.
was again removed and more than ten voices said together: "Sic transit
was agreed that whoever became "King" should have the right to kiss Mary
was ahead of it; but the wolf turned its head to face her, and instead
was aiming.
was all a misunderstanding and that no one is to blame for it." She
was all my fault, and Andrew was only joking."
was all over; but he said in an indifferent tone:
was all right and everyone was cheerful. The thought has come into my
was all she said, in a dry and mournful tone.
was all the harder for the Emperor to turn it elsewhere. Amid the
was already at the door. Princess Mary saw him walk out of the house in
was already full of people. There were people not only in the square,
was already in ear but had been completely trodden down by cattle and
was already past midnight, the hour when Karataev was usually free of
was already perfectly cured of his former faults and was ready for all
was already too late to go anywhere but still too early to go to bed,
was also a yellow, wrinkled old man, without beard or mustache,
was also looking at Princess Mary, and in her lovely eyes there was a
was always busy and always felt in a state of mild and cheerful
was always conscious of his own guilt toward him for having wasted the
was always ready to render the small services for which she had a gift,
was an Emperor, Alexander, who decided to restore order in Europe and
was an almost hostile expression as he slowly regarded his sister and
was another matter and quite the thing for a dashing young hussar!
was any hay to be had in the villages.
was as full of rapturous admiration as the Rostovs' servants had been.
was as weighty and uninterrupted as the booming on the battlefield, but
was asking the adjutant to wait, and he went on with the conversation in
was asleep on the sitting-room sofa. The old count was resting in his
was associated in her mind with the ruin of Russia. She was agitated and
was attached to Platov's division.
was attained in the first place of itself, as the French ran away,
was awakened by the bombardment of the town--and Smolensk held out all
was baptized. The wet nurse supported the coverlet with her chin,
was based on his trickery and deception of the people. So the historians
was before him and listened to what was said, though evidently seeing
was beginning to breathe heavily and quickly which was always a sign of
was beginning to grow up which was stronger than principle, virtue,
was beginning to lose its sublimity, gave a sign with his hand. A single
was behind him and to whom he had not spoken since the previous day.
was being done. And he fell back into that artificial realm of imaginary
was being led up to some object he noticed a hesitation and uncertainty
was being mown down by the soldiers, evidently for fodder. This fact
was beside himself: moved the chair on which he was sitting noisily
was bewitching and that he loved her. During the ecossaise, which she
was bright, he had a good horse under him, and his heart was full of
was bright, joyous sunshine on Natasha's face as she gazed tenderly at
was burning as usual. (The boy was afraid of the dark and they could
was busy for whole days. The count and countess turned to her when they
was calm, though a severe and grave expression had again settled on her
was camping out at night for months in the snow with fifteen degrees
was carried out--not because those orders differed in any way from the
was clear that the kitten had settled down only to spring up with more
was coming, and turning to her mother:
was concerned she would be the last to quit Petersburg.
was confirmed in this delusion by the fact that she had become a very
was considered to be the most suspicious of all. When they had all been
was considered very stinging), "and your greatest pleasure is to be
was covered with perspiration. Pierre was hungry and shared the dinner
was crying. Prince Andrew kissed him and evidently did not know what to
was damp and he began to cough; Alpatych came to Yaroslavl with reports
was dead--and Tikhon reminded him that she was no more, and he shouted,
was deemed worthy to partake of the holy and heavenly sacrament at the
was delighted that Pierre, whom he did not much care for, had returned.
was delighted with Denisov's skill, he was asked again and again as a
was destroying itself at such a rate that, though its path was not
was disengaged. He made a grimace...
was dispersing on the hill lay still more densely below, where they were
was displeased that evidently important news had reached the Emperor
was dissatisfied with him. And in a history recently written by order
was diverted by the desperate shrieks of the woman in the vehicle. An
was doing for his serfs, he would be vexed and reply: "Not in the least;
was doing no harm, but either sat quietly on the slope of the trench
was doing when he was arrested, Pierre replied in a rather tragic manner
was doing; the boldness with which our outposts now scouted close up to
was doing; the thought of meeting the Emperor at any moment was so
was done in haste at that time), and Pierre and Anna Mikhaylovna in
was drenched with perspiration, yet he did not go home but stood with
was dressing it had not time to release. "That bow is not right. Come
was dulled by imbecility and a constant expression of sullen
was dying without glory, or because he was sorry to part with life,
was ecstatically conscious of his approach. He felt it not only from the
was engrossed by watching the family circle--separated from all
was entering the house the Emperor occupied. "After all, people do go
was equally bad. As long as they remained with their own people each
was even then understood. Russian authors are still fonder of telling
was evident that nothing the general could say would surprise or even
was evident that the more lifeless he seemed at ordinary times, the more
was evidently a German) patiently awaited the end of the service, which
was evidently one, Rostov felt confused, blushed, and became silent.
was evidently ready with a joke. "Whether tomorrow brings victory or
was excellent. With the second course, a gigantic sterlet (at sight of
was expected in Moscow, where old Prince Bolkonski was spending the
was expecting the usual set for cards that evening, after which there
was extraordinary and had achieved miracles of valor. The soldiers,
was familiar.
was feeling. Prince Andrew answered all his questions reluctantly but
was feeling. She knew that Sonya with her severe and simple views
was filling her soul, there could be rich people and poor, and the rich
was firm, or because England's policy was astute or the Duke of
was firmly persuaded that he wished for peace and intended to enter into
was first made aware by a strong smell of perspiration which came from
was fonder than ever of Mary, and how Mary was in every way better than
was for earthly love. The more she tried to hide this feeling from
was found under the old merchant's pillow. He was tried, knouted, and
was galloping toward the knoll on a lathering horse. It was Belliard.
was generally a drinking bout, finishing with visits of a kind Pierre
was getting down from the carriage steps two men, who looked like
was getting lighter. To the left he saw a sloping descent lit up, and
was glued. They all sang something. When they had finished their song
was going home to Voronezh and Rostov persuaded him to travel with him
was going on among the staff of the army. A was undermining B, D was
was going on at the staff at headquarters and to consider means of
was going on before him. So the way in which these people killed one
was going on, she called Sonya to her and, instead of reproaching and
was going to join the army, with such passionate girlish adoration that
was going, still on all sides there was what there had been on the field
was going, to Mitenka's lodge and demanded an account of everything. But
was good or bad, reasonable or senseless. Behind her sat Anatole,
was groaning so piteously--he felt like weeping childlike, kindly, and
was growing cold on the bare floor.
was growing dusk. On the narrow Augesd Dam where for so many years the
was happening and what was about to happen in the bedroom. Pierre did
was happening in Moscow. Again they interrupted him: they had not asked
was happy to be seeing him. He knew that he might and even ought to
was happy. "Left... left... left..." he seemed to repeat to himself at
was heard on the stairs. Forgetting the danger of being recognized,
was heard to "mount" and the soldiers crossed themselves and mounted.
was heard to say. His voice was calm and deliberate. "Moscow it is,
was his custom when at home--taking leave of a good-looking, dark-haired
was holding their horses.
was horrified, and at tea to which all had sat down after the opera, she
was humiliating, in her position rose vividly to her mind. "They, the
was immediately followed by a feeling of release from the oppressive
was immediately killed. Prince Andrew again seized the standard and,
was immediately surrounded by courtiers on all sides. Everywhere he saw
was impossible to see it clearly with the naked eye. Our right flank was
was in Moscow and living in her house--which had not been burned--in
was in a white uniform rode a black one. These were the two Emperors
was in attendance, to include him in the suite appointed for the stay at
was in confusion and crumbling to pieces, that nobody was right or
was in his place, waiting.
was in the full whirl of society pleasures. She was surrounded by young
was in the same black dress with soft folds and her hair was done the
was innocent and unhappy at my desertion, and much more. I knew that if
was it the romantic love stimulated by himself that he experienced for
was jealous of Prince Andrew's memory), or on the rare occasions when
was joyfully conscious of a return of that self-sacrificing spirit in
was joyfully planning this new life, when Prince Vasili suddenly entered
was just the Cossack, Likhachev, who was sitting under the wagon, but it
was just what he used to be. As before he was absent-minded and seemed
was kept out of their minds by the fact that they saw they were
was kissing her hand, "you're feeling dull in Moscow, I daresay? Nowhere
was kneaded by the feet and wheels, while the rest rose and hung like a
was left alone, suddenly he came to himself and realized the position
was living a real life, seeing new places and new people that interested
was living with Anatole. Pierre smiled, looking about him merrily.
was looking with curiosity at his huge unmilitary figure.
was lost. No one whom Rostov asked could tell him where the Emperor
was lying asleep on the ottoman with an open book in his hand.
was lying looking steadily straight before her at one of the mahogany
was lying on the table and went out of his study by the other door.
was lying on the table. 'Here it is! You did not write it yourself but
was made for him, was approaching the icon.
was mentioned, by those who did not know him, as having, when wounded
was merely a circumstance, and Davout could have shot him without
was merely a man of the world who had got on and to whom getting on had
was more at ease as to the possibility of himself and his troops being
was mortified to feel that his mental capacity was inadequate for the
was my lover," she said in French with her coarse plainness of speech,
was nearly noon.
was necessary to await provisions, or that the men had no boots--was so
was no one beyond the ditch now. Only some carts and carriages were
was no such great honor after all, and that if he loved Natasha he
was not a Frenchman, the captain, evidently not understanding how anyone
was not a fool to want to have children, and that she was not going to
was not an advanced post of that position, we have the fact that up to
was not announced; Prince Andrew insisted on that. He said that as he
was not as much at ease with Sonya and Dolokhov as before and was less
was not because of Napoleon's commands that they killed their fellow
was not destroyed, gleamed white in the distance with its towers and
was not done, because Poniatowski, advancing on the village through the
was not his adjutant's fault, and still not answering the Austrian
was not in love with anyone in particular, but with everyone. Whatever
was not mean, and did not refuse anyone who asked of him. All he cared
was not only afraid to speak of it and ask Dessalles the reason of his
was not there and life was going on as before.
was not thinking of herself. As with everyone, her face assumed a forced
was not to the point. Why was he in the yard of a burning house where
was not with them, the count decided to stay with Marya Dmitrievna
was nothing dishonorable in these tastes, and he was incapable of
was now a rich man who had risen to high honors and no longer sought
was now afraid of everything.
was now his only hope. Karay, with all the strength age had left him,
was now nearer and more akin and more comprehensible than this side of
was now necessary to attack in order to cut away through for themselves.
was now quivering with nervous excitement; his eyes, in which the fire
was now replaced by another, especially since he had seen that soldier
was now saying she had talked of before, with tears.
was now surprised at the surprise expressed by those who had never
was now the whole French army marching from Moscow in an unexpected
was now useless to say any more.
was obviously drunk. On seeing Pierre he grew confused at first, but
was occupied by the French, a proclamation by a French general that no
was occupied by the interests of the center that was conducting
was of course sufficient. The novelty of Truth endowed her with
was of value to suffering humanity, would sit for hours with Pierre
was on duty and that he should go through the door on the left into the
was one he had bought from a Cossack during the campaign, and he wore a
was one of those unnoticed cogwheels that, without clatter or noise,
was only a momentary feeling and Count Rostopchin smiled disdainfully
was only because in his state of depression he did not feel able to take
was only interested in the affair with the commissariat officers. On
was only more vividly conscious of the fact that if his affairs had not
was pacing up and down the drawing room, waiting for the household to
was pale, his cheeks sunken and his eyes hollow, but the charm, the
was particularly noticeable on Nesvitski's usually laughing countenance.
was particularly tender to and considerate of him from a wish to
was perfectly true. He was afraid of getting some other officer into
was pierced beyond Valuevo by the Smolensk highroad crowded with troops.
was prejudiced against her by involuntary envy of her beauty, youth, and
was preparing fireworks to let off that night.
was pretty, but this no longer gave her satisfaction as it used to.
was put in the sleigh or of the first three stages of his journey.
was putting up there, but just when Pierre arrived he was not in and
was questioned as to who he was, where he had been, with what object,
was rallied about Princess Bolkonskaya.
was rapidly and excitedly talking to a French grenadier. "Hark to him
was rapidly demonstrating that not only all that had happened, but all
was rather derogatory to his manhood. He went to balls and into ladies'
was rather out of place in this brilliant society, the whole company had
was reading or writing in his study. Pierre had but to show a partiality
was ready to accept it; but some secret feeling of repulsion for her,
was really of small importance in view of such events as the fall of
was received as if he were a corpse or a leper. The eldest princess
was reduced to thirty-six thousand, though not more than five thousand
was regarded as a diploma of intellect. Young men read books before
was repeatedly summoned to see him. At headquarters and among the troops
was required of him, but when they told him to bless the boy, he did
was resolute, calm, and animatedly alert, as never before. The former
was responsible for the delay he ought to bear the whole burden of it;
was retreating to the Ryazan road beyond Moscow. This was not news to
was riding a thin thoroughbred horse with sunken sides. Like his horse,
was right or wrong to show fear, snorted, reared almost throwing the
was right.
was rubbing his forehead and eyes with his hand. A short man was saying
was safe from Cossacks.
was said to him, the German submitted and took his men elsewhere. The
was saying, and he looked on without interfering. Karataev thanked the
was saying, but he knew (the categories of thoughts were also quite
was saying.
was scrawled over with figures, wet with spilled wine, and littered
was seized by an agonizing fear. And that fear was the fear of death. It
was serving, and a misunderstanding arose. The two commanders were much
was silenced at once. They looked at the beautiful, large, thoughtful
was silent and then from the study the sound was heard of other steps,
was silent with his steward, the gardener, and the architect, and though
was sitting at a small table, chattering with Masha, her maid. She grew
was sitting at the head of the table. On either side of her sat the
was sitting beside him, by the hand. Rostov was struck by the totally
was sitting on the floor of her dismantled room with dresses, ribbons,
was slipping away from him.
was so constructed that one could stand up in the middle of the trench
was so much interested in that task that he was unable to sleep, and
was so pressed to the wall by people who probably were unaware of the
was speaking hurriedly, evidently afraid her strength might fail
was speaking in jest or in earnest. "Ah, your excellency! How you look
was spitting blood. A bullet had evidently hit him in the throat or
was sprinkling Eau de Cologne on the Emperor's pampered body with an
was still burning, and the same shirtlike sphinx lay near the door; but
was still incomplete), he caught himself smiling and was conscious
was still living in Pierre's house. The two younger ones had both
was still sitting at the side of the road under the birch tree and two
was still the same bewitching combination of majesty and mildness in his
was still, warm, and silent. Occasionally the whistle of a huntsman,
was stopped by French cavalry sentinels.
was strikingly out of proportion to her short legs. Prince Vasili turned
was stronger than a married man's should be for his friend's fiancee.
was struck by the change in him. His words were kindly and there was a
was such a thing as "landlord's corn" which was sometimes given to the
was suddenly heard from both sides. The corporal frowned at Pierre's
was suddenly shown up in unexpected and striking beauty. For the first
was sufficient to cause his whole body to slip as he sat on the sloping
was supported in his design and prevented from renouncing it by what he
was supposed to be a man of genius--Speranski. And this movement of
was taciturn, and the old prince noticing this also became morosely dumb
was talk of his intrigues with some of the ladies, and he flirted with a
was talked of. For the Rostov family the whole interest of these
was talking about her and this afforded her pleasure. She even turned so
was talking absolute nonsense. Kutuzov's expression grew more and more
was talking in low tones to the elderly lady about Pierre.
was tall and fair, and his calm and handsome face had regular, delicate
was telling a fourth group that he was prepared to die with the city
was telling the ladies about last Wednesday's meeting of the Imperial
was that his former stern and determined expression had altered to one
was that soul I loved in her... loved so strongly and happily..." and
was the Emperors' suites. The Emperors rode up to the flank, and the
was the King of Naples that when, on the eve of his departure from that
was the Word and the Word was with God," Pierre went round the table and
was the absence of host or hostess and the presence of the good-natured
was the bear swimming about with the policeman on his back!"
was the duty of every man; that..." They interrupted him, for this
was the factory lad in the loose cloak. The moment they laid hands on
was the first against whom he directed his efforts, angrily shouted at
was the first he had attended in Russia. He knew that all the
was the governor's wife herself, who welcomed Rostov as a near relative
was the little princess, these tears, the cause of which she did not
was the only person really attached to him.
was there because it suited him to be. The ex-Minister Stein was there
was there on the hilltop, and kept constantly looking at the patches
was thinking only of himself and of how to get away quickly and save
was threateningly repeated and he heard the click of the man's musket as
was to accompany them to the ball.
was to be found "the cream of really good society, the bloom of the
was to explain the whole affair by word of mouth, besides delivering
was to get away.
was to him that she now spoke.
was told in Russian, German, and Czech by the crowd of fugitives who
was told that his turn would come in due course. After some others had
was told that the prince had gone to the nursery.
was told to go. He rose and tried to walk, but staggered and would have
was too far off, and for a man going a thousand miles it is absolutely
was too far separated from our right flank and the cavalry were all
was treating her in some new and unusual way.
was trying to find some relief after what had been done, but was not
was unable to accomplish all that she considered necessary.
was unable to stop him.
was under no obligation to meet, and did not rebuild his Moscow house
was undertaking nothing.
was unescorted, Denisov with his hussars had seized it by force. The
was very anxious to see him if only for a minute, and that someone from
was very far gone in the land of tenderness..." (alluding to a map of
was very fond of.
was very glad and wished to entertain him. It seemed as if I chattered
was vexed with himself for having stayed.
was wearing only trousers and a tattered shirt as black as soot. His
was well brought up, and had a pleasant voice; what she said was
was with Julie Karagina, the daughter of excellent and virtuous parents,
was with this that Daniel's voice was heard calling ulyulyu. The sounds
was wont to dispose of all difficulties.
was wont to do when Natasha was ill, then touched her forehead with her
was wounded.
was writing in haste from the field of battle before collecting full
was!"
was, as it were, a war trophy. Nicholas felt this, it seemed to him
was, dear fellows!" Karataev concluded and sat for a long time silent,
was, for something could be descried. On the right the Guards were
was, nor what was going on before her. As she looked and thought, the
was, this was not even unpleasant to him. Nothing mattered to him.
was, when he met the big coach just entering the town gates was appalled
was, with his rosy cheeks and dark eyebrows, and with what difficulty
was--did not struggle, and perhaps she was right. Nothing has been found
was.
was.
was. He asked his sister to forgive him for not having told her of his
washed it down with half a bottle of his favorite Bordeaux.
wasn't it so, your excellency?" and again Timokhin turned to the prince.
waste spaces with only stoves and chimney stacks still standing, and
waste the whole world, rises against us; these lawless men are gathered
watch and its hands point to ten, I hear the bells of the neighboring
watch the change in the tone and manners of the mammas burdened by
watched for it too.
watched from the various roads by the fugitive Muscovites and by the
watched her. She did go first to her cousin.
watched him from the knoll.
watched him. She smiled, hid her face in her handkerchief, and remained
watched this slim, graceful countess, reared in silks and velvets and so
watchful eye on the young man who so alarmed her, noticed that he was
watching and it creaked very slightly as she disappeared behind it.
watching him, raised his eyes, and began to speak seriously:
watching the people who drove past and hurriedly glancing round at
watchmaker cannot open it, he can only adjust it by fumbling, and that
watchman's hut giving final orders. The infantry of the detachment
watchman's hut or it might be a cavern leading to the very depths of
watchword--shaft, Olmutz. What a nuisance that our squadron will be in
water across the road along which he was driving. Kutuzov looked at
water cart, painted green, stood in a shed; the paths were straight,
water is running on my seat! I'll go and look for shelter. The rain
water over his hands. "For just one moment I didn't look after you...
water that had trickled to their bodies and not admit the fresh cold
water that was leaking in under their seats, their knees, and at the
water, but Natasha did not respond to her.
waters of the distant Danube shone. And fairer still were the faraway
waved his feet about very rapidly. (He was Duport, who received sixty
wavering clouds of smoke rose over the Square.
waves of the great movement abate, and on the calm surface eddies are
waving it above his head cried:
way Pierre was told of the death of his brother-in-law Anatole and of
way and manner of farming which produced good results.
way back from the anteroom he would pass through the conservatory and
way for him to obtain a right over her was to marry her. The elderly
way from Moscow, and so on. But all this was only talk; in reality
way from the Dorogomilov suburb to the Kremlin, and was now sitting in
way her brother had taken the news of Natasha's faithlessness.
way in which he danced the mazurka, Nicholas ran up to Natasha:
way is nearer."
way of saving Russia. Everything came about fortuitously. The armies
way of these men, and he would have got clear had they continued at the
way on the bench where she had seated herself on arriving. She was
way rumors fly from Petersburg to Moscow, especially such false ones as
way through his spectacles.
way to Moscow and they still did so at the end of the battle as at the
way we shall be saying there is no God--nothing!" shouted Nicholas,
way with the old man to buy the pistol at the Sukharev market that he
way! I am glad to have her. Sit down and talk. About Mikhelson's army
way! Make way!"
way), the historians forget that nothing could have saved his army, for
way, and far from spoiling the high tone and general impression of the
way, and, blushing far more than Boris, began to speak with a feeling of
way, because he wished to fulfill his duty and earn fame as a great
way, inwardly he began a new life.
way, it seemed to him that he was tired out. He experienced a variety of
way, or we may soon bring the enemy to Moscow...
way, the rumors current among the people of an invasion by Antichrist,
way," said an officer.
way. At Tarutino Kutuzov received what was almost a reprimand from
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
we are conscious of, we feel ourselves to be free.
we are here. And it had to happen that we should meet at that ball.
we are interested in here," said the spirit of the place.
we arrive at absurdity, while by admitting its motion (which we do not
we call that freedom.
we can assist our Fatherland! I imagine," he went on, warming to his
we can foretell the result.
we combine in one simultaneous expression a whole series of consecutive
we do not understand.
we don't see it, or it is not at all witty," their expressions seemed
we find that a command can never be the cause of the event, but that a
we find that a command is executed only when it is related to a
we had not religion to console us life would be very sad. Why do you
we have a man!" said he, glancing sternly and significantly round at
we have no Prater here..."
we have thrown up three redoubts there, very strong ones. The left
we may consider, we always regard it as the result partly of man's free
we may make to ourselves the connection between the man and the external
we might say that it was not an historic phenomenon (which is the
we must keep some force to reach the frontier with, and that he would
we must watch the movements of all the prominent animals moving on all
we only dreamed it or were told about him."
we ourselves should not have done so, just as people speak today. But
we parted. Why are we not together as we were last summer, in your big
we quarreled? And it was always my fault. Always mine. And what we
we reach our quarters."
we really lost? Master!..."
we say that this is so because it is unthinkable otherwise, or in other
we shall all have to take part in a greater and more serious duel, and
we should attack their line of communication. He began explaining his
we should have reached a definition of inevitability by the laws of
we should probably have defended the Shevardino Redoubt--our left
we to argue? We cannot comprehend either the Emperor's aims or his
we to continue firing?" he asked.
we watch the ants round their ruined heap, the tenacity, energy, and
we were fighting for Russian soil, and that there was a spirit in the
we were retreating from Sventsyani we dare not touch a stick or a wisp
we who are such fools. If you have no pity on me, have some for the
we who lost the battle of Pultusk. In short, we retreat after the battle
we'll drive to the Super-Rogue's. I suppose you'll have everything new.
we'll give you some food, only let us know whether you are an honest
we'll rest. The Tsar won't forget your service. It is hard for you, but
we'll set off."
we're getting it still worse," said Nesvitski. "But sit down and have
weak that it was out of the question to move her to the country, and
weak, and alone, with no ground to stand on.
weak, and others had died for want of fodder. It seemed that no horses
weak, unentrenched Russian wing?"
weakened in Moscow, and do so only because the results did not justify
weaker than a company. The relative strength of bodies of troops can
weaker than those of the enemy, but, as a result of the loss of the
weakness but dimly felt that he could not overcome it and that his
weakness tied him to the spot; he wished to get up and go away, but
weakness which assailed him at this touching recollection.
weakness--the one to which he had confessed when admitted to the
wealth had influenced Nicholas' choice. She could not find fault with
wealth of Moscow and the strength of its plunderers was destroyed. But
wealth, and being in the habit of lording it over these people, he
wealth, freedom, and enlightenment of the people, how is it that Louis
wealthy heiress and also by the fact that the older she grew the less
wealthy heiress through the death of the last of her brothers.
wealthy match, and now he's half crazy."
weapon) and looked now at the superior officers and now back at the men
wear military uniforms, and he who kills most people receives the
wear on the left arm. Several churches of different denominations are
wear warm clothes, which were designed for that purpose. That is what
weariness of tone, "it is almost impossible for me to do what you ask;
wearing a blue swallow-tail coat, shoes and stockings, and was perfumed
wearing a dress such as was then fashionable, cut very low at front and
wearing a gray peasant coat and a white knitted cap.
wearing a short jacket, bast shoes, and a Kazan hat, was approaching
wearing a woman's cloak and had a shawl tied woman fashion round his
wearing scarves and all their decorations, not only the elegant, pomaded
wearing the Cross of St. George, awarded to soldiers for bravery in
wearing the uniform of a general with sash over his shoulder, entered
wearing uniforms, stars, and ribbons, while ladies in satin and ermine
wearisome Christmas congratulations from neighbors and servants, and the
wearisome and artificial obligation. She could not write, because she
weary anyone.
weary ears to the ever-recurring sounds, distinguishing the whistle
weary faces, were sitting at the table eating and drinking.
weary of the campaign, felt at the sight of an army blocking their road
weary, and distracted air, though at the same time he was haughty and
weary, making his way past the baggage wagons, rode in search of the
weather had cleared again since noon and the sun was descending brightly
weceives evewyone, thank God!... It's awful with those sausage eaters!
wecollect what bad use I made of your lessons?"
weeks as he said, but had remained there nearly seven weeks and was
weeks near a totally ruined and deserted German village.
weeks, and months of his life passed in as great a rush and were as much
weeping. Tears filled the thin man's eyes, and the fat otkupshchik
weighs on him increases.
weight of his knapsack.
weight.
welcome.
welfare and civilization of humanity in general, by which is usually
welfare of his peoples--at the time when Napoleon in exile was drawing
welfare of his soul is at stake. Ah, it is awful: the duties of a
welfare," thought he.
well I will give you my hand to kiss. Not till then!" she said. And
well again now, isn't she?" Julie asked Pierre with a knowing smile.
well and have the greatest respect for them."
well and in that case badly. He behaved admirably at the beginning of
well and liked so much. She turned away and suddenly remembered all that
well and was as like as two peas to every other evening party with its
well and, in particular, drinks well. "So do come and dine with us!" he
well as a new dress of her own made of "metallic gauze," which she had
well as anybody," he said, and advanced with a single division.
well as by the proximity of the enemy, resolved to advance. All his men
well as children, popped out from the back entrance to have a look at
well as for those who protect one: higher than that life and truth there
well as the false paper money which flooded Moscow lost its value. The
well disposed toward them all, but was now instinctively on his
well how to arrange a feast on an open-handed, hospitable scale, and
well known, so-called sophism of the ancients consisting in this, that
well remembered that seven afterwards. He laid down the seven of hearts,
well remembers, and which was... not fully successful, only because our
well yet and still weak, went to Moscow with Petya and the rest of the
well, as all the connoisseurs who heard her said: "It is not trained,
well, both the appeal to the people and the news from the army. In the
well, never mind, here you are."
well, only a little bruised just here," he added, pointing with a
well--quite well."
well--we must manage as best we can!"
well-brushed clothes. There was a masculine odor and a smell of tobacco.
well-known Prince Bolkonski who had to retire from the army under the
well-known, but quite false, conception. All the historians describe the
well-lit anteroom where they took off their cloaks without the aid of
well-supplied district and the parallel road was open to him along
well-to-do peasant Matthew Ermishin, who with his family had carted
well. The visitors were invited to supper in the drawing room, and the
welled up in Pierre. He felt the tears trickle under his spectacles and
went about all that morning as though facing a cocked and loaded gun and
went about among the mummers without removing her spectacles, peering
went away, taking what they could and abandoning their houses and half
went away. It seemed to Pierre that even the prince was disconcerted.
went away. Natasha with a gay, coquettish smile talked to him, and
went back to her father in the other box, now quite submissive to the
went by. Then suddenly a terrible shriek--it could not be hers, she
went in to dinner. He was seated in the place of honor between two
went in to the countess. In all his encounters with his son, the count
went in with Nicholas. After them other couples followed, filling the
went into Natasha's room with it in her hand.
went into the maids' room. There an old maidservant was grumbling at a
went nowhere and spent whole days in reading Thomas a Kempis, whose book
went off into a good humored, unexpected, elderly laugh.
went on asking.
went on in Russia at that time a special recklessness was noticeable, an
went on of itself. The killed were dragged from the front, the wounded
went on severely, as though there were something wrong about it which
went on, "is that our sovereign has given him full powers over all
went on, addressing his son and patting Pierre on the shoulder. "A fine
went on, and then paused ("Do you see," shouted the youth victoriously,
went on, between gasps of laughter: "And the whole world knew...."
went on, crooking a finger, "education and so forth; that is, you want
went on, testily pushing away a little table without looking at her.
went on, with a smile at her own enthusiasm. "We belong to different
went on. "If we are ordered to die, we must die. If we're punished, it
went out accompanied by his family. Three well-fed roans stood ready
went out into the vestibule.
went out, following her aunt.
went over his vices in his mind, not knowing to which of them to give
went quickly forward, missing the trodden path and stepping into
went round the study, approached the cupboard in which the manuscripts
went round to all the brothers. Pierre would have liked to subscribe all
went to her father's room at the usual hour, Mademoiselle Bourienne and
went to his own room.
went to the Sparrow Hills with Madame Jacquot?... It's such an age..."
went to the couch on which he slept.
went to the door.
went to the looking glass and arranged her hair and scarf. Looking at
went to the middle of the ballroom to sing, but with quite a different
went to the mirror, and gazed a long time at his own face. Then he would
went to the nursery.
went up to her and began singing, waving his arms about.
went up to his wife, who sat with her head bent low over her embroidery
went up to the harp that stood there in a corner. He took off its cloth
went with her into the unoccupied room.
went with unusually hurried steps down the long corridor leading to the
went, angry and scowling and without answering questions as to where he
went. The Emperor was following him, and Bennigsen had hastened on
wept secretly at night and did not go to her mother in the evenings. She
wept too. They wept because they were friends, and because they were
wept. She saw her brother now as he had been at the moment when he took
were Russians.
were a few dozen miles separating it from its goal. Every soldier in
were a mob of marauders, each carrying a quantity of articles which
were accomplished. Then she told him that she knew of a splendid girl
were again doing something by the post, their trembling hands impeding
were alone, Rostov felt for the first time that he could not look Boris
were already close to the wall, and from the gallery resounded the
were always some. Then she had dinner, a substantial and appetizing meal
were and exchanging glances with Natasha, who was sitting opposite.
were and only asked them to allay his grief.
were angels somewhere there, and have been here, and that is why we
were as usual laughing.
were assembled near the round tea table at which Sonya presided beside
were assuming too free a character must be stopped.
were attained: the transition from retreat to advance, an exposure of
were beds in these rooms and the sick and wounded officers were lying or
were being made for her sake, and to know that she had to take medicine
were being taken with them.)
were both particularly happy and gay. That evening, proud of Dolokhov's
were bringing in jugs and basins, hot water for shaving, and their
were broad, but very plump, soft, and white. Such whiteness and softness
were brothers.
were burning and pictures of knights with short beards hung on the
were but a given amount of animation between them and as the wife's
were by half the world, and so he had to repudiate truth, goodness, and
were called for and received from the footman by bare girlish arms from
were carrying were too much for them.
were casual guests--chiefly young men, among whom were Denisov, Rostov,
were constantly shaping themselves in his mind, arising from the
were continually kissing and saying tender things to one another and
were crossing themselves. Rostov no longer looked at the colonel, he
were crowding to warm themselves at campfires. Near Dobroe an immense
were current. But not listening to what Firhoff was saying, he was
were destroyed in their essence.
were discernible, and in the hollow the dying campfire gleamed red.
were divided at the commencement of the campaign. We tried to unite
were doing something near the pit, with pale faces and trembling hands.
were doing.
were either more or less than 666. Once when making such calculations he
were especially striking. For the most part they sat quietly in their
were everywhere. Pierre pushed forward as fast as he could, and the
were evidently flurried and intimidated by the directions and shouts of
were excellent drawings. And in my dream I knew that these drawings
were firing at our men. Prince Bagration bowed his head as a sign
were flocking in to look at him. Prince Bagration was thanking the
were flying and perishing and not a single general was left in the rear
were for the most part not the coarse and indecent saws soldiers
were forced to bend it back and hastily entrench it where it chanced to
were forever washed away from his imagination and memory the agitating
were four of them. They rushed at me with their little swords. So I went
were full of officials who had been summoned or had come for orders.
were given in small doses), but they were useful, necessary, and
were greater and more resourceful, Nicholas felt himself cornered. This
were growing up and dying with no idea of God and truth beyond
were hardly heard in comparison with the noise of the firing outside the
were heard in the room. Natasha looked round at her, and then, red
were heard on all sides. But the liveliest attention was attracted by
were heard or not.
were heard saying as they gazed on the charred ruins. "All beyond the
were heard through the firing, but it was impossible to tell what was
were his worst enemy, firmly fixed his eyes directly on his face.
were hunting and let his man snatch a fox their dogs had chased.
were ill at ease and Prince Andrew felt that he was a visitor for whose
were ill-clad, exhausted, and had lost a third of their number in
were in a hurry to show the changes that had taken place in them.
were in animated talk over their tea about the events of the day and the
were in any way unsuitable. But on the contrary, my papa and mamma
were in his own heart. "But who, after all, is doing this? They are all
were in his place..."
were in retreat he ordered an advance, though at every hundred paces he
were in the carriage. "He hardly recognizes anybody."
were in them. She leaned over to her brother and kissed him, slightly
were intended for quite other conditions, they were for the most part
were kept, and took out what had once been one of the most important,
were kindling glowing fires in a hollow of the forest where the French
were kindly attentive and sadly interrogative.
were laws directing its movement and that of the other planets. There
were leaving to join their regiment after Epiphany. About twenty people
were like those of a conjuror who always expects his trick to be found
were lips seeking a kiss.
were locked and the shutters up. The streets and lanes were deserted.
were mentioned of how the private physician of the Queen of Spain had
were moving about, in front and behind moved lines of troops; but why,
were moving in and out among the Russian troops and served as heralds
were moving in the same direction. Every soldier felt glad to know that
were not in very good condition), and instantly the squares that had up
were not interested in the import of the words spoken, but rather in
were not looting, that is--were arrested, and I among them."
were not many such gallant sons of the fatherland out there as he. And
were not my duty I would not talk to you for a moment"), was listening
were not on leash darted after the hounds and the hare. All the hunt,
were not to be overburdened with labor, women while nursing their babies
were not to be sent to work, assistance was to be given to the serfs,
were now any difficulties the whole fault lay in the fact that his plan
were now moving forward.
were observed and the Emperor was the first to set that example,
were of the same age and both handsome fellows, though not alike. Boris
were officiating that day with the bishop. The clerk several times used
were old, creep slowly about without trying to hinder the robbers,
were on our side. Our enormous forces, undoubtedly superior to
were only 217 sick and stragglers. Everything was in good order except
were passing that morning, then into the distance across the river, then
were passing through a crowd at a fair. He pushed through, evidently
were passing, and a clear black sky appeared. Sometimes it seemed as
were present, including Dolokhov and Denisov.
were pronounced, Pierre, who had so long been considering his career,
were put there to be slaughtered. Bennigsen on his own authority ordered
were puzzled as to what Balashev's tone suggested. "If there is a point
were quarrels, his kindly smile and well-timed jests reconciled the
were raised to the count.
were rejoicing at his happiness! And such a lofty angelic soul as young
were relit and he was told that he would see the full light; the bandage
were reporting. By long years of military experience he knew, and with
were rigged up for the officers, caldrons were being boiled, and muskets
were right, as were those too who canonized him and died a martyr's
were said to have shown themselves was even dangerous.
were seen, but columns of smoke rose on all sides, and all Moscow as far
were sent to the crossroads to guide him over the country road with its
were several Frenchmen present, among them Metivier who from the time
were shouting something loudly and incoherently. A gallant-looking
were sitting and one was lying. One of those sitting up in the cart had
were sitting on some feather beds. Evidently these fugitives were
were slipping off but unable to let go of the mane and reins, he
were smiling to himself at some amusing thought.
were solely engaged in sacrificing themselves, saving their fatherland,
were standing outside the Sloboda Palace.
were staring at their mother with a look of stupefaction on their pale
were such as might have had a particular charm for Petya at his age, but
were surrounded by Cossacks who had hurried up. "We won't take them!" he
were swimming and drowning in this river under the eyes of the man who
were symmetrically placed on the green silk quilt, the palms downward.
were talking secrets, sat down beside them. Vera, having noticed Prince
were the cause of the Russian failures, it is still incomprehensible
were the cause of the conflagrations. After marching through a number
were the center of groups which even strangers approached respectfully
were there, only disorganized crowds of troops of various kinds. He
were there," thought Rostov. "In myself alone and in that sunshine there
were there.
were those of the orderlies who were packing up; one voice, probably a
were thousands of inhabitants deceived into believing that Moscow would
were to abandon the wounded, many of them dragged themselves after
were to be the first to descend the heights to attack the French right
were to come in line with them, 102 guns in all, were to open fire and
were to land at Naples, and how a total force of five hundred thousand
were to take some of the wounded away, shouts, curses, and blows could
were to watch Kutuzov's actions and report upon them.
were too enthusiastic and emphatic for the occasion and were therefore
were too one-sidedly personal and brain-spun. And there was the former
were torn from the regiment in a minute and the slain were continually
were trying to pass over in silence simply because another, a very poor
were tuned to a high pitch and this was too simple and needlessly
were turned against the ten-gun battery. Tushin's companion officer
were using their ramrods, others putting powder on the touchpans or
were very insufficient and obscure, no one made any rejoinder.
were waiting for them to come out.
were walking, driving past, and settling down all around. The sound
were well known to him. Count Arakcheev's anteroom had quite a special
were written on the twentieth, and during all this time not only has
were, it is true, some rigid individuals unable to rise to the height of
were, the latter would probably have left him, but the man's animated
weren't in the study. We began disputing--Pierre and I--and I lost my
weren't told anything. There were some twenty of us lying there. We had
west--Paris--and subsides.
western forces push toward the east several times in 1805, 1806, 1807,
wet cloaks, but they did not sleep for a long time; now they exchanged
wet face against her.
wet with the night's rain; the drooping branches of the birches, also
wet, painfully sobbing child to himself as tenderly as he could and ran
wet, swayed in the wind and flung down bright drops of water to one
what He has been pleased to conceal from us, the sooner will He
what I did."
what I expected and feared."
what I have seen. The troops are in complete disorder..."
what I wrote to Joseph Alexeevich. I told my wife that I begged her to
what Pierre had told them. Princess Mary did not express her opinion of
what a pity."
what a plight our Anatole..."
what a strange frenzy one experiences during an attack," Prince Andrew,
what an account of everything might be Nicholas knew even less than the
what are your commands?"
what awaited her. She did not even cry when, on taking leave, he kissed
what character the war would take. Some disputed his arguments, others
what constitutes the essence of these two conceptions, the philosophy
what convinces, that is what has convinced me," said Prince Andrew.
what had been said to him and following these verbal fireworks with
what had been the drawing room, and another, on the right, to the study.
what had happened to her, and suddenly remembering Prince Andrew she
what had happened to her, but was unable either to understand what
what had happened, and expressed their readiness to punish the culprits,
what had happened. He alone then understood the meaning of the French
what happened--the insane, convulsive stampede of Napoleon's army
what happiness it would be to die--not in saving the Emperor's life (he
what harm is there in that?" and she rose (everybody else got up too)
what have you done to me?" it still seemed to say, and Prince Andrew
what he did hear he understood that the Emperor spoke of the danger
what he dreaded more than anything in the world--to ridicule; but his
what he had acquired. Like a monkey which puts its paw into the narrow
what he had felt at the Sloboda Palace during the Emperor's visit--a
what he intended to accomplish or had accomplished; in general he said
what he must do and how he should answer, Willarski only replied that
what he said and would have passed on, but Chernyshev introduced him to
what he said.
what he should do on his estates.
what he vill, but I cannot sacrifice my hussars... Bugler, sount ze
what he was laughing at. Everything her father did inspired her with
what he was saying flitted through her mind. She thought of her nephew.
what he was to do. The coming of these visitors annoyed him. "What are
what is bad and what is good in history: some people regard giving a
what is certain is that that girl is so charming, so original, that she
what is going on around them.
what is it I am attached to, Papa?" said Anatole, turning to his father
what is right and what is wrong. Men always did and always will err, and
what is there? Who is there?--there beyond that field, that tree, that
what is unknown we call free will. Free will is for history only an
what it is to be left a widow without means and with a son you love
what it must be for her, poor thing, after what she has been used to,
what it was ein Mann zu sein. * Vera at the same time smiling with a
what looked like a squadron of horsemen in various uniforms. Two of them
what minuteness, what knowledge of the locality, what foresight for
what of it! I hope we'll get better acquainted," and he pressed Boris'
what pleased the sovereign.
what reasoning the historians reach the conclusion that this maneuver
what she needed. While attending to him she bore the anxiety about her
what she really is. Was I mistaken before, or am I mistaken now? No, she
what she wanted. In my perplexity I did not know whose aid and advice
what she was doing, and then went up to her mother and stood without
what the Emperor is! It is I, Ramballe, who tell you so.... I assure you
what the Emperor was pleased to say at the Council? Can all that make me
what the government is for. You'd better listen to what people are
what the nobility had been convened for, the talk became undecided and
what the way was prepared for his activity. If we have a large range
what these men, who were dragging something out, were about; but seeing
what they had lived through and experienced could not be expressed in
what they said, but did not understand the meaning of the words and
what they told her, and convinced that say what she might she would
what they were doing, though they would have been glad to leave off,
what they were saying, she softly left the room and went to the nursery.
what they were to do next. "Am I taken prisoner or have I taken him
what those society women are, and women in general! My father is right.
what to do with his hands; he was more accustomed to walk over a plowed
what to do, and glanced inquiringly at his guide. Anna Mikhaylovna made
what to him was precious and sacred.
what was asked. All that would be interesting if we recognized a divine
what was being reported to him. The tone of the conversation was such as
what was being said by one or other of these groups he generally turned
what was demanded and looked round as if asking whether there was
what was going on in the passage. Some women passing with quiet steps in
what was going to happen to them. They could not believe it because they
what was good of him.
what was happening in front.
what was happening in the Bald Hills district, where over a radius of
what was happening there; he was entirely absorbed in watching this fire
what was limited, petty, commonplace, and senseless. He had equipped
what was passing in his mind.
what was said in the letter might be true, or might at least seem to be
what was said of him; he was only glad that people were standing near
what was taking place, the lightning of hidden fire growing more and
what was taking place. There for several hours amid incessant cannon and
what was the will of these individuals themselves guided? the ancients
what was to come. He was driving to the Yauza bridge where he had heard
what went on, having made up his mind once for all that what he saw
what will follow.
what would please his master.
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
whatever may happen to him or to me, shall never cease to love him as
whatever the import of his work. It was not the question "What for?"
whatever--with a man who speaks to him, a book he reads, the work on
whatever.
wheels and pulleys is merely a slow and regular movement of the
wheels and the sensation of victory. Then he began to imagine that
wheels go round. A third asserts that the cause of its movement lies in
when "Uncle" returned from the chase. "Uncle" was fond of such music.
when Denisov explained that his purpose was to kill the French, and
when I am gone. You will find them useful."
when I have not a soldier left I shall put myself at the head of my
when I see him!"
when Kutuzov would be destroyed and the power pass to Bennigsen, or even
when Prince Andrew went to him and, trying to rouse him, began to
when behind the purpose for which they strive that of exercising their
when close to the hare's scut paused as if measuring the distance, so as
when did it all come about?" And here he was sitting by her side as her
when everyone is expecting the inevitable catastrophe, as many as
when footsteps or voices were heard did they look at one another, the
when half Russia had been conquered and the inhabitants were fleeing to
when he came that morning. Pierre had been taken by one set of soldiers
when he came to his senses. Balashev stood with downcast eyes, looking
when he did he abandoned himself entirely to his laughter, and after
when he felt the contact of the fresh air and heard the noise of the
when he had decided that to marry Helene would be a calamity and that he
when he makes his round, he will do anything for you."
when he met women--even probably he did not, for in general he thought
when he ran to save the child. She had now become quiet and, clinging
when he reached it he found it was a road. Having come out onto the road
when he said 'chosen already'? Is he glad of it or not? It is as if he
when he said one must believe in the possibility of happiness in order
when he said that," he remarked, repeating the words in Italian: "'Dio
when he slept. Nicholas suddenly moved and cleared his throat. And at
when he was being crushed, together with that of rapture, still further
when he was needed there--now when his part was played out, Kutuzov's
when he wished to speak contemptuously, and noticing Boris, Prince
when he would go. Pierre noticed this but could not go. He felt uneasy
when in reply to an invitation to dinner he had had to listen to an
when inviting him. The prospect of that dinner in the intimate home
when it joined the army in the field in the second half of the campaign,
when it seemed that the incomprehensible was revealing itself to her a
when it was worth while going to certain death, as now. Then there would
when killing Napoleon. "Well then, take me and execute me!" he went on,
when one of the aides-de-camp rode up to them.
when our men were not always getting full rations and the prisoners
when receiving friends for the first time in one's own house, "Uncle,"
when several voices shouted at it did it dart to one side and disappear
when she again smilingly said to him, "Well then, remember!" he drew her
when she began to speak passed through such transitions as she herself
when she reflected on the change. But when she was with Natasha she was
when she saw Pierre enter. Though he was certainly rather bigger than
when she stooped near to his mouth to catch what he said.
when she took her seat opposite and beamed upon him also with her
when she was not like that and when everything was light and gay. She
when speaking of him and of the year 1812 they always seem a little
when speaking to him that afternoon, "believe me I suffer no less than
when suddenly, clinking his spurs and spreading out his legs, he stopped
when the Frenchman began to cry.
when the army had got there, as the result of innumerable and varying
when the justification is no longer needed, and displaying to the whole
when the oak buds unfold, I cannot agree with the peasants that the
when the youthful Speranski was at the zenith of his fame and his
when their leave permits had been passed at the town gate and they had
when there was a war, like this one, it would be war! And then the
when they again heard an unexpectedly violent whistling which suddenly
when they encounter anyone who shows animation, is to flaunt their own
when they have no powers; this one had none.... The Austrians let
when they heard the clatter of three horses' hoofs on the road not far
when they locked him up at night in a stable. Of all that he himself
when they rushed from the covert... the horse worth a thousand rubles
when they saw his looks.
when they want to prove something else, say that power produces events.
when they went in. In her snug room, with lamps burning before the icon
when they were married, how their husbands would be friends, and how
when we know what is needed!" said he, trying to be heard above the
when with a foreboding of disaster she had remained at home against his
when with her--might "become womanish" as he termed it to himself--he
when women listen to him--not clever women who when listening either try
when you are going to this terrible war, and he is so old? Mademoiselle
when you please, and I give you my word of honor that no one shall dare
when you see them in their true colors! When you meet them in society it
when, after getting up at daybreak and spending the whole morning in the
when, seeing these girls, he realized the existence of other human
when, trying to comfort her, he had said that if he were not himself but
whence--a stern note of which all are conscious sounds in the moral
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
where Anisya Fedorovna had just stood. Something seemed to be laughing
where Denisov was sitting on the same chair by the clavichord with his
where Nicholas had placed the kiss.
where Pierre was met by his groom and coachman there was no room to be
where Tushin's guns were stationed was an unharnessed horse with a
where a wolf might come out. Having straightened his coat and fastened
where also some campfires were smoking and something black was visible.
where cattle were grazing, posthouses with stationmasters asleep in
where he could never have expected the enemy to be.
where he had been in the habit of putting up for the last thirty years.
where he had not been for a long time past. He went up to the gate.
where he stood.
where he was and what lay before him that very day.
where he was and what was expected of him. When he was informed that
where he was going, but why he was found near the fire? Who was he? they
where he was staying, and had been absurd, excited, and foolish in
where his regiment was stationed, and take him to visit Prince Nicholas
where his tea was handed to him; Milka, the old gray borzoi bitch
where it'll get rubbed? I don't like that way of doing things. Let it
where scarcely a day passes without conflagrations when the house owners
where she had sat down on arriving and paid no attention to her father's
where she was going and with whom. Having fallen into the line of
where the commander in chief was.
where the hottest musket fire and cannonade were heard. Suddenly he
where the loose covers had been removed from the furniture, a servant
where the oak is, but now we have withdrawn our left wing--now it is
where the protection of guards awaits you! You shall receive proper pay
where the rivals suddenly recognized one another; and the ladies looked
where the sleighs had been left, in a small clearing in the pine forest
where the steward had shown him in the accounts that the serfs' payments
where the steward's high bedstead stood with its patchwork quilt.
where there was no hope of soon taking part in a battle and had come to
where they had been before it had been evident that it was impossible
where they were now being taken and how far they would get that day. An
where they were to take him Pierre did not know: back to the coach house
where to haul it. They haul the log away, and it happens that this is
where to. "Is it possible to plan or think of anything now? Is it not
where to? It's one--let them sing!"
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
where what he had seen was.
where's Nicholas?"
where.
whereabouts. First he rings his bell fearlessly, but when he gets into
whereas it was perhaps not known, since the enemy was in movement.
whether Kuragin was alive. And he dared not inquire.
whether all or only half the things were left behind. Cases full of
whether he had no commission for him.
whether he lived with his wife or not?
whether he was still firm in his intention and determined to submit to
whether he would soon be back.
whether it was cheaper to live in Moscow or Odessa. Natasha sat down,
whether it was firmly plaited, and grasping his by the hand. "The house
whether she ought to write, tormented her. Now that he was already an
whether the guests had all observed her father's hostile attitude toward
whether the samovar was really wanted.
whether they want rain or fine weather: "The wind has blown the clouds
whether they were as contented as he was, and people felt pleased by his
whether things would go well or ill under French rule in Moscow. It was
whether to abandon Moscow or defend it; whereas, with the Russian army
whether to go to meet him or to wait till he came up.
whether what he said was very witty or very stupid. He was dressed in
which (as it seemed to him) plainly forbids remarriage while the husband
which Count Lauriston informs me, as a reason for this aggression, that
which I not only cannot address but which I cannot even express in
which Ilya Rostov blushed with self-conscious pleasure), the footmen
which Kutuzov afterwards pursued him--this unnecessary retreat along
which Napoleon rode, horses and men were lying in pools of blood, singly
which Pierre promised to communicate to the Petersburg Brothers what
which Pierre spoke of that dead father, and from the careful, reverent
which Prince Andrew had been when he examined the battlefield.
which Princess Mary meekly submitted, just as her hair had been arranged
which Rostov sat.
which Rostov was serving.
which all vital organic and elemental events occur. And the botanist
which all was clear, but nothing eternal or mysterious.
which alone had maintained its order in the wood and, having lain in
which also oppressed him.
which always angered the countess when it was not properly cleaned,
which always grows by country roadsides became clearly visible, still
which ancient historians regarded as representing the progress of
which are from of old; turn not Thy face from us, but be gracious to our
which aroused his own pity.
which at Borodino for the first time the hand of an opponent of stronger
which at least half of them would be left on the field. After passing a
which attracted him. He very readily took up Boris' cause and went with
which burned ever more brightly and which he felt was flaming up in the
which by this time there were now Russian and now French soldiers,
which can convince me, dear friend--life and death are what convince.
which can only cause harm."
which changed his appearance for the worse. There was something naively
which constantly conflict with one another.
which cover the enemy's front. For this object it is necessary that...
which creaked under his weight.
which emerged from a dark, gold-embroidered, gauze gown, talked to her
which every Freemason should cultivate in himself. These virtues were:
which expressed joy for himself, severity for the regiment, and welcome
which fitted him badly like a fancy costume, seemed familiar to Prince
which had been moved forward and was in action, deafening them with the
which had been particularly revived and strengthened by his late tour.
which had caught in his cloak. It was an old-fashioned saber of a kind
which had drawn nearer and was increasing in strength, Alpatych hurried
which had laws she had not fathomed.
which had said: "The Pavlograd hussars?"
which he always deceived himself. The question was whether he could ever
which he ceased coming to the Rostovs'.
which he could not solve and yet could not cease to ask himself. It was
which he found himself.
which he found himself. Anna Pavlovna was obviously serving him up as a
which he gave the order only because he thought it was expected of him,
which he had come out was thronged with caleches, carriages of all
which he had entered. When the Rostovs came to Petersburg Boris called
which he had experienced as previously, all the inner struggle to
which he had gone to Petersburg to consult with his new friend Prince
which he had hoped to reawaken by caressing the boy and taking him on
which he had just been speaking. She thought he was speaking of Russia,
which he had not till then been aware).
which he had prepared himself, "or shall I remain with your honor?"
which he had reckoned up to ten thousand, but that now, as he vaguely
which he had worn on his Italian campaign, sat on his small gray Arab
which he himself did not understand.
which he is engaged, even with the air he breathes or the light that
which he listened to Pierre, especially when he spoke with joyful
which he was accustomed (the honours awarded to Prince Prozorovski,
which he was evidently in need. A further proof to Pierre of his own
which he was making the bast shoe, and two little girls, running out
which he was so fond, and moved with his mother and Sonya to a small
which heaved with convulsive sobs.
which hides its head in a bush in order not to be seen: he hung his head
which his father kept a large establishment.
which is hidden in heaven," said Pierre.
which it followed that the limit fixed for Napoleon's power had come
which it had been decided not to move but to wait. Yet there was no
which it is difficult to justify."
which language she always felt that her case did not sound quite clear,
which large masses of French were advancing.
which lay under his head. Nicholas turned with a tender smile on his
which lie the ashes of your ancestors! I shall follow the army. I have
which made a certain sensation, the count exchanged glances with the
which marauding and insubordination were now regarded, degradation to
which means the All. Talks with Brother V. strengthen, refresh, and
which mingled in his imagination with the roll of the drums.
which not one battle had been won, and in which not a flag, or cannon,
which now, seeing how near they were to the French, he seemed to have
which occasional puffs were blown by an invisible smoker.
which of us has not weaknesses of his own?"
which particularly inspires in them curiosity, awe, and even love--a
which penetrated into the very depths of her heart, it was impossible
which perhaps the fate of mankind depends. But since this mystery is of
which possesses qualities resembling those of the symbol."
which produces events. They do not recognize it as a power inherent in
which ran along the ruts in streams.
which results from the conception of freedom? That is a question for
which said nothing of when he would return. In 1810 he received letters
which seemed to him clever while they formed in his mind became foolish
which seemed to him dazzlingly red, and at the feeble, round-shouldered
which seemed to him stupid, and made forcible and sharp comments on what
which seemed to rise out of the sea of mist and on which the Russian
which seemed to say that he was not blaming anyone, but could not help
which seemed to stand rather than lie down on his massive shoulders. He
which several others joined but which bored Pierre. When the music began
which she did not admit. From early in the morning, wearing a dressing
which she had been listening.
which she had experienced with Kuragin that it never entered her head
which she had heard before.
which she had to reply; the room in which little Nicholas had been put
which she imagined must be the same toward everyone as it was to her.
which she neither wished, nor could, nor considered it necessary, to
which she received indications)-before parting with her money insisted
which she was accustomed to live and loved to live. So with a joyful
which so many blunders were committed by both sides that these wars
which sparks continually fall for several days. A town built of wood,
which stood exactly the same kind of cakes in a silver cake basket as
which stood on her right. It reflected a weak, ungraceful figure and
which struck Pierre especially by contrast with his own dejection and
which swarmed a crowd of Frenchmen. At first Pierre did not realize
which the Duc de Bassano based his refusal to deliver them to him would
which the Guards prided themselves), the officers on foot and at their
which the Kiev regiment was stationed, in the hollow where the rivulet
which the Rostovs always attended. He was pointedly attentive to Sonya
which the base with the largest diameter consists of the rank and file;
which the doctors recommended long ago. I hope it will cure him. You
which the man was placed whose action is being judged, and according
which the mob tried to end the work that had been begun, those who were
which the serfs' manorial labor had been diminished, and heard the
which the whole household had assembled. At that table were his mother,
which these histories are filled--admitting that nations are governed by
which they all agreed in approving, Prince Andrew began to express a
which they had given out to the prisoners to make up into boots and
which they had put him and turned him over again confused his thoughts,
which they hurriedly sought plausible pretexts. When he had gone, taking
which they were all more or less vaguely conscious.
which they were all to be converted; then of some proclamation of the
which they were present, and went to Iogel's balls for young people
which though they embarrassed Pierre awakened a joyful feeling in the
which to Prince Andrew seemed so natural, namely, that it is after all
which to attack and defeat the enemy should he cross the Lech. Also,
which to hang the prince's favorite topic, he looked inquiringly at the
which to try historic characters and events; let us say that Alexander
which turned its head and laid its ears back, he shrank from the driving
which unites in itself the strength of all the former ones, and aid me
which usually follows after a serious and heartfelt talk. It is
which was almost unentrenched.
which was carpeted with red baize, and not only gendarmes but dozens of
which was hidden by curtains, struck her head against it, and rushed
which was littered with books and papers. The princess was as untidy as
which was never to be seen on it in a drawing room. His eyes too seemed
which was not clear to him, to question his chief steward, to visit his
which was offered him. Telyanin for some reason had been transferred
which was pitched that day on the steep left bank of the Niemen, and
which was presumably somewhere in the same neighborhood. And so it was
which was talked of in the town, and was it true? Pierre laughed and
which was that it had been impossible to fight before Moscow, and that
which was usually toward seven o'clock when she had had an after-dinner
which was written in French. He read without understanding half of it,
which will have forty guns in all directed against it.
which with the masses needs explanation. It is possible to understand
which, as commands, were related to events, historians have assumed
which, he said, swarmed with hares. Nicholas agreed, and the hunt, now
which, in accord with the Club custom, he had given up to the hall
which, preceded by the clergy, would go to the Three Hills; others
which--in spite of the purity and loftiness of his inner man--he does
whiffs of crowded life, comes an odor of emptiness and decay mingling
while Kutuzov is described by foreigners as a crafty, dissolute, weak
while Nicholas rose, clutching his head, and left the room.
while Prince Andrew on the contrary, taking no part in the war and
while a patient is being strapped to the operating table. "The matter is
while at every third beat his partner's velvet dress spread out and
while carts were passing out of the gate. Pierre turned away with
while drinking his tea, remained on the top of the brick oven in the
while dying he expressed the love his actions had proved.
while giving orders to the steward, and at last stopped, while Mitenka
while he laughed the expression on his face clearly said: "Yes... it's
while he tried to prove to Pierre that in his actions there was no
while looking about him. Standing among the crowd of peasants, Pierre
while meeting my remorse with some forced bravado!"
while on the scaffolding, in the midst of a talk explaining the future
while others sought some extraordinary explanation of so strange an
while still keeping his arms extended, raised one hand with the reins.
while the borzoi whips, with a cry of "A-tu!" galloped across the field
while the less their direct participation in the action itself, the more
while the majority were interested in Helene's good fortune and in the
while the other was warming; and that when he had put on tight dancing
while the poorer remained and burned and destroyed what was left.
while the priest with a goose feather anointed the boy's little red and
while thinking that he was acting on his own volition, to perform
while under the supervision of the countess and the solicitude of the
while without any definite opinion on the subject of the war and without
while, she suddenly hears someone coming... a sleigh drives up with
while, sometimes even accompanied him on his carousals, and gave him
while. The night was dark and damp. They could not see the horses, but
whim, and did not dare absent himself for any length of time, except on
whims and secret ill-will, and helped Nicholas to conceal their poverty
whip in the sand when a caleche dashed up noisily. A man in a general's
whip who had sighted the hare.
whipped. "As soon as Napoleon's interpreter had spoken," says Thiers,
whippers-in. Besides the family, there were eight borzoi kennelmen
whirling black ball, and his sudden rush of passionate love of life.
whirring in rapid flight and alighting on the ground, a shell dropped
whisper, "everyone knows Count Cyril's reputation.... He has lost count
whisper, evidently meaning to wound his sister.
whisper, with a strangely unsmiling face: "Come to dinner tomorrow... in
whisper:
whispered among themselves behind his back. All along the road groups of
whispered in French.
whispered just above Telyanin's ear.
whispered that Augustin had been forbidden to leave, that traitors had
whispered to herself. A smile lit up her face but at the same time she
whispered to one another, casting significant looks at him with a kind
whispered, "straight to the Lyadov uplands."
whispered, and taking up his glass, he rose. All were silent, waiting
whispered.
whispering, not pausing an instant.
whispers and as a great secret.
whispers, and, whenever anyone went into or came from the dying man's
whistle and hiss of the flames, the excited shouts of the people, and
whistling of projectiles, and the piteous moaning of the cook, which
white and he could not control the feverish twitching of his lower jaw.
white daylight of his clear perception of death. "There they are, those
white foam on the waves of the Enns, an officer, in a cloak and with
white gauze over pink silk slips, with roses on their bodices and their
white hands with an air of calm importance.
white hands--the fate of Russia. Prince Andrew was struck by the
white head twitched with the effort. At last he rose, kissed the icon as
white horse followed by his suite, and said something in passing: "What
white horse, followed by an enormous suite of discontented generals who
white horse, was Prince Bagration. Prince Andrew stopped, waiting for
white horse. One of the generals was reporting to him where the guns and
white houses? He even thought something moved on that white spot. "I
white muslin, she returned home after communion, for the first time for
white one, the white one!"
white plumes in his hat rode a bobtailed chestnut horse, the other who
white ruffle, outlining his rather long face which was lit up from
white thing with the lamp inside was a human skull with its cavities and
white trunk and branches, and above it shone the moon, nearly at its
white vest, and the St. Andrew ribbon over his shoulder. He was riding
white, muscular flesh. The officer, Timokhin, with his red little nose,
white, strong teeth which showed in two unbroken semicircles when he
white--as white as birchbark--and some of them are such fine fellows,
whiteness, "the peasants at Mozhaysk were saying that when they began
whites glittering and rolling as he waved his sheathed saber in a small
whither, and who they were, it was impossible to make out. These sights
who advised hurried preparations for a removal to Kazan of the court and
who always kept close to her, by Michael, a huntsman, and by a groom
who asked as long as he had anything to give. Formerly he had been in a
who assume that the collective will of the people is delegated to
who at the front had the power to annihilate him, a lieutenant of the
who because of those tears quite forgave Natasha's joy.
who believed in a science of war with immutable laws--laws of oblique
who came from the field of battle, and of those who stood around him,
who came to congratulate, and who constantly succeeded one another in
who choose their opinions like their clothes according to the fashion,
who commits such a crime always knows just where that welfare lies. And
who committed the action, and seems more free and less inevitable to one
who could therefore be of use to him. He liked Petersburg and despised
who dealt the blow, the look of silent, timid reproach that boy in the
who did the actual fighting.
who discussed Russia's position at the time involuntarily introduced
who does not know it. In all these cases the conception of freedom
who ducked low as a cannon ball flew over.
who entered the room and glanced uneasily around, evidently expecting
who evidently understood his case and wished him nothing but good,
who finds that the apple falls because the cellular tissue decays and so
who for some unknown reason threatened to trample them under his horse's
who formerly reflected the movement of the masses by ordering wars,
who got across the river fled farther. Their supreme chief donned a
who guided the Club's opinion reappeared, and everybody began speaking
who had attacked the Russian army in order to drive it from its position
who had been arrested with Pierre. "All right, you can tell all about it
who had been moving slowly, shouted, "Stop!" calling in the hounds,
who had been regarded with patronizing condescension when he was an
who had been robbed and was in rags and did not know how to get out of
who had brought a letter from his wife, the Countess Helene, he felt
who had come into the room unnoticed by anyone, stood there and wiped
who had come up to the cot with noiseless steps, lifted the curtain,
who had crossed the Vienna bridge, and encumbered by his baggage and
who had distinguished himself and were pleased with their
who had entered the bedroom to report to the Emperor the number of
who had entered the hall after him (they had met at the last post
who had evidently just arrived, entered quickly, slamming the door.
who had followed her in. "How can you live in Moscow and go nowhere? No,
who had fought so desperately with the marauder and the convoy and had
who had given him geography lessons in Switzerland. "Wait a bit,"
who had grown old in society and at court. He went up to Anna Pavlovna,
who had him under observation, interrupted:
who had joined the young folk with a mildly condescending smile but now
who had just returned from captivity and by an hussar orderly, left
who had just thrown out the drawer of a chest, filled with metal
who had mimicked the regimental commander, fell back from the carriage
who had not been seen in Moscow for a long time, attracted general
who had obtained a post in Petersburg. Among the men who very soon
who had rescued Petya was talking to a functionary about the priests who
who had risen and was sniffing in the dark passage.
who had settled down by the roadside with a flask and some food.
who had sheltered in the village houses. They all rushed out of the
who happened to turn up and who was not at all to blame, suffered the
who has been sewn into this amulet by Mary! There is nothing certain,
who hate us, love of our enemies; yes, that love which God preached on
who held her up.
who in his opinion have directed humanity (one historian considers
who instead of getting into the general fold every evening goes into
who judge those near to them severely, he always on meeting
who knew of Kuragin's marriage. "Take care!"
who lays back her ears and continues to crouch motionless before her
who lived a good and God-fearing life with his family, and who went once
who looked at her was thinking only of what had happened to her. With a
who looked at her, after being in her company and talking to her a
who looked fatigued, was dismounting. Marquis Paulucci was talking to
who made his mark in 1807, and to whom Napoleon himself did justice--a
who maintain that Napoleon was drawn to Moscow by the skill of the
who met him with the cross oppressed the peasants by his exactions, and
who pursued them, continued as far as Krasnoe without a battle. The
who recognized him and said a few words to him, disjointed and awkward,
who remained behind decided for themselves what they must do.
who seemed to be on his side understood him in their own way with
who served as its tools, was useless. Pierre knew this now. One had to
who spoke with suppressed agitation.
who still remained in the same attitude of indecision.
who stood behind him. "Brigand! Get away!"
who stood ready to assist him.
who ten years before and a year later was considered an outlawed brigand
who they were, why they were there, or what they wanted of him. He heard
who usually left town for their country estates had not gone away that
who want to fight will always put themselves in the most advantageous
who was asleep with his back to her, rose on tiptoe and kissed the hand
who was called Tit. He was saying, "Tit, I say, Tit!"
who was continuing his story.
who was evidently looking for her, and who stopped suddenly as if in
who was in a high fever. These last days, mistrusting their household
who was in the same room. The Emperor was not dancing, he stood in the
who was lagging behind, to follow. Though he did not see why it was
who was not a military man at all, and Pfuel himself, who, as Prince
who was passing:
who was pawing the ground and champing his bit. At last all were
who was prepared to wait awhile for an answer, Pierre felt that every
who was present, but whom Pierre had not noticed.
who was riding toward him.
who was rubbing him, slightly twitching and grunting. An aide-de-camp,
who was sitting opposite him. Every time he chanced to meet Dolokhov's
who was sitting silently beside him, what he thought of tomorrow's
who was standing behind him.
who was surrounded by ladies laughing at something he said.
who was under such obligations to him ("But never mind that") was not
who were carrying the body of Petya Rostov to a hole that had been dug
who were guiding him, he was not only doing nothing wrong, but was doing
who were loading, hauling the guns, and continually running past
who were moving the gun.
who were not themselves dressed up, the young people decided that their
who were to leave Moscow. The loaded carts were still standing in the
who will inherit his wealth?" he added in a whisper.
who wished to distinguish themselves, to astonish somebody, and for some
who would have felt very much ashamed had she not been assured that this
who, discerning the will of Providence, submit their personal will to
who, jesting and laughing, stared at their strange foreign enemies.
who, liking work, knew how to do it, and despite his indolence would
who, more dead than alive, was already hurrying out of his way. "Real
who, with his face buried in the ground and a blackened nape, lay on his
who--apparently quite unclothed--sat with a quiet tranquil smile, not
who--she thought--was making a favor of receiving her, and so everything
whole army! "I needn't have been in such a hurry to pray about today,
whole army, did the same thing. The rustle of the battle of Tarutino
whole army, from its chiefs to the lowest soldier, without exception in
whole being. Rapidly leaping the furrows, he fled across the field with
whole body as if in that position he hoped to hasten the speed of the
whole body jerked at each step. The eldest princess followed him, and
whole campaign and by the battle of Borodino, the Russian army--when
whole day was finally and indubitably answered in the affirmative. He
whole day.
whole days together that he had no time to notice that he was thinking
whole dining hall, and last of all the children, tutors, and governesses
whole district, Balashev was brought to Vilna--now occupied by the
whole empty ballroom, and slowly dying away; and all at once she felt
whole energy was directed to flight.
whole evening, I hope?"
whole face, as she had so often seen it in the stillness of the night
whole forthcoming battle from right to left (looking from the Russian
whole fortified camp and, by the aid of his own knowledge and by
whole government! And what a government! They see treason everywhere and
whole hospital, with arms and legs torn off and its dirt and disease. So
whole house, there was a feeling of awe at something important that was
whole import of an event that is occurring. Moment by moment the event
whole life, and he impatiently sought everywhere for signs of that
whole mass of men was concentrated.
whole meaning of a song lies in the words and that the tune comes of
whole month, or go on falling and never reach the bottom. Perhaps it
whole neighborhood in powder smoke.
whole outlook on the universe is constructed--the incomprehensible
whole people. But Smolensk was burned by its own inhabitants-who had
whole responsibility for what happened, and his darkened mind found
whole reward for her self-sacrifice and the whole meaning of her life.
whole set. Yes, you're all right! Choose what you will; it's all the
whole soul, had become an integral part of herself, and she no longer
whole soul--shall I live? What do you think?"
whole staff and all that belongs to it, advising him if there is a lack
whole story of life. You talk of Bonaparte and his career," said he
whole street was full of clouds of black smoke. Tongues of flame here
whole summer, from spring sowing to harvest, he was busy with the work
whole tenor of his thoughts instantaneously changed; the battle seemed
whole time of his service Dron had never been drunk or ill, never after
whole town is singing their praises and I don't even know then!"
whole trend of thought he had formed during his life of seclusion quite
whole trousseau. When they got home she turned everybody out of the room
whole with her dress, but all the charm of her body only covered by her
whole world--seemed to him centered in his love and the possibility of
whole. Like a cat, she had attached herself not to the people but to the
wholly occupied his mind.
whom Boris was expecting, entered the room. Prince Andrew, who liked
whom Natasha had, teased her elder sister Vera, speaking of Berg as her
whom Pierre most respected. Judging by what he had said there was no one
whom carried a lowered and smoking gun. They both looked pale, and
whom everyone in the house liked except Natasha. She almost quarreled
whom had his face covered with sores, were tearing a piece of raw
whom he evidently dominated.
whom he had promised to take home.
whom he saw only occasionally. Countess Mary who had brought him up
whom he was again talking with the same involuntary smile. Sonya wore
whom hitherto he, like everyone else, had always called Buonaparte.
whom now the blood rushed to his heart and he felt a difficulty in
whom the Russians, and especially the Russian ladies, then liked so
whom the boy did not remember appeared to him a divinity who could not
whom the honor is due. Even foreign historians, including the French,
whom there was so much talk, but that on the contrary his smile was most
whom they met on the way. He felt it in the merry sounds of regimental
whom to or what about. "That's it, come on! That's a dog!... There,
whom was a dashing hussar and the other a notorious duelist and
whose action are beyond our ken, we get the conception of a minimum of
whose activities at that period were most useful.
whose expression of sympathy was pleasing to him.
whose hands lay the real power--the soldiers who fired, or transported
whose notes were familiar to him, by the way the voices of the huntsmen
whose state of unconquerable childish embarrassment now changing to
whose white shirt was stained with blood. On seeing this, Pierre moved
whose words struck Pierre more and more by their precision and firmness.
why did six hundred thousand men go to fight when Napoleon uttered
why he did not reply to what she chiefly wanted to know: how was her
why he should be disturbed by the bad composition of the Note.
why he stepped out from the window to the veranda and smiled under his
why he went to Petersburg? They have formed..."
why not. To a proposal made by General Campan (who was to attack the
why she had to die, and in what way that death was but an expression
why the defeat of an army--a hundredth part of a nation--should oblige
why, the position of the Russian army being what it was at Krasnoe and
why, the recollection came to his mind of a summer evening he had spent
why?... Go away!"
wide breeches hanging down in creases, and a crumpled shako on the back
wide sleeve on his right arm, she went up to Sonya and took her hand.
wide, and assumed the expression he usually put on when taken to be
wide-open happy eyes, and quickly seizing his head pressed it to her
wide-open space adjoining the Povarskoy on one side and the gardens
wide-spreading steppes in the midst of which lay the holy city of Moscow
widened and lit up.
wider than ours, and it was plain that they could easily outflank us
widespread everywhere. The cook's moans had now subsided. On two sides
widows of live men, make beautiful conversations over our charpie, only
width of the field, an enormous mass of cavalry in brilliant white
wife and you marry Nicholas!"
wife came up with a look of disapproval.
wife said--met for supper at Prince Vasili's. All these friends and
wife was showing a rent in her shawl and telling how much the shawl had
wife's affairs and must rebuild in Moscow. Why this was necessary he
wife's circle, which did not interest him, that air of unconcern,
wife's command had let his hair grow and abandoned his spectacles, went
wife's line of thought.
wife's past and her relations with Dolokhov, Pierre saw clearly that
wife, and by an anonymous letter he had received that morning, which in
wife, she died, but that was not enough: he wanted to bind his happiness
wife, sister, and future son, and the tenderness he had felt the night
wife, who had turned pale and was staring fixedly at her son.
wife--are the count's only direct heirs. I know, I know how hard it is
wife.
wife.
wife: "Ah, why have you done this to me?"
wild set led by Dolokhov. Zherkov had met Dolokhov abroad as a private
wild virgin pine forest, and far away on the other side of the Enns the
will I overthrow it and thrice re-establish it!" he cried, raising his
will accept them," said Nesvitski (who like the others concerned in the
will act as they did. I will do better. Everyone shall know me, love me,
will all pass, Natasha."
will always be noticeable ahead of it. To those on board the ship the
will and partly of the law of inevitability.
will as it had seemed to him--he had been no more free than now
will be coming," he was going to say, "to dine," but changed his mind
will be cut off," said he.
will be empty," said the old woman to the old attendant.
will be here any day now, so what are we waiting for? I ask just one
will be no more war! Old women's nonsense--old women's nonsense!" he
will be renamed.
will be so kind, I'll fix a time and go down to the estate just for a
will be stationed along the highroads on Tuesdays and Saturdays at such
will be taken that peasants with their carts and horses may meet with no
will be. I am in attendance on him, you know; I'll mention it to him.
will come out that you're already married. Why, they'll have you in the
will depend on her...."
will do all I can to arrange the match between them. If he is not rich I
will do more than if you paralyze it by encumbering it with remedies.
will do so.... So you see there can be no question about-" said Nicholas
will do," he said to himself, though when planning his design he had
will find the beautiful Helene here, whom it is always delightful to
will follow."
will give her the means; I will ask my father and Andrew. I shall be so
will happen. Buonaparte has become a great commander among them! Hm!..."
will is not withdrawn from certain rulers and their heirs, and
will know and I shall never see him again," she told herself. "So it is
will not say comfort us--but save us from despair. Religion alone can
will of Alexander. But the universal historian Gervinus, refuting this
will of God; you cannot escape from Him. And they are simple. They do
will of the whole people. Still more difficult would it be to find
will operate:
will pass here immediately; it will please him to see these gentlemen
will raise the cry a day or two beforehand, but they are not wanted yet
will represent the commander in chief.
will say that you, drunk and not knowing what you were about, challenged
will see Moscow. You surely did not expect to see that Asiatic capital.
will see."
will she take that si? She's taken it! Thank God!" And without noticing
will slash at him!" thought Rostov, gripping the hilt of his saber.
will talk of it later" (and he looked round at Rostov). "Come to me
will teach you to behave yourself."
will throw you back beyond the Dvina and beyond the Dnieper, and will
will to inevitability, that is, of consciousness to the laws of reason.
will to tell only what happened. It is very difficult to tell the truth,
will win. That's right. But if three days pass, then after that, well,
will you? You may want us one of these days."
will--his words--are only part of the general activity expressed in an
will. But in the Crusades we already see an event occupying its definite
will. One wants to do it peacefully and lovingly. You're a clever girl
will. She had not slept and had stolen downstairs on tiptoe, and going
willing! What is it, gentlemen?" he added, turning to the officer. "Are
willing, are going to die in the regiment, we prize the honor of the
willingly into his circle and did not speak to Rostov. Boris did not
willingly promised to do it all for her, Natasha sat down on the floor,
win a campaign. For that, not storming and attacking but patience and
win, but if later, God knows what will happen." Napoleon did not smile,
wind to carry away. A pleasant humming and whistling of bullets were
wind, and may Thy mighty Angel confound them and put them to flight; may
wind.
winding through a thick, low-growing birch wood. In the middle of the
window and from Dolokhov's back. Anatole stood erect with staring eyes.
window the moans of the adjutant could be heard more distinctly. She put
window, from which the double frame had been removed (by order of the
window, with a thin, pale, and spiteful face. She glanced round at him,
window.
window.
window.
window. He wished to take leave of Princess Mary, but she would not let
window. Nesvitski, moving his moist lips as he chewed something, and
windows at a small table laid with hors-d'oeuvres. Speranski, wearing
windows of the Senate House the soldiers threw chairs into the Square
windows, icons, woodwork, and still unbuttressed walls, and should be
windows, the fence, and on Pierre's horses standing before the hut. The
wine for her son, or money to buy a present as a surprise for Natasha or
wine he had drunk and the conversation with this good-natured man had
wing of the house, which was burning brightly and fiercely. One of its
wing with the other, Prince Andrew met Mademoiselle Bourienne smiling
wings, adjusted her bodice, returned to the middle of the stage, and
wings, hoping before evening and before the arrival of the Emperor to
winning a battle was unprecedented. He alone during the whole retreat
winning, suddenly just when he has calculated all the chances of the
winter and, as they had come only for a short time and the countess
winter of 1806, which Nicholas Rostov spent in Moscow, was one of the
winter, and Natasha felt sure he had already arrived.
winter, and lying in his overgrown garden in summer.
wiping away the blood with his coat sleeve, as if apologizing for the
wiping them on the sleeves of their greatcoats. All their faces were
wise because thou couldst utter those blasphemous words," he went
wise, and kind like Pierre. In Pierre's presence his face always shone
wise, because you can take everything along with you--vodka and snacks."
wisest men, boldly yet prudently overcome superstitions, infidelity, and
wish and, receiving a justification, presents itself as the result of
wish nothing but to relive it all from the beginning."
wish or not to be Prince Anatole Kuragin's wife? Reply: yes or no," he
wish that Kuragin should be banished from Moscow. The whole house was in
wish the Emperors may arrange the affair between them, and that the war
wish they would come sooner. I hope to be friends with her. You have
wish to be seen in that mood, for hearing footsteps in the passage he
wish to die, that his end was not only touching but edifying. As to the
wish to dress and Mademoiselle Louise sent for me. He was naughty and
wish to express all that was in his mind.
wish to let the mistress leave the estate, and threaten to unharness her
wish to negotiate.
wish to see you, I do not think so and do not want to do so. You will
wish to take it on my conscience. You say they'll die. All wight. Only
wish you good luck and success, gentlemen!" he added and went out after
wish you to have as good an opinion of me. Don't upset yourself, and let
wish--that the frightful thing that had to happen should happen quickly.
wished to and because he was very clever and a genius.
wished to and only refrained out of regard for his modesty.
wished to devote her whole life to him.
wished to do so. He grew confused and said: "On condition that the
wished to do something special on meeting his friend. He wanted to pinch
wished to get away. With his head bent, and his big feet spread apart,
wished to have word with their mistress.
wished to make some suggestion. But Prince Vasili interrupted him in the
wished to return to that former world of pure thought, but he could not,
wished to run away with a certain lady here in Voronezh.
wished to say something, but dared not.... No, it was I who dared not.
wished to see the regiment just in the state in which it had been on
wished to stop the affair ran to a corner of the room and threw himself
wished to take another seat so as not to trouble the lady, and also to
wishes. To Sonya he wrote separately.
wishing for a chance to race past him.
wishing to avail himself of their courtesy, and this caused some delay
wishing to flatter Anna Pavlovna by defending her former position on
wishing to profit by his friendliness and obtain for himself the best
wishing to say something or at least to meet his eye. But Rostopchin did
wishing to show her connections and knowledge of what went on in
wishing to show his noble-mindedness.
with "Uncle" where they should set on the hounds, and having shown
with Austria, and unconsciously jumped from the general subject to
with Bazdeev's notes and explanations. He sat down at the dusty writing
with Berg who was already in command of a company. Berg, who had
with Boris as of old. She sang him his favorite songs, showed him her
with Count Rostov, the general, and the colonel. At the card table he
with Dessalles or by himself, recall and reconsider the meaning of
with Dolokhov. "None but fools trust to luck in play," Dolokhov had then
with France, a rupture which, according to them, ought to be promptly
with Germans all day. We went with Weyrother to survey the dispositions.
with Kutuzov's cantata, laid one before Pierre as one of the principal
with Napoleon Bonaparte and from all the schemes of reconstruction.
with Napoleon and had been bribed by him, and so on, and so on.
with Napoleon if, contrary to expectations, these negotiations were
with Petersburg, and so on. But the destruction of the French, which he
with Pierre, Natasha heard a man's voice in Countess Bezukhova's box and
with Prince Bagration's detachment."
with Princess Mary in Bogucharovo. The countess let no occasion slip of
with Rostopchin's own permission. Yet all the same this information
with Shinshin. Berg gave his arm to Vera. The smiling Julie Karagina
with Turkey in 1811 independently of Kutuzov, and found that peace had
with Uvarov's cavalry at midday, and on the other side, beyond Utitsa,
with a French guardsman he had captured. The prisoner said that the
with a bashful and awkward gesture not at all like a military salute
with a beautiful Polish lady on the veranda of his house in Kiev. And
with a bottle wrapped in a napkin passed him by. He frowned, trying to
with a bow and approached them silently and with a look of inquiry. The
with a calm smile that she was not so stupid as to be jealous: 'Let him
with a clatter, and then walked hurriedly and noiselessly over the baize
with a decanter on a tray as "my dear" and "my sweet," asked about the
with a deep sigh left the drawing room and locked its main door.
with a distressed face left the room to find Sonya.
with a general and did not answer her look, and her father's eyes said
with a gentle smile, looking at Boris' and went on, evidently concerned
with a gloomy and tired face, was wearily taking off his wraps with the
with a gloved finger, and paying no attention to those who had entered
with a grimace that distorted his handsome face, kissed Anna Pavlovna's
with a hoarse voice.
with a hum of conversation, like the hum of bees swarming in springtime.
with a laugh.
with a long face and nose, as he entered the room.
with a look of nervous agitation such as Pierre had never before seen on
with a mildly contemptuous smile, as if intimating by that smile that he
with a more than cordial smile.
with a more tranquil mind.
with a mournful expression.
with a much stronger enemy, and necessarily withdrawing the armies at
with a pair of sleek roans, exactly like those of a certain prince. He
with a rapid, almost brutal movement of her head, she intercepted his
with a sallow, bloated, angry face, who was wearing a Kazan dressing
with a scared look and that Princess Mary was no longer by the cot.
with a scarf over his uniform and mounted on a lean, dark-gray horse,
with a scent of autumn. Pierre and the adjutant dismounted and walked up
with a sense of antipathy to the old prince which she did not
with a serious face asked Sonya, who was considered an excellent reader,
with a shy smile or, politely making way for the soldiers, paced up
with a sigh. This might have been taken as an expression of sorrow and
with a slight trembling of the lower jaw, "I can't prevent your doing
with a smile as he brushed from his clothes some earth it had thrown up.
with a smile of pleasure, held out her slender, delicate hand to him,
with a smile to Bolkonski.
with a smile.
with a sob.
with a solemn gesture raised his arm.
with a stern and serious air which showed that now was no time for
with a strength he had never before felt, he made a step toward her
with a supple movement to show how he had done it.) "One turned up and
with a supple movement, got up, coughed, and went off to another part of
with a thoroughly attractive woman, her defect--the shortness of her
with a thought that always occupied her: "Now you see if I were to be
with a trembling voice and some difficulty in utterance due to his
with a vigorous movement. The Emperor's mild and handsome face was
with a white handkerchief tied to his sword and announced that
with a wide swing of his arm.
with a woman whose husband was alive, as the younger man had been, but
with all her heart and all her might. For a while she had stood beside
with all her might to conceal it. And this was the very attitude that
with all his being that the terrible blow into which he and all the
with all his remaining strength.
with all its menacing and majestic strength, and without consulting
with all of whom he was acquainted. He too approached that group and
with all their teeth and hair, and had only left it when not a single
with amiability. His position has not turned his head at all. He said to
with an amused smile, evidently in that cheerful mood of good humored
with an audience.
with an observation unusual to him, and everything confirmed his
with an old mother and a hunchback sister, and was the most affectionate
with animated face she ran into the room.
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
with anything in regard to her; and that always will be so in whatever
with apparent relief, and began walking up and down, arm in arm, to
with astonishment at the angry face of the princess which had lost all
with both hands and looked sternly and reproachfully at the count who
with both without offending either.
with both.
with bread and salt and wished to build a chantry in honor of Peter and
with bright, attentive, and animated eyes, as if trying to understand
with cards. One tormenting impression did not leave him: that those
with carts that it was impossible to get by in a carriage. Prince Andrew
with chalk--as white as flour! I suppose they polish him up as they do
with characteristic briskness and holding out his hand to the prince.
with closed eyes, heaving abrupt sighs at certain passages.
with cold glassy eyes that boded no good, they became silent. On the
with conversation about the French embassy, at once began accordingly.
with cudgels or with rifles that repeat thirty times a minute. Men
with curly light-brown hair and beautiful eyes, was delighted because
with difficulty.
with dignity and looking to the count for approval.
with dim eyes and wide-open mouths, they were all laboriously singing
with dismay at her husband.
with distinction and special marks of favor, explaining to him that
with eighteen degrees of frost, and without even full rations (the
with emotion, and resignation to the Divine will.
with emotion:
with eternity?"
with evident pleasure.
with exasperation, symptoms of a growing attachment between her son and
with external dignity and coldness, though she felt the tears choking
with faces distorted by suffering, walked, crawled, and were carried on
with fat, is killed for meat.
with fever. "If only reserves had come up just then, lads, there
with flour whitening their carts--on that narrow dam amid the wagons and
with galoshes on his bare feet, stood in the anteroom. On seeing Pierre
with greater heat than ever in the highest circles, between the parties
with guilty, happy faces.
with happy face and sparkling eyes, raised his saber, shouted "Vivat!"
with her and avail themselves of her suppers, soirees, and the animated
with her beautiful eyes full of tears at the door through which Prince
with her better spirits.
with her brother about him. She insisted that he was a bad man, and
with her enormous plait of hair. "No, how could she? She's virtuous. She
with her fingers.
with her hands she burst into sobs.
with her head bent first on one side and then on the other.
with her indifference to everything about her. Her black eyes looked at
with her knitting. Princess Mary took a book and began reading. Only
with her little hands to Pierre's coat, sat on his arm gazing about
with her long lashes drooping as if she did not see or feel what the
with her through the garden seeking another way out.
with her, when Anna Pavlovna called him away on the pretext that her
with herself, her sufferings, her strivings after goodness, her
with him about feelings in general and about her sister. With so
with him and he was looking at her with a lover's eyes.
with him for an attack on the transport.
with him in Naples. Then suddenly, as if remembering his royal dignity,
with him not a commander in chief's staff but the imperial headquarters
with him remained in his room; a small box, a large canteen fitted with
with him she had so often repeated in her imagination, and at the
with him to the troyka.
with him, but in 1811 they again quarreled and again began killing many
with him, it means that that is the right thing to do. If once we begin
with him, tell him about his past, his life at home, and his love,
with him, that there was quite a scandal and that that's why he was sent
with him, trying to speak significantly. He referred to the fact that
with him," thought he, relishing his own goodness of heart, "but it must
with him.
with him. I must tell you, mon cher," he continued in the sad and
with him. Pierre pushed his way into the middle of the group, listened,
with him?" he asked the regimental commander.
with himself and those around him, his smile and glance were brighter
with his Russian instinct, was the first to recognize the value of
with his arrangements--leads his division to the decisive point, and
with his black horses over the winter rye to the place reserved for him,
with his chest.
with his clear blue eyes, stepped forward from the ranks, went up to the
with his cloak, but now neither the lodge nor his benefactor was there.
with his daughter, Princess Mary, and her companion, Mademoiselle
with his decorations and placed his shriveled little body on a table.
with his feelings but with the very possibility of life. Life without
with his feet turned under him. "It's the very devil! What? Feel how it
with his feet.
with his fifty-year-old Moscow cousins, and in the midst of these
with his foot.
with his forty-year-old stomach understood that hint, not feeling his
with his glistening wide-open eyes fixed upon him and his mustache
with his glittering, black eyes at Rostov.
with his hand. Looking more closely Pierre recognized the blue-gray dog,
with his handkerchief, sat down by Natasha and did not leave her for the
with his hands, down which the grease trickled, Petya was in an ecstatic
with his horse, a being consequently possessed of twofold strength.
with his intentions. Prince Andrew noticed, however, that though what
with his knee Raevski who was at his side.
with his little burden to the Gruzinski garden at the corner of the
with his marshals around him, it was quite light. Above him was a clear
with his own hands, whose weak nerves rendered him unable to face
with his podgy old hands resting symmetrically on its arms. At the sound
with his right hand the cleanest of gloves that fitted his left hand
with his roast meat, hoped he had been forgotten: "Didn't I tell you
with his shock of black hair, and the prince in his dressing gown and
with his small hand.
with his suite diminished by more than half, rode toward a sound of
with his superiors, and a moral young man with a brilliant career before
with his wife sat down at the long table laid for twenty persons, at
with hurried steps and bent head, not knowing where and why, along the
with it hidden for awhile; then looking up and seeing Pierre she
with it to the marshals, and ordered the action to begin. The marshals,
with it, and looked around bewildered and unable to grasp what was
with its bare, unplastered log walls, was not overclean--it did not seem
with its famous arsenal so indispensable to the army, is in danger.
with its legs in the air, sat a peasant woman uttering piercing and
with its marshals, kings, and Emperor was not captured, if that was what
with its singers, surrounded Pierre's carriage and blocked the road.
with its snow undisturbed by vehicles, the sleigh drivers and hovels of
with its toothless open mouth. The storm was long since over and there
with joy.
with kisses, holding him tight by the skirt of his coat, sprang away and
with lanterns, standing at the entrance. She went out on the stairs. On
with lice, curled round his head like a cap. The look of his eyes
with life, but the malady that had formerly found expression in such
with lighted tapers in their hands, slowly and solemnly conducting the
with little noise within two steps of Prince Andrew and close to the
with long, light steps. He had a musketoon over his shoulder and an ax
with lovers in my house! It's no use pretending: you listen when I speak
with me and we'll arrange a game of cards. Of course you know Dmitri
with me for coming? You have changed so, Andrusha," she added, as if to
with me in the carriage."
with me!" thought he, full of an irrepressible fury that welled up
with mild irony old times in Moscow and Moscow acquaintances. It was
with much animation and cheerfully nodded to his son as the latter
with my hussars fwom here. And at the signal shot..."
with my wife as he advised, I was not living with her as her husband. To
with new people outside the ordinary routine of her life. She and Mavra
with one another than either of them felt with herself when alone. A
with our regiment all the time, so that we had every comfort and every
with pale faces round the cook. The loudest sound in that crowd was her
with paper. The prince allowed no one at Bald Hills to drive with
with particular courtesy ushered Prince Andrew before him along a
with peasants and peasant women, gentlemen's country houses, fields
with people dressed in furs continued to drive past, carrying away the
with playful ceremony somewhat in ballet style, offered his bent arm to
with pleasant smiles when he talked to the old prince.
with pleasure and he flushed and was breathless when Pierre spoke to
with pleasure the whistle of bullets evidently aimed at him. Several
with pleasure. Morel, the orderly, brought some hot water in a saucepan
with powdery snow.
with problems of motion admits the conception of the infinitely small,
with prominent black eyes, got up on seeing her master, stretched her
with quick angry steps, looked hastily around as if seeking someone.
with quick steps, accompanied by Michael Ivanovich, bringing the letter
with quick steps.
with quite new eyes. It seemed to him that it was only today, thanks
with rapid rhythmic whistle flew over the heads of the horsemen and fell
with red epaulets, probably French. He could see nothing more, for
with red light like a Russian church during evening service. Under
with regard to Pierre's expressed wishes, but to what Natasha from the
with regard to his wife's debts and to the rebuilding of his houses in
with regret that there was something lacking in her feeling for young
with resolute strides and went into the house.
with respectful jocularity to remark that there is no reason for not
with satisfaction as he poured the water over his head with hands
with satisfaction, because the self-sacrifice that fills it now..."
with saucy gaiety, confident that her prank would be taken in good part.
with severity. "I am glad.... Are you here on leave?" he went on in his
with six horses, surrounded by pages, aides-de-camp, and an escort,
with sleepy eyes, tell Princess Mary anything. With just the same smile
with sleeves rolled up, swinging her bare elbows, had stepped to the
with snow, appeared on the landing where the footman stood with the
with something more than curiosity and sympathy. He noticed that they
with sparkling eyes and ruffled hair, sat at the clavichord striking
with strained smartness. They gave little jumps as they walked, as
with such admiration and delight of the farming of the thrifty and
with such exactitude that Nesvitski could not help laughing. Kutuzov
with such men as Klyucharev. And I will knock the nonsense out of
with surprise. This was the French drummer boy captured that morning.
with tender smiles was saying to Vera that love is not an earthly but a
with terror. The thought that both her sons were at the war, had both
with that maniac's bullet in my body?"
with that object he had asked Gerasim to get him a peasant's coat and
with that peculiar lift in the note that indicates that they are after
with that softened, grateful, last look she had given him through her
with that.
with the Emperor that day.
with the Empress and during the royal apprenticeship of my son, to
with the Tsar," he said.
with the beginning of any event--the position from which we always
with the child and the woman for protecting whom he was arrested was
with the cooperation of all, by the millions of generations from our
with the cross at the church, and she intends to welcome him in the
with the delight boys feel at the sight of a military elder brother, and
with the dogs, while from under them could be seen her gray hair and
with the external world in time and in dependence on cause, that is, it
with the family, he had gone on with his regiment which was making for
with the following rescript:
with the frost, and then all was again perfectly silent. His bosom
with the full swing of a bludgeon. It hurt a little, but the worst of
with the gentle, patronizing intonation natural to a man of importance
with the greatest pleasure--which he did not conceal and which his
with the happy smile seen on the faces of young men who have been under
with the hussar colonel on his left and Shinshin and the other male
with the lassitude of age, sat yawning wearily with closed eyes. The
with the little cap on its unsteady head evidently absorbed all his
with the mother made careful inquiries as to Julie's dowry (she was to
with the object of bearing children, your sin might be forgiven. But the
with the old man he will talk things over and then come on to you."
with the old prince."
with the others to a house where a French general with a white mustache
with the others.
with the palm of his hand.
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
with the physical pain. It was they, these soldiers--wounded and
with the politeness characteristic of his countrymen, addressed the
with the proclamation and killed them.
with the rapier according to all the rules of art. One can imagine what
with the river between himself and the main body of the French. On the
with the self-destruction toward which--ever dissecting and dissecting
with the smell of honey. There are no longer sentinels sounding the
with the smile of a coquettish girl, which at one time probably came
with the staff, the letters he wrote from Tarutino to Madame de Stael,
with the strain. One hand moved as if to clutch the window sill, but
with the strict formality of his house. At that moment the great clock
with the thought that no one would ever know it and that she would not
with the two foremost borzois, pushed ahead of them regardless of the
with the village, the church, and the large white house. The bare trees,
with the villain. We must punish the villain who has caused the ruin of
with the white forehead, black eyebrows, and red lips.
with the white mustache and red flushed face.
with the words she always used when Pierre or her son returned after an
with their governess and tutor, his wife's nephew with his tutor, Sonya,
with their lower branches lopped off, a field on which shocks of
with their management and embezzlement of money, some after their first
with their mother. The harmony between him and his wife grew closer and
with their party. The countess had seldom been so angry with anyone as
with their plumes, ribbons, and medals, both courtiers and military
with their relief. The pangs began again and Mary Bogdanovna advised
with them as he had been pleased with those of the naval officer, the
with them, giving final orders to the adjutant. After they had gone
with them, shouts of delight and triumph arose among the young men.
with them.
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
with these she had prolonged conversations in private on the vanity
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org
with this feeling of tenderness and love he experienced: in comparison
with this order, for there were two hundred and thirty households at
with those about him began, he alone said that the battle of Borodino
with those swift steps that had sounded buoyant to Princess Mary.
with three) and the music ceased. A worried aide-de-camp ran up to the
with tobacco smoke, when someone came in. It was Prince Andrew.
with trappings that glittered in the sun, rode a tall man with plumes
with trembling hands, threw his body across the saddle, righted himself,
with two fingers, and blowing and shaking something off it, as if by
with unclouded common sense, an incalculable number of causes present
with uncovered white head and puffy face showing the white ball of the
with unexpected rapidity and ran out into the corridor.
with unnatural speed but yet stayed on the same spot. From behind him
with upraised arms.
with us at Otradnoe."
with us, but heaven help you and your capital!' The one general whom we
with us."
with vexation that she was herself being judged and was judging others,
with well-provisioned sutlers and Austrian Jews offering all sorts
with what he saw and experienced in the army, but at the same time
with which everybody involuntarily addressed that officer.
with which he spoke to the Emperor, and who considered Kutuzov to be
with which he was covered and, making wry faces at the noisome smell of
with which to reply to Dolokhov's words. But before he had thought
with white hands who was doing something to him and, still standing
with whom Raevski came onto the dam. And even those who did see it
with whom he was on intimate terms.
with wide-open eyes. "Will you believe it, Makarka, it took one's breath
with wide-open eyes. He had awaked from a terrible dream. He had dreamed
with you at supper. We'll have another dispute. Make friends with my
with you, and you do not really believe what you are saying." Prince
with you, my angel? Are you ill?" asked the count.
with you," he said with a smile.
with you? You must be ill to shiver like that," he added, noticing that
with. Having glanced at Dron he at once understood that his answers did
withdraw his troops beyond the Vistula and to restore the duchy of
withdraw, respectfully pressed close to the doorpost with bowed head.
withered yellow legs. He was not meditating, but only deferring the
withers of Balashev's horse and said:
within a few days. Princess Mary and the old prince each bore and hid
within a twelvemonth, and then he would go and confess to his wife, and
within a week. Set off immediately for Moscow. Let me know at once when
within him against the someone to whom what was happening might be
within him, suddenly awoke, joyful and youthful, in his soul. It
within him.
within sight of the enemy and he wishes to profit by the opportunity to
within the limits of virtue. Our order should provide means to that end.
within. But Kutuzov evidently did not wish to enter that room till he
within...."
without a battle, namely the evacuation and burning of Moscow,
without a battle, or by accepting battle to risk losing the army as well
without a battle.
without a battle.
without a stepmother either! Only one thing, no more women are wanted
without aim or object for her existence. She ate, drank, slept, or kept
without alluding to the offenses of the commissariat officials, simply
without an inner struggle; "at such a moment as this one must think of
without any aim at self-sacrifice, and he therefore looked at what was
without any command being given, apparently obstructed by something in
without any definite position, without relations or even a country, did
without any incendiarism.
without asking Napoleon and issued orders where and in what direction to
without at all noticing that his involuntary smile had stabbed the heart
without attacking. It was necessary to let the French reach Shamshevo
without being dull or angry, was silent, thoughtful, and preoccupied.
without closing their eyes, while the adjutants and company commanders
without concealing it he tried to be with Natasha all day. Not only in
without doffing their caps. Two tall old peasants with wrinkled faces
without eating."
without exception speak only of the self-sacrifice, patriotic devotion,
without exception, he read the same dismay, horror, and conflict that
without exception, this consciousness without which no conception of man
without fighting and of fortresses without a siege must incline Germans
without giving them a glance, turned to Balashev:
without going out of the house, waiting for the money his father could
without her false curls, and with her poor little knob of hair showing
without her parents' knowledge and that the cause of this was Anatole
without her! But can she love me?... I am too old for her.... Why don't
without him, but it's not nice to enter a family against a father's
without him--he knew he must go away from this good, bright world to
without his greatcoat, with his Orders on his breast and an enormous
without his noticing it the feeling of offense immediately turned into
without his parents' knowledge.
without hurting others."
without it. 'When wood is chopped the chips will fly.'" He looked at the
without knowing its cause--was such as to remind one still more of the
without knowing why, felt awkward about paying court to her. When they
without knowing why--rode behind on his artillery nag. Though the orders
without knowing why. War is not courtesy but the most horrible thing in
without laughing, but could not resist looking at him: so to be out of
without linking up the events of the day or drawing a conclusion
without looking at Rostov, as was his way at moments of deep feeling.
without looking at her--filled him with enchantment.
without looking at him, and with a kind of fury that made him like his
without looking at him.
without looking at the man he was addressing, and did not reply to
without losing step, his whole powerful body turning flexibly. It was as
without male society, on Anatole's appearance all the three women of
without moving, undertaking nothing...."
without muskets who, holding up the skirts of their overcoats, were
without noticing Arakcheev who, holding his sword and glancing
without noticing Nicholas.
without obtaining the desired result. Then it occurred to him: if the
without omitting her duties as hostess, threw significant glances from
without reading it and reread his father's letter, ending with the
without realizing what he was doing. He smiled at the recollection of
without replying to Sonya's words of comfort she got into bed, and long
without replying. Belliard began talking loudly and eagerly to the
without scruple to forget her own grief. She began asking Dron about the
without some groans gave orders to their stewards about the enrollment,
without some shouting and even a little fighting among themselves--and
without speaking of it, they knew how capitally Nicholas and the lady
without staying for supper.
without taking any notice of him although they were now meeting for the
without taking it from my mouth, sitting outside the window on this
without the Revolution and without the Empire. If the aim was the
without themselves knowing whether they do it with friendly or hostile
without turning their heads glanced at one another, curious to see their
without undressing, and was awakened soon after midnight by a courier
without undressing, he generally remained awake thinking.
without waiting for all the carriages to pass, and he began resolutely
without waiting for it to be accepted took leave of absence and went to
without whom my wife cannot exist, and those women... If you only knew
without you," said she, giving him a tender smile.
withstand an attack--knew there was only that moment and that if he let
witnessed."
witnesses had seen him? He replied that he had gone out to see what
witty and stinging.
witty, and at every opportunity he uttered in that way the first words
wives and children streamed to the southeast, to parts where none of
wives were created for them, Rostov did not leave the lady's side and
wobbed the Tweasuwy...'"
woke Sonya and told her what she had done. The necessary antidotes had
wolf which, softly swaying from side to side, was coming at a quiet
wolf would certainly escape should she reach it. But, coming toward
wolf.
wolfhounds, who had, however, grown fat like their master and his horse.
woman in a pink dress with a lilac silk kerchief on her head, holding
woman to be buried in the country during the best years of her life,
woman who could not understand all that constitutes a man's dignity,
woman! Where has she run off to? And how am I to find the nearest way
woman!"
woman!" He had often begun to make reflections or think aloud in
woman, and looked from under her long lashes with motionless, large,
woman, clutching at her neck, screamed piercingly.
woman, handing the little girl to her. "Give her back to them, give her
woman, you bow down too; and you, grandchildren, also bow down before
woman," he repeated, "but dared not admit it to myself. And now there's
woman. Now I have spoken that terrible word to myself all has become
woman. She could say what she did not think--especially what was
woman. With a slight rustle of her white dress trimmed with moss
woman; and what have you done? You have not helped her to find the way
womanly notes vibrated. Mademoiselle Bourienne, who was in the drawing
women had spread out their linen," said one of the men, gazing with
women known for the freedom of their conduct. Mademoiselle George was
women with gems on their bare flesh, turned their whole attention with
women, Prince," and she smiled tenderly, "always know how to say these
women--mostly mothers--who, having once made up their minds, will not
women."
won't be dancing here a month before she will be married.... Such as
won't be in action," he added as if in apology.
won't have those splendid provinces. Yet he might have united them to
won't marry, but let him come if he enjoys it and I enjoy it." Natasha
won't surrender, I say... Am I not right, sir?"
won't you come to this other table?" repeated Anna Pavlovna.
won't--that's his affair," said Marya Dmitrievna, looking for something
wonder at how it had all happened, and at the evident omens there had
wonder at you, Annette--how at your age you can rush off alone in a
wonder whether he really ought not to stay and which he remembered long
wonder-working icon of Smolensk.
wondered at her, laughed privately at her rudenesses, and told good
wonderful classic beauty of her figure, his face on the contrary
wonderful talent!" he said to Prince Andrew, and Magnitski immediately
wonderful!" she cried, holding out her hand to him. "What are you doing?
wood a brown hare with white feet sprang out and, scared by the tramp of
wood from the prince, had begun to trade, and now had a house, an
wood, met Tuchkov there barring his way, and could not and did not turn
wood, should turn the Russian left flank. This could not be done and
wood, the chief action of the day took place on an open space visible
wood, where wagons were stationed. The dressing station consisted of
wooded banks above the winding river vanishing in the purple distance,
wooden walls redolent of pine, and would have gone farther, but Anton
word Empereur. By omitting the e, though incorrectly, Pierre got the
word from the princess that she would be very glad to see Pierre if he
word in it to the best of his ability.)
word of command the expression of cheerful serenity on the faces of
word of command, the whole squadron, sharing his feeling, was following
word of insincere or feeble sympathy, seemed an insult, painfully
word or slight rearrangement kept the conversational machine in steady,
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
word that Hardenburg says, or Haugwitz either. This famous Prussian
word with a French accent--having noticed that Zherkov could still hear
word would effectively prove to Prince Vasili the invalidity of his
word) in the officer's voice, in the expression of his face and in
word. It was evident that Kutuzov himself listened with pleasure to his
word. With a sinking heart he watched Dolokhov's hands and thought,
words a meaning he had perhaps not intended.
words and they alone expressed what he wanted to say and solved the
words and, uttering some meaningless oaths, slammed the door. The shed
words clearly did not correspond to his thoughts):
words of comfort to her companion, realized that he was asleep in
words of justice and mercy.... It is just this which Alexander will
words of prayer, and the sobbing of the count's old valet.
words serving as their expression are not what move people--use quite
words that it is a law.
words to her such as her father had uttered before his death, and
words to the soldiers who were carrying him, now with his eyes fixed
words what they understood.
words), others were eating bread; the more severely wounded looked
words, and so it was.
words, and that any reference to the details of his life infringed the
words, apart from what meaning they conveyed, were less audible than the
words, to describe directly the life of humanity or even of a single
words--the Great All or Nothing-" said he to himself, "or to that God
words.
words. If you are going to fight a duel, and you make a will and write
words. She was listening to the ceaseless moaning of the adjutant, three
words. Touched that this statuesque princess could so change, Pierre
words:
words: "Gallop off to Korchevo and carry out instructions!"
words: "Morning dawned, the sun was rising," and concluding: "On then,
words; his face twitched and the calf of his left leg began to quiver
work as if to testify that the interest and fascination of the story
work in Bogucharovo and the peasants were well to do. But on hearing the
work it would turn to some unexpected idea and he had not the strength
work nearer to her.
work of men. Men are His tools." She looked a little above Prince
work on its sides, that previously seemed dark, coarse, and meaningless,
work once more.
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.
work or by feasting. Two doors led from the room, one straight on into
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
work, give vent to her anger, and so on, merely because she had a
work, just as children are ready to play directly they awake. He could
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
work.
work.
work. On a third estate the priest, bearing a cross, came to meet
worked went step by step toward his goal. He was free, he had nothing
working and looked up with that curious expression of inner, happy calm
working herself up to tears with the imaginary words of her pauvre mere
working his way with his elbows, but the woman just in front of him, who
working the screws himself.
workman suddenly sank down on the cords that held him, how blood showed
workmen came out the smith, wrenching himself free from the tavern
workmen surrounding the publican paused in indecision.
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
works.
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.
world and like herself were garnering the last ears of the harvests they
world began and men have killed one another no one has ever committed
world is so opposed to yours that we shall not understand one another."
world of dreams, where everything was as light and beautiful as in
world she found herself in. All that was going on before her now seemed
world what it was that people had mistaken for strength as long as an
world!"
world, however inaccessible it may be to us, however long or short the
world, whom no one knew of. It might really have been that the hussar
world. Incidents were related evidently confirming the opinion that
world. Prince Andrew was the first to move away, ruffling his hair
world." Prince Andrew came up to her with downcast eyes.
worldly vanities. He told me of the Emperor's new projects. I began to
wormwood and gentian in his hair and, gleefully rubbing his hands, would
worn and irritable. The infantry passing before him came to a halt
worn face. Alpatych told how he had been sent there and how difficult it
worn-out, gloomy-faced bootmakers, wearing overalls and long tattered
worried by the curiosity of officers and generals who questioned him, he
worried by the impending necessity of interfering in the stupid business
worried by the question of what news Balashev had brought and how he
worried too about her nephew's education for which she had always felt
worry about that as they had an ambulance and a permanent hospital and
worse off. In Siberia they lead the same animal life, and the stripes on
worse, and it is absolutely necessary to prepare him if he is so ill. We
worse, would have thought that Rostov was himself to blame since what
worst of all in the lungs of the men and beasts as they moved along that
worst," said the Austrian general, evidently wishing to have done with
worth thinking or speaking of it at such a moment? At a time of such
worth, and she was accustomed to this and loved doing it. But in all her
worthless scoundrel whose whole life could not atone for his crime. He
worthlessness he was also dreaming of how she would be his wife, how she
worthy action to slay the evildoer, but now he felt that he would not
worthy dwelling place of the Great God," he added, and closed his eyes.
worthy of Nicholas whom she loved more than anything in the world. But
wotten and howwible, but the Tugendbund I don't understand. If we're
would again be deaf, the snuff damp, and the countess' face yellow. Just
would again promise that this should really be the very last time.
would all have to go begging. The count was so weak, and trusted Mitenka
would always keep Uncle near him, if not for his riding, then for his
would appear as he passed the commander.
would at last try to make a good match there. He indicated to him
would be agreeable to his hearer since it went to prove his, Napoleon's,
would be an insult to her and to her father's memory. Assuming that she
would be better than the very best one trammeled by the presence and
would be decided that evening. The visitors were seated at supper.
would be dreadful for me. He then still wished to live and feared death.
would be far easier and simpler for him to die. Others are being born
would be for astronomy.
would be good if everything were as clear and simple as it seems to
would be killed.
would be no contradicting, and her plans would be spoiled; and so,
would be ordered. But she drove these thoughts away with disgust. Toward
would be reduced by three fourths, but he felt it must be done.
would be regarded by the secular authorities.
would be returning that way. Petya no longer thought of presenting his
would be safe.
would be sure to get his dinner, tea, and supper. But for a long time in
would be taken immediately to free his serfs--and that till then they
would be the only one. That I did not lift my arm a moment later does
would be the pretext, and when she felt a need to speak spitefully, the
would be well--if only they did not pull it, but it was impossible to
would be wiser for him to leave Petersburg. Pierre proposed going to his
would call Dmitri Vasilevich, a man of good family and the manager of
would come under his command), and Bagration--being in command of the
would come when there would be no more wars. The old prince disputed it
would content himself with that hint.
would do without his consent; then he marveled at the feeling that had
would either make his father consent to this marriage and love her, or
would either not understand it at all or would be horrified at such a
would even be increased if he refused to pay his wife's debts which he
would excuse her want of ceremony and come upstairs to her apartment.
would follow him.
would follow the same old road, or that new path so attractively shown
would forget something that had just occurred, or take a false step with
would get on together. The husband, however, did not seem to share that
would give a thousand men and their maintenance.
would give my life twice over..." He looked at the countess, and seeing
would give them an answer that they would not easily forget.
would give way not only under a cannon or a crowd, but very soon even
would grow yellow, and her maids knew by infallible symptoms when Belova
would happen according to plan, and therefore insisted that it was just
would happen to her before he came. She could no longer think of him by
would have a dispute, but long afterwards Pierre to his surprise and
would have been at once announced in the Gazette, as he is a colonel."
would have been clear and complete. One might believe or disbelieve
would have been difficult for a face to express greater respect and
would have been the wish to capture army corps of the French, when our
would have found on every man a clean shirt, and in every knapsack the
would have had no meaning for other listeners, but in her imagination
would have happened if on approaching Tarutino, Napoleon had attacked
would have made them.
would have me be, but I have never had help from anyone.... But it is
would have remained there for a long time testing each other's courage
would have seemed so unnatural had anyone disliked him, that he could
would have taken the icon, but she stopped him. Andrew understood,
would have to abandon the hope of ever getting matters right. This match
would have to bear the whole responsibility for all that might happen.
would immediately pounce on the hare, but she overtook him and flew
would inform her.
would joke about them.
would know anything about it if only Natasha herself would undertake
would laugh at him, and thrust his head into the shirt hurriedly. None
would love him become quite different, and how all he had thought and
would make that foxy old courtier feel that the responsibility for all
would marry Marie for love? Plain and awkward! They'll take her for her
would mention him to the Emperor for a decision as to his employment,
would never have entered her mind to think her position hard; but this
would never open them again. Suddenly he was aware of a stir all around.
would not be able to move on for some time, Alpatych got down and turned
would not be proper for her, in her deep mourning, to receive visitors;
would not have been much stimulated by it, for what had they to do with
would not have happened," he said.
would not hold out even for fourteen hours. It is disgraceful, a stain
would not let him, and having closed the door behind him continued her
would not need finesse; and he tells me that I am lying--so let him give
would not see us for a whole fortnight. I know it was then he wrote this
would not supply them. Pierre was obliged to wait. Without undressing,
would now have been surprised had he been absent.
would occasionally raise himself on an elbow and glance at Morel with a
would occupy a most brilliant position in society. Don't you think so? I
would pretend to sympathize with my sorrow..." thought Princess Mary,
would rather wash himself with water in the barn.
would recognize them--were not at all shy, Pelageya Danilovna hid
would result from the common activity; while the man who commanded
would say. Or, turning to Mademoiselle Bourienne, he would ask her in
would say: "Well, Dmitri, you'll see that things are all as they should
would set all Russia against you and every one of us would feel ashamed
would still remain piteous and plain. After two or three changes to
would suddenly fall asleep, letting his napkin drop and his shaking head
would take place on this side of it...
would then have said to me what he said the day he died. While talking
would wish you to go into society rather than be bored to death."
would you have said?"
wouldn't go, but I knew that today is the sort of day when you couldn't
wouldn't have been nothing left of him! I tell you surely..."
wouldn't have room to turn round there. If you must go, go to the
wound bandaged. Water was being sprinkled on his face. As soon as Prince
wound it had received at Borodino. The direct consequence of the battle
wound reopened and the doctor said he ought to go away for a cure. And
wound, but now he took advantage of it to excuse himself from appearing
wounded Bolkonski, and the doctor had to admit that he had not expected
wounded and captured Russian officers he was carried to the hospital.
wounded and understanding that the matter is no joke but concerns his
wounded and was traveling with their party, she had at first asked many
wounded dragged themselves out of their rooms and stood with pale but
wounded had been abandoned on the other side of the Danube with a letter
wounded in front of them. Almost at the head of the line she could see
wounded man.
wounded man.
wounded men as one might, it was evident that if they were given one
wounded men had stopped in the street.
wounded men whom the count in the simplicity of his heart had ordered
wounded or not was still an undecided question. Now by the fact of
wounded soldier was so dirty, coarse, and revolting that his proximity
wounded under him and his own arm slightly grazed by a bullet. As a mark
wounded were more distinctly heard than any other sound in the darkness
wounded where there was no one left to fire at, on seeing an adjutant
wounded, and Davout killed; yet at the very time the adjutant had been
wounded, and the still more terrible news of the loss of Moscow reached
wounded, but though his face was bleeding, he would not give up his
wounded--had left it long ago. All about the field, like heaps of manure
wounded--some known to Pierre and some unknown--Russians and French,
wounded; they know that. Look at the Lopukhins opposite, they cleared
wrapped her up in it.
wrapped his dressing gown around him with a shamefaced and angry look
wrapped his loose cloak closer and rubbed one bare foot with the other.
wrapped in a rag.
wrapped in paper.
wrapped in the shawl was Morel, his orderly.
wrapped up in his fur coat, he looked like a child taken out for an
wrath. Having snapped at an officer for an unpolished badge, at another
wrathfully around, followed some twenty paces behind them.
wreaths of black smoke rolled from under the roof. There was another
wrenching herself from Marya Dmitrievna's hands with a vicious effort
wretch--that's a fact!"
wretched appearance. Most of them were disfigured by frost-bitten noses
wretched," wrote the countess.
wretches) "at the French. Some of them were sabered and the Kremlin was
wringing her hands.
wrinkle comes and goes on his pale forehead. One of his legs twitches
wrinkled soles and palms.
wrinkled up his face he was evidently preparing to smooth it out again
wrinkled; he waved his arm at Toll and turned to the opposite side of
write that in Petersburg he is spoken of as one of the most active,
write to her myself, and we will kill the fatted calf."
write to. In Moscow Princess Mary had no one to talk to, no one to whom
write, told Rostov the contents of his letter.
writer, opinion as to what is good for mankind changes; so that what
writes that the French were beaten at... at... what river is it?"
writes..." and he screamed as piercingly as if he wished to drive the
writing than doing."
writing--he was auditing accounts. Better quarters could have been
writing. "I'll do it."
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
written in Natasha's album.
written it yourself?' said he, and he took up the Hamburg Gazette that
written that he should make use of you in proper places and not keep you
wrong in my behavior. But I'll just tell Mamma how you are behaving with
wrong to think that of me... I... for me... for the honor of the
wrong, lads!"
wrong, the future held nothing, and there was no escape from this
wrong.
wrong. Discharge me, for God's sake!"
wrongs, the movement of troops into Prussia--undertaken (as it seemed
wrote a few words on a large sheet of paper folded in four). "Allow me
wrote about Gerakov: 'Lectures for the corps inditing'... Recite them,
wrote down his own name in French, Comte Pierre Besouhoff, but the
wrote himself," said she through her tears.
wrote proclamations.
yard, at the gates, at the window of the wings, wounded officers and
yard.
yard.
yard. His face expressed the relief of relaxed strain felt by a man who
yard. Sonya, owing to the count's contradictory orders, lost her head
yard. Two of them had been uncorded and a wounded officer was climbing
yard... Mamma!... It's impossible!"
yards was all that separated them. The enemy ceased firing, and that
yards wide as the people on both sides made way for him. Boris noticed
yawn. "Plenty of time," he repeated.
year earlier might have ruined him, has reached its extreme limit, and
year. And I wished to tell you of that," said Prince Andrew.
year?..."
years ago that same law of necessity which with such ardor they are now
years been suffering from a painful disease of the bladder. No one has
years before with Joseph Bazdeev, came out in answer to his knock.
years before, it seemed impossible that the little creature who lived
years of their lives on that business. But, above all, that thought
years previously and one year later--an outlawed brigand. But by some
years the whole course of life is altered and presents an intensive
years there had been so many changes in his life, he had thought, felt,
years' time, when everything would be made free and so "simple" that
years, but that he had not dared to think of her because she was too
years, had cost millions, and had done nothing except that Rosenkampf
years, if he goes on like this?" Presently he added: "That's what we
years. It seems to me that I have never loved anyone before. You can't
years... then I will ask for your hand."
yelling wildly, fell with him under the feet of the pressing, struggling
yelling, and puffing.
yellow dress, wearing her badge as maid of honor, her old lady's maid
yellowish borzoi, which, with a piercing yelp, fell with its head on the
yells and swayed about him, Rostopchin suddenly turned pale and, instead
yes! There they are, those false images that agitated, enraptured,
yes, I remember you with the standard!" said Kutuzov, and a flush of
yes, that's the French ambassador himself!" she replied to the countess'
yes, there was something else important, very important, that I was
yes, there," he pointed to Raevski's knoll. "But the battle will hardly
yesterday and the question presented itself whether he ought or ought
yesterday when I ordered Platov to retreat, or was it the evening
yesterday, 'Alexandre, Russie, grandeur.' One day our Emperor gives it
yesterday, yesterday, and today," thought Sonya. "But it can't be that
yesterday... let him grow up with you.... Please."
yet a young woman. Escaping from her father she ran to hide her
yet ashamed to call him "father."
yet at the same time only a part of a whole too immense for man to
yet at the same time was conscious of his strength as a part of that
yet dressed.
yet everything is so strange, so strange! I can't make it out. I don't
yet killed. The regiment stood in columns of battalion, three hundred
yet more muffled than they had done six weeks before, for now all was
yet simply at everybody. Old Count Rostov also rode up and touched the
yet the question he was always putting off demanded an immediate
yet they were nothing to one another; they felt themselves now quite
yet understanding what the latter was telling her.
yet with unhesitating assurance that he was doing the right thing,
yet. He felt that he must not say it.
yet... How like he is growing, Mary!" he added, addressing Countess
yielded reluctantly. He was absorbed in the role he had created
yielded--went to inquire how he could arrange for Petya to serve where
yielding to the entreaties of the festive company to drive off somewhere
you again in happier circumstances. If you don't want to make me blush,
you all."
you alone! God knows how long we may again be parted. You are not angry
you already know his sister and father and are liked by them. Am I right
you and I understand it all," and much, much more was said in her smile.
you and make you weep.
you are hiding in terror, return to your huts without fear, in full
you are only half my age--I advise you, as a father would, to cease
you are still at that silly business!" quickly closed his eye again, and
you ask me," continued Prince Andrew, becoming irritable--as he was
you ask such a question?"
you asleep?"
you believe it, he jabbered something in their lingo."
you can say to yourself that you have done all you are capable of, and
you come here?"
you complete freedom--if it is really so; but I don't believe it!
you daughter of a bitch!" said Karataev, touching the dog that lay at
you do nothing but laugh."
you do, but be a man!"
you don't know! Be so good as to ride to General Barclay and inform
you exciting yourself? Do you think the French are here?"
you fool?" added the other--"A real fool!"
you for a long time: first from your action with regard to your serfs,
you for myself and for our two dear ones whose name day we are keeping.
you for nothing. So here are our accounts all settled," said Dolokhov,
you give it to me, an old woman..."--yet it was evident that she was
you have a perfect right to reassure the inhabitants of Smolensk, for
you have got thinner?..." "And you have grown stouter!..."
you have loved a man for a whole year and suddenly... Why, you have only
you have sent me and which has such success in Moscow. Yet since you
you hear; hammering and knocking--that's bad; but a sound of shifting
you imagine it?" and he began describing how the Guards, having taken
you it would not be enough. How much?"
you know I have sent for Pierre? The count," pointing to his portrait,
you know he has fallen in love with Sonya?"
you know it? I think you know it already." Abashed by this question,
you know, chiefly directed to political questions. He cannot endure
you know. He is a man who never forgets anything. Speak to the captain
you like, but all the same Bonaparte is a great general!"
you made us pay dear for it. I was at it three times--sure as I sit
you might think they were nobles."
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
you my word of honor," said Napoleon, forgetting that his word of honor
you not to indulge in trifles now, but to help to pack, and tomorrow we
you off to the front?"
you ought to sign it and ask this gentleman to take it. No doubt he"
you please, but do this for my sake! Please do! Father's father, our
you please--is still as great, marry! And that's my last word on it.
you remember, who gave you a lift at Schon Grabern? And I've had a bit
you require money for your journey..."
you say so much that is bad, does not seem to have had its usual effect
you see, Count, I want some money."
you send for? Shinshin?" she crooked one of her fingers. "The sniveling
you shall judge between us. I always tell him: Here he is Uncle's
you shoving to?"
you speak?"
you staying in my house?"
you think of it, my dear?"
you think so badly of me?"
you thumping the table for?" she demanded of the hussar, "and why are
you to appeal to Rumyantsev through Prince Golitsyn. That would be the
you to dress the men in fancy coats for a parade.... Eh...?"
you to dress your men decently."
you to excuse me... God is my witness, I didn't know-" he repeated,
you to return a call. One would think mere politeness required it....
you to?" shouted Natasha, raising herself on the sofa and looking
you too will have to mount a horse," remarked the old count, addressing
you too! To the health of Alexander the First! Hurrah!"
you too. Give them to the woman whom you shall honor most of all. This
you very much in love?"
you want of them. They are armed against you by the same experience
you want to know whether I am happy? No! Is she happy? No! But why this
you were taken prisoner, or go through all this again?' then for
you were to order an attack! If not, the Guards will not so much as see
you what it is. Napoleon has also formed his plan by now, not worse than
you what kind of rivet to use."
you will change your opinions, my dear Monsieur Pierre."
you will not marry her. I know, heaven knows how, but I know for certain
you will pray over it. Well, pray if you like, but you had better think
you will start. Send by special messenger to Usvyazh."
you wish, eh?"
you with the hope that your son is alive, for otherwise he would have
you would not deceive me? You'll tell me the whole truth?"
you yourself are left facing that abyss, and look in. And I have looked
you yourself say your Papa's affairs are in a very bad way. And what
you! Go back or I'll flatten you into a pancake," repeated he. This
you! You must have a rest. Be at the levee tomorrow after the parade.
you!"
you!"
you!" came from different sides.
you!... forgive!... thank you!..." and tears began to flow from his
you'd say so. But it won't do, because you see, if you say that--if you
you'll carry her off--all right! Will they let it stop at that? It
you'll give her the packet?"
you'll thank me for."
you've had to take," cried he.
you, and Vasili Dmitrich * is also going."
you, but you would not believe it," she said triumphantly. "He has
you, come at once if you do not wish to make me and the whole family
you, dear Mary, that in spite of his extreme youth his departure for
you, my friend, are missing..." and so on.
you, please, ride on a little farther," said Alpatych with a melancholy
you," Natasha began, evidently anxious to disperse the cloud that had
you," he added, bowing his head.
you," said Petya shyly.
you," said she to Natasha with her stereotyped and lovely smile. "I had
you--sit down and tell me all the news."
you--those German gentlemen won't win the battle tomorrow but will only
you. Can I do anything for you? Dispose of me. It is for life and death.
you. It is essential for us; it will give us all we need: comfortable
you. Lead that man away!" said he quickly and energetically, and taking
you. Let us go to Mamma."
you. May I?" he added in a low voice so as not to disturb the vicomte
you. Religious! I don't interfere with anyone's belief... I have looked
you. Very glad! Go back to your rooms, Princess. Go!" said the old
you."
you."
you."
you... go," and he continued to put on the uniform the valet handed him.
you..."
you: "He was in the great battle before Moscow!"
you: would you like me to arrange it?"
you? I love you madly. Can I never...?" and, blocking her path, he
you? Why doesn't he come to the house?"
you?"
you?" he asked.
young Brothers who were influential through their connections or rank,
young Nicholas Rostov, who with his enthusiasm could not bear to remain
young Nicholas, who had gone into my study and broke all my things."
young aide-de-camp with a smile.
young countess?" he asked. "Where is she?"
young ever to be more to me than a friend, but this sweet friendship,
young fellow must be found as husband for you. That's it--come on!"
young footman and courier her aunt had sent to accompany her.
young girl who stood panting, having just run in through the cold from
young girls ready for anything and full of hope--experienced the
young had triumphed. The voices of those who counseled delay and advised
young horse Telyanin had sold to Rostov.)
young ladies prepared and that never reached the wounded, and so on.
young ladies, and she thanked them all for having entertained her so
young lady visitor and the countess' eldest daughter (who was four years
young man he did not know, with a peculiar cross hanging from his neck.
young man speaking about her in too loud a whisper.
young man was an illegitimate son of Count Bezukhov, a well-known
young man who had entered. "Bring me..." he reflected a moment, "yes,
young man's shoulder.
young man, because he was at home, because he had left Belaya Tserkov
young man. He sat with his legs up on the sofa as if quite at home and,
young master. "Can it be? My treasure!" and Prokofy, trembling with
young men, possible suitors, who sometimes appeared at their house. She
young people often do. "No, I am too happy now to spoil my enjoyment by
young prince, wondering what would follow.
young princess who was sitting some way off, the center of another
young shoots of grass were already sprouting, which taking root would so
young soldier with eyes rolled back.
young wife she was irreproachable; perhaps she could not have been so
young woman, so soon to become a mother, so full of life and health, and
young, all our octogenarians were reviewed, and of Prozorovski
young, and because he had been an illegitimate son without a name.
young, and in nobody's way if only they leave her in peace." But
young, bright, adroit, and resolute. He ran round to the other side of
young, with a dimple in the chin and light-blue eyes--was not an enemy's
younger generation Pierre and Boris Drubetskoy--awaited the prince in
youngest, at home. Father, he says, 'All my children are the same to
your Frenchmen! Only wait till it gets dark and I'll fetch you any of
your acquaintance!" he repeated again, smiling sadly, and he again
your arm bleeding afresh. Wait, we must tie it up again."
your battalions. I will keep out of fire if you with your habitual valor
your chivalry just the same." He paused. "However, we must get to work.
your command.' Yes, he is a fine fellow and a very kind relation.
your dark branches shed gloom and melancholy upon me."
your duty to say that, but you don't believe it yourself. I have
your equipment.
your excellency, for God's sake!" he kept saying, glancing for support
your excellency, my dear sir, that you must not defile through narrow
your excellency?" said Rostov, with his hand to his cap.
your eyes," added Willarski. "I wish you courage and success," and,
your family and all the property... They've brought us to utter ruin!
your father the truth when he was in favor, and in your case it's my
your honor, that a minister is coming to visit your honor."
your honor. I don't know where... such bad luck!"
your lump of a son," a little old man suddenly began attacking
your old father..." he paused unexpectedly, and then in a querulous
your parts, too, the harvest is nothing to boast of, Count?" he went on,
your position is a bad one. You offer me negotiations! But what is the
your regiment before peace is concluded, or you will share defeat and
your return," she added in a whisper.
your sake," and so on. And though Prince Vasili, when he stayed in (as
your service to help you nurse my uncle. I imagine what you have gone
your service. You belong to the gentry?" he concluded with a shade of
your sorrow, and that for you I am not a Serene Highness, nor a prince,
your way! Do go somewhere, anywhere... to the devil!" he exclaimed, and
your wife..."
your wits, or I have outlived mine. May God help you, but we'll see what
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
yours."
yourself but only wanted a quiet life, the harsher your steward was the
yourself forward anywhere."
yourself further."
yourself imagine the effect this news has had on me, and your silence
yourself in it. And now, when one wants to smooth the thing over, some
yourself incapable and your life a spoiled life. You have everything
yourself reported to Count Buxhowden yesterday, you must think of
yourself! A pity! Prince Andrew wants a son and not an old maid," he
yourself!' Yes... That was the answer I got!"
yourself, my dear. I will go to my father," she said, and went out.
yourself, we'll settle afterwards," he added, turning to Rostov.
yourself. And the main thing is," he continued, "that I know, and know
yourself."
yourself."
yourself."
yourselves. It must be here somewhere," said Lavrushka.
youth and inexperience of the sovereign, who had trusted worthless and
youth upwards has been occupied with learning: that is, with books and
youth, there also opened out a new and hitherto uncomprehended side of
youth, we've had our fling and lived and reveled. Eh? And now, when
youth, with a stony look on his face, and rigid and uplifted arm, stood
youth.
youth. "Don't let him go, lads! Let him answer us! Keep him!" shouted
youthful expression in his friend's face.
youthful movement dropped on her knees.
youthful movement, stood for a moment in the stirrup as if loathe to
youthfully glittering eyes.
zealous champion of old of our country's weal, is offered to Your
zero, we should even then not have arrived at the conception of complete
The Project Gutenberg EBook of War and Peace, by Leo Tolstoy
